---
title: CHAPTER 361 UNIFORM CONDITIONAL SALES LAW
---

TITLE XXXIII
                                             
CONDITIONAL SALES
=================

CHAPTER 361
                                             
UNIFORM CONDITIONAL SALES LAW
-----------------------------

### Section 361:1-10

 **361:1 to 361:10 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1959, 247:2, eff. July 1,
1961.
                                             ]

### Section 361:10-a

 **361:10-a Destruction of Certain Records Authorized. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2001, 102:54, I, eff. July 1, 2001.
                                             ]

### Section 361:11-13

 **361:11 to 361:13 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1959, 247:2, eff. July
1, 1961.
                                             ]

### Section 361:14

 **361:14 Prohibition of Removal or Sale Without Notice. –** Prior to
the performance of the condition, no buyer shall remove the goods from a
recording district in which the contract is recorded, except for
temporary uses for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days, unless
the buyer not less than 5 days before such removal shall give the seller
personally or by registered mail written notice of the place to which
the goods are to be removed, the approximate time of such intended
removal and the length of time during which he intends to keep such
goods in any recording district to which they are to be removed; nor
prior to the performance of the condition shall the buyer sell, mortgage
or otherwise dispose of his interest in the goods, unless the seller
shall consent thereto in writing. If any buyer does so remove the goods,
or does so sell, mortgage or otherwise dispose of his interest in them
without such notice or consent, the seller may retake possession of the
goods and deal with them as in case of default in payment of part or all
of the purchase price. The provisions of this section regarding the
removal of goods shall not apply, however, to automobiles removed for
vacation purposes or to the goods described in section 8.

**Source.** 1945, 104:1 par. 13, eff. July 1, 1945.

### Section 361:15

 **361:15 Re-recording on Removal. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1959, 247:2, eff.
July 1, 1961.
                                             ]

### Section 361:16

 **361:16 Fraudulent Injury; Concealment; Removal or Sale. –** When,
prior to the performance of the condition (1) any buyer or conditional
purchaser of any personal property, maliciously or with intent to
defraud, shall injure, destroy or conceal the goods or other personal
property, or (2) any buyer with such intent shall remove the goods to a
recording district where the contract is not recorded, without having
given the notice required by RSA 361:14, or (3) any buyer or conditional
purchaser of any personal property shall sell, mortgage, or otherwise
dispose of such goods under claim of full ownership, he shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other
person.

**Source.** 1945, 104:1 par. 15. RSA 361:16. 1973, 528:256, eff. Oct.
31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 361:17-33

 **361:17 to 361:33 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1959, 247:2, eff. July
1, 1961.
                                             ]
