---
title: CHAPTER 457 MARRIAGES
---

TITLE XLIII
                                             
DOMESTIC RELATIONS
==================

CHAPTER 457
                                             
MARRIAGES
------------

Relationship
------------

### Section 457:1

 **457:1 Purpose and Intent. –** The purpose of this chapter is to
affirm the right of 2 individuals desiring to marry and who otherwise
meet the eligibility requirements of this chapter to have their marriage
solemnized in a religious or civil ceremony in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** RS 147:1. CS 156:1. GS 161:1. 1869, 9:1. GL 180:1. PS 174:1.
PL 286:1. RL 338:1. RSA 457:1. 1987, 218:1, eff. July 17, 1987. 2009,
59:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 457:1-a

 **457:1-a Equal Access to Marriage. –** Marriage is the legally
recognized union of 2 people. Any person who otherwise meets the
eligibility requirements of this chapter may marry any other eligible
person regardless of gender. Each party to a marriage shall be
designated "bride,'' "groom,'' or "spouse.''

**Source.** 2009, 59:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 457:2

 **457:2 Marriages Prohibited. –** No person shall marry his or her
father, mother, father's brother, father's sister, mother's brother,
mother's sister, son, daughter, brother, sister, son's son, son's
daughter, daughter's son, daughter's daughter, brother's son, brother's
daughter, sister's son, sister's daughter, father's brother's son,
father's brother's daughter, mother's brother's son, mother's brother's
daughter, father's sister's son, father's sister's daughter, mother's
sister's son, or mother's sister's daughter. No person shall be allowed
to be married to more than one person at any given time.

**Source.** RS 147:2. CS 156:2. GS 161:2. 1869, 9:2. GL 180:2. PS 174:2.
PL 286:2. RL 338:2. RSA 457:2. 1965, 46:1. 1987, 218:2, eff. July 17,
1987. 2009, 59:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 457:3

 **457:3 Recognition of Out-of-State Marriages. –** Every marriage
legally contracted outside the state of New Hampshire, which would not
be prohibited under RSA 457:2 if contracted in New Hampshire, shall be
recognized as valid in this state for all purposes if or once the
contracting parties are or become permanent residents of this state
subsequent to such marriage, and the issue of any such marriage shall be
legitimate. Marriages legally contracted outside the state of New
Hampshire which would be prohibited under RSA 457:2 if contracted in New
Hampshire shall not be legally recognized in this state. Any marriage of
New Hampshire residents recognized as valid in the state prior to the
effective date of this section shall continue to be recognized as valid
on or after the effective date of this section. Notwithstanding anything
in this statute or the provisions of RSA 457:43 to the contrary, any
marriage of a same-sex couple lawfully contracted outside New Hampshire
shall be recognized in New Hampshire as of the date of its
solemnization.

**Source.** RS 147:3. CS 156:3. GS 161:3. GL 180:3. PS 174:3. PL 286:3.
RL 338:3. RSA 457:3. 1965, 252:1. 1973, 145:6. 2004, 100:1, eff. May 14,
2004. 2009, 59:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2010. 2014, 160:1, eff. July 10, 2014.

Age
---

### Section 457:4

 **457:4 Marriageable. –** No male below the age of 14 years and no
female below the age of 13 years shall be capable of contracting a valid
marriage that is entered into by one male and one female, and all
marriages contracted by such persons shall be null and void. No male
below the age of 18 and no female below the age of 18 shall be capable
of contracting a valid marriage between persons of the same gender, and
all marriages contracted by such persons shall be null and void.

**Source.** 1907, 80:1. PL 286:4. RL 338:4. 2009, 59:2, eff. Jan. 1,
2010.

### Section 457:5

 **457:5 Of Consent. –** The age of consent shall be in the male and
in the female, 18 years. Any marriage contracted by a person below the
age of consent, except as hereinafter provided, may in the discretion of
the superior court be annulled at the suit of the party who at the time
of contracting such marriage was below the age of consent, or at the
suit of his or her parent or guardian, unless such party after arriving
at such age shall have confirmed the marriage.

**Source.** 1907, 80:2. 1923, 108:1. PL 286:5. RL 338:5. RSA 457:5.
1973, 72:35, eff. June 3, 1973.

### Section 457:5-a

 **457:5-a Petition for Annulment; Orders by Court. –** In the event
a petition for annulment is filed by the parent or guardian of a minor,
as provided in RSA 457:5, the superior court is hereby authorized to
make such orders as in the discretion of the court will protect the
interest of the minor child, including but not limited to orders
directing the minor child to return to its parents or guardian and such
orders may be issued ex parte. The party against whom the orders are
issued may file a written request with the clerk of the superior court
and request a hearing thereon. Such a hearing shall be held no later
than 5 days after the request is received by the clerk. The request
shall be filed with the clerk of court for the county in which the
petition of annulment is filed.

**Source.** 1969, 375:1, eff. Aug. 31, 1969.

### Section 457:6

 **457:6 Petition by Party Under Age. –** If special cause exists
rendering desirable the marriage of a person resident in this state, or
the marriage of a person who is a nonresident in this state who applies
for permission to marry a resident in this state, either person being
below the age of consent and above the ages specified in RSA 457:4, the
parties desiring to contract such marriage, with the parent or guardian
having the custody of such party below such age, if there be such parent
or guardian, may apply in writing to the judicial branch family division
having jurisdiction in the location in which one of them resides, for
permission to contract such marriage. No waiver shall be granted to
persons below the age of consent if both parties are nonresidents.

**Source.** 1907, 80:3. PL 286:6. RL 338:6. RSA 457:6. 1965, 121:1.
1967, 319:1. 1987, 218:3, eff. July 17, 1987. 2011, 177:3, eff. Jan. 1,
2012.

### Section 457:6-a

 **457:6-a Fee. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1998, 155:10, III, eff. July 8,
1998.
                                             ]

### Section 457:7

 **457:7 Granting of Permission. –** Such justice or judge shall at
once hear the parties, and, if satisfied that special cause exists
making such marriage desirable, shall grant permission therefor, which
shall be filed with the court and shall be reported to the division of
vital records. The division shall note the fact of the granting of such
permission upon the certificate and upon all copies thereof which are by
law required to be kept.

**Source.** 1907, 80:3. 1917, 79:1. PL 286:7. RL 338:7. 1997, 325:16.
2003, 319:70, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 457:8

 **457:8 Prohibitions. –** No town clerk shall issue any certificate
for the marriage of any person below the age of consent, and no
magistrate or minister of religion shall solemnize the marriage of any
such person, if such clerk, magistrate or minister knows or has
reasonable cause to believe that such person is below such age, unless
permission for such marriage has been given under this subdivision. No
magistrate or minister of religion shall solemnize any marriage by
proxy.

**Source.** 1907, 80:4. PL 286:8. RL 338:8. RSA 457:8. 1987, 218:4, eff.
July 17, 1987.

### Section 457:9

 **457:9 Penalty. –** Any person violating any of the provisions of
RSA 457:8, or any person knowingly making any false statement as to the
age of any person, with intent to induce any clerk to issue a
certificate for the marriage of any person below the age of consent, or
to induce any magistrate or minister of religion to solemnize the
marriage of any such person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1907, 80:5. PL 286:9. RL 338:9. RSA 457:9. 1973, 528:307,
eff. Oct. 31, 1973, at 11:59 p.m.

Defective Persons
-----------------

### Section 457:10-16

 **457:10 to 457:16 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1975, 69:1, eff. June 6,
1975.
                                             ]

### Section 457:16-a-16-e

 **457:16-a to 457:16-e Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1959, ch. 99, eff.
July 13, 1959.
                                             ]

Diseased Persons
----------------

### Section 457:17

 **457:17 Marriage. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XLVI, eff. Aug. 2,
1986.
                                             ]

### Section 457:18

 **457:18 Duty of Physicians. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XLVII,
eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 457:19

 **457:19 Notice to Division of Public Health Services. –**

                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XLVIII, eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 457:20

 **457:20 Certificate Not Issuable Without Division's Consent. –**

                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XLIX, eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 457:21

 **457:21 Penalty. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, III, eff. Aug. 2,
1986.
                                             ]

Documentation of Marriages
--------------------------

### Section 457:22

 **457:22 Completion of Marriage License Application. –** All persons
proposing to be joined in marriage within the state shall complete a
marriage license application with all facts required by RSA 5-C:41 to be
entered in any town clerk's office. The clerk shall record the
application in a book to be kept for that purpose.

**Source.** RS 147:4. CS 156:4. 1854, 1518:1. GS 161:4. GL 180:4. PS
174:5. 1897, 18:1. PL 286:22. RL 338:22. 1949, 98:3. RSA 457:22. 1983,
291:1, I. 1995, 310:181. 1997, 325:18. 2003, 319:71, eff. July 1, 2003.
2005, 268:10, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 457:23

 **457:23 Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. No marriage license shall be issued by any town or city clerk
until the applicants have each provided for inspection the following
documents:
                                             
 (a) Proof of age;
                                             
 (b) A certified copy of the final divorce decree, if either or
both parties are divorced; and
                                             
 (c) A certified copy of the death record of spouse, if either or
both parties are widowed.
                                             
 II, III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1937, 186:1. RL 338:23. RSA 457:23. 1961, 222:1. 1965,
333:1. 1977, 277:1. 1979, 310:2. 1981, 95:2. 1988, 226:2; 262:6. 1995,
310:181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995. 2005, 261:6, eff. Sept. 20, 2005. 2011,
187:5, eff. Aug. 13, 2011.

### Section 457:24

 **457:24 Penalty. –** Any person violating the provisions of RSA
457:23 shall forfeit 
                                             $60 for each such offense.

**Source.** 1937, 186:1. RL 338:24.

### Section 457:25

 **457:25 Confidential Report, Optional Destruction. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1981, 95:3, eff. June 19, 1981.
                                             ]

### Section 457:26

 **457:26 Marriage License. –** The town clerk shall deliver to the
parties a marriage license embodying the facts required in RSA 457:22,
specifying the time when the application was entered, which license
shall be delivered to the minister or magistrate who is to officiate,
before the marriage is solemnized. The license shall be valid for not
more than 90 days from the date of filing.

**Source.** RS 147:5. CS 156:5. 1854, 1518:2. GS 161:5. GL 180:5. PS
174:6. 1903, 93:1. 1905, 79:1. 1911, 173:1. PL 286:23. 1939, 52:1. RL
338:26. RSA 457:26. 1979, 45:2; 310:3. 1997, 325:19, eff. Aug. 22, 1997.
2006, 86:1, eff. July 4, 2006.

### Section 457:27

 **457:27 Shortening Period. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2006, 86:5, eff. July 4,
2006.
                                             ]

### Section 457:28

 **457:28 Procedure. –** The procedure upon such application shall be
as provided in RSA 457:7.

**Source.** PL 286:25. RL 338:28.

### Section 457:28-a

 **457:28-a Brochures Relative to Family Planning Services, Fetal
Alcohol Syndrome, and Human Immunodeficiency Virus. –** The town clerk
shall make available to the public, in the office of the town clerk, a
list of family planning agencies and services available in the state,
the informational brochure relative to fetal alcohol syndrome prepared
pursuant to RSA 132:2, XI, and the informational brochure relative to
human immunodeficiency virus prepared pursuant to RSA 141-F:3, XIII. The
department of health and human services shall supply each town clerk
with a sufficient quantity of the brochures initially, to be resupplied
upon the request of the town clerk.

**Source.** 1973, 132:1. 1983, 291:1, I, eff. July 1, 1985. 2005, 261:3,
eff. Sept. 20, 2005.

### Section 457:28-b

 **457:28-b Destruction of Records. –** The clerk of the superior
court and the clerk of the circuit court may destroy petitions by
parties under age under RSA 457:6 and related documents after 5 years
from the time of filing.

**Source.** 1981, 518:2, eff. Aug. 28, 1981. 2006, 86:3, eff. July 4,
2006. 2011, 88:20, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 457:29

 **457:29 Marriage License Fee. –** The fee for the marriage license
shall be 
                                             $50 to be paid by the parties entering into the marriage. The
clerk shall forward 
                                             $43 from each fee to the department of health and
human services for the purposes of RSA 173-B:15. The clerk shall retain
the remaining 
                                             $7 as the fee for making the records of notice, issuing
the certificate of marriage, and forwarding the 
                                             $43 portion of the
marriage license fee.

**Source.** RS 147:5. CS 156:5. 1854, 1518:2. GS 161:5. GL 180:5. PS
174:6. 1911, 173:1. PL 286:26. 1929, 54:1. RL 338:29. 1951, 92:1. RSA
457:29. 1973, 335:3. 1981, 223:1. 1989, 277:1. 1992, 289:8. 1993, 149:2.
1999, 240:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2000. 2010, Sp. Sess., 1:68, eff. June 10,
2010. 2011, 224:320, eff. July 1, 2011. 2015, 244:2, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 457:30

 **457:30 Marriage Outside the State. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1977, 530:8,
eff. Sept. 13, 1977.
                                             ]

Solemnization of Marriage
-------------------------

### Section 457:31

 **457:31 Solemnization of Marriage. –** A marriage may be solemnized
in the following manner:
                                             
 I. In a civil ceremony by a justice of the peace as commissioned by
the state, by a state supreme court justice, superior court judge, or
circuit court judge, and by judges of the United States appointed
pursuant to Article III of the United States Constitution, by bankruptcy
judges appointed pursuant to Article I of the United States
Constitution, or by United States magistrate judges appointed pursuant
to federal law; or
                                             
 II. In a religious ceremony by any minister of the gospel in the
state who has been ordained according to the usage of his or her
denomination, resides in the state, and is in regular standing with the
denomination; by any member of the clergy who is not ordained but is
engaged in the service of the religious body to which he or she belongs,
and who resides in the state, after being licensed therefor by the
secretary of state; or within his or her parish, by any minister
residing out of the state, but having a pastoral charge wholly or partly
in this state.

**Source.** RS 147:6. CS 156:6. 1861, 2484:1. GS 161:9. 1877, 57:1. GL
180:9. PS 174:8. 1919, 56:1. 1921, 79:1. PL 286:28. RL 338:31. RSA
457:31. 1969, 435:1. 1998, 294:1. 2001, 11:1, eff. April 24, 2001. 2006,
86:2, eff. July 4, 2006. 2009, 59:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2010. 2014, 9:1, eff.
July 13, 2014.

### Section 457:31-a

 **457:31-a Secretary of State. –** The secretary of state may issue
a license to an unordained clergy who is a resident of this state and
who is a member of and engaged in the service of a religious body which
is chartered by the state if he or she presents a certification from
that body that he or she is in its service. Said license shall authorize
the clergy to solemnize marriage in this state. The fee for such license
shall be 
                                             $5.

**Source.** 1969, 435:2. 1975, 81:1, eff. June 14, 1975. 2006, 86:2,
eff. July 4, 2006.

### Section 457:31-b

 **457:31-b Solemnization of Marriage; Applicability. –**
                                             
 I. Nothing contained in this chapter shall affect the right of
Jewish Rabbis residing in this state, or of the people called Friends or
Quakers, to solemnize marriages in the way usually practiced among them,
and all marriages so solemnized shall be valid. Jewish Rabbis residing
out of the state may obtain a special license as provided by RSA
457:32.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit a person
authorized to solemnize a marriage in a religious ceremony from
solemnizing a marriage in a civil ceremony.

**Source.** 2009, 60:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2010 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 457:32

 **457:32 Special Commission. –** The secretary of state may issue a
special license to an ordained or non-ordained minister residing out of
the state, or to an individual residing out of state who is authorized
or licensed by law to perform marriages in such individual's state of
residence, authorizing him or her in a special case to marry a couple
within the state. In the case of an individual residing out of state who
is authorized or licensed by law to perform marriages in such
individual's state of residence, the secretary of state may require the
submission of a copy of a valid commission or other indicia of authority
to marry in the individual's state of residence as proof of existence of
that authority. The names and residences of the couple proposed to be
married in such special case shall be stated in the license, and no
power shall be conferred to marry any other parties than those named
therein. The fee for such license shall be 
                                             $25. The secretary of state
shall keep a permanent record of all such special licenses, which record
shall contain the names and residences of the couple to be married and
the name and residence of the minister to whom the license is issued.

**Source.** RS 147:6. CS 156:6. 1861, 2484:1. GS 161:9. 1877, 57:1. GL
180:9. PS 174:8. 1919, 56:1. 1921, 79:1. 1925, 27:1. PL 286:29. RL
338:32. 2000, 75:1. 2003, 319:20, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 457:32-a

 **457:32-a Judges of the United States and the State of New
Hampshire. –**
                                             
 I. The secretary of state may issue a special license to marry a
couple within this state:
                                             
 (a) To a judge of the United States residing in this state who is
appointed pursuant to Article III of the United States Constitution, to
a judge of the United States Bankruptcy Court residing in this state and
appointed pursuant to Article I of the United States Constitution, or to
a United States magistrate judge residing in this state and appointed
pursuant to federal law; or
                                             
 (b) To a state supreme court justice, superior court judge, or
circuit court judge.
                                             
 II. There shall be a fee of 
                                             $25 for each such license, and the
secretary of state shall maintain a record of all such special licenses
issued. A copy of the marriage license of the couple proposed to be
married shall be filed with the secretary of state who shall maintain a
permanent record of all such marriage licenses and the name and
residence of the judge or magistrate performing the ceremony.

**Source.** 1998, 294:2. 2001, 11:2, eff. April 24, 2001. 2014, 9:2,
eff. July 13, 2014.

### Section 457:33

 **457:33 Fee for Solemnizing. –** The persons joined in marriage by
a minister or justice of the peace shall pay the minister or justice a
minimum of 
                                             $5.

**Source.** RS 147:7. CS 156:7. GS 161:10. GL 180:10. PS 174:9. PL
286:30. RL 338:33. RSA 457:33. 1969, 244:2. 1988, 121:13, eff. Oct. 1,
1988.

### Section 457:34

 **457:34 Penalty for Solemnization Without Valid Certificate. –** If
a minister or justice of the peace shall join any persons in marriage
without having first received a certificate of the town clerk, or shall
join any persons in marriage with a certificate which he knows to be
invalid, he shall forfeit for each offense 
                                             $60.

**Source.** RS 147:12. CS 156:9. 1854, 1518:5. GS 161:8. GL 180:8. PS
174:10. PL 286:31. 1939, 52:2. RL 338:34.

### Section 457:35

 **457:35 Penalty for Solemnization by Unauthorized Person. –** If a
person not authorized by this chapter to solemnize marriages shall join
any persons in marriage, with or without a certificate, he shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** RS 147:13. CS 156:10. GS 161:11. GL 180:11. PS 174:11. PL
286:32. RL 338:35. RSA 457:35. 1973, 529:113, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at
11:59 p.m.

### Section 457:36

 **457:36 Effect of Informality. –** No marriage solemnized before a
person professing to be a justice of the peace or minister of the gospel
shall be void, nor shall its validity be affected on account of want of
jurisdiction or authority in such supposed justice or minister, or on
account of any omission or informality in the certificate of intention
of marriage, if the marriage is in other respects lawful and has been
consummated with the belief on the part of either of the parties thereto
that they were lawfully married.

**Source.** RS 147:15. CS 156:12. GS 161:13. GL 180:13. PS 174:12. PL
286:33. RL 338:36.

### Section 457:37

 **457:37 Affirmation of Freedom of Religion in Marriage. –** Each
religious organization, association, or society has exclusive control
over its own religious doctrine, policy, teachings, and beliefs
regarding who may marry within their faith.
                                             
 I. Members of the clergy as described in RSA 457:31 or other persons
otherwise authorized under law to solemnize a marriage shall not be
obligated or otherwise required by law to officiate at any particular
civil marriage or religious rite of marriage in violation of their right
to free exercise of religion protected by the First Amendment to the
United States Constitution or by part I, article 5 of the New Hampshire
constitution.
                                             
 II. No religious organization, association, or society, or any
nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or
controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, shall be required to participate in a ceremony
solemnizing marriage in violation of the religious beliefs of such
organization, association, or society.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a religious
organization, association, or society, or any individual who is managed,
directed, or supervised by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction
with a religious organization, association, or society, shall not be
required to provide services, accommodations, advantages, facilities,
goods, or privileges to an individual if such request for such services,
accommodations, advantages, facilities, goods, or privileges is related
to the solemnization of a marriage, the celebration of a marriage, or
the promotion of marriage through religious counseling, programs,
courses, retreats, or housing designated for married individuals, and
such solemnization, celebration, or promotion of marriage is in
violation of his or her religious beliefs and faith. Any refusal to
provide services, accommodations, advantages, facilities, goods, or
privileges in accordance with this section shall not create any civil
claim or cause of action or result in any state action to penalize or
withhold benefits from such religious organization, association, or
society, or any individual who is managed, directed, or supervised by or
in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society,
or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or
controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society.
                                             
 IV. The marriage laws of this state shall not be construed to affect
the ability of a fraternal benefit society to determine the admission of
members pursuant to RSA 418:5, and shall not require a fraternal benefit
society that has been established and is operating for charitable or
educational purposes and which is operated, supervised, or controlled by
or in connection with a religious organization to provide insurance
benefits to any person if to do so would violate the fraternal benefit
society's free exercise of religion as guaranteed by the First Amendment
of the United States Constitution and part I, article 5 of the New
Hampshire constitution.
                                             
 V. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to limit the
protections and exemptions provided to religious organizations under RSA
354-A:18.

**Source.** RS 147:8. CS 156:8. 1854, 1518:4. GS 161:7. GL 180:7. PS
174:13. PL 286:34. 1927, 45:1. RL 338:37. RSA 457:37. 1992, 243:2, eff.
July 12, 1992. 2009, 60:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2010 at 12:01. a.m.; 61:1, 2,
eff. Jan. 1, 2010 at 12:02 a.m.

Proof of Marriage
-----------------

### Section 457:38

 **457:38 Certified Copy of Record. –** A copy of the record of a
marriage, certified by a city or town clerk or by the registrar of vital
records, shall be received in all courts and places as evidence of the
fact of the marriage.

**Source.** RS 147:14. CS 156:11. GS 161:12. GL 180:12. PS 174:14. PL
286:35. RL 338:38. RSA 457:38. 1981, 160:5. 2003, 319:72, eff. July 1,
2003.

### Section 457:39

 **457:39 Cohabitation, etc. –** Persons cohabiting and acknowledging
each other as husband and wife, and generally reputed to be such, for
the period of 3 years, and until the decease of one of them, shall
thereafter be deemed to have been legally married.

**Source.** RS 149:11. CS 158:19. GS 161:16. GL 180:16. PS 174:15. PL
286:36. RL 338:39.

### Section 457:40

 **457:40 In Civil Actions. –** In all civil actions, except actions
for criminal conversation, evidence of acknowledgment, cohabitation, and
reputation is competent proof of marriage.

**Source.** GS 161:17. GL 180:17. PS 174:16. PL 286:37. RL 338:40.

### Section 457:41

 **457:41 In Criminal Cases. –** In actions for criminal
conversation, and in indictments for bigamy and the like, there must be
proof of a marriage in fact.

**Source.** GS 161:18. GL 180:18. PS 174:17. PL 286:38. RL 338:41. 2014,
44:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

Legitimation of Children
------------------------

### Section 457:42

 **457:42 Marriage of Parents. –** Where the parents of children born
before marriage afterwards intermarry, and recognize such children as
their own, such children shall be legitimate and shall inherit equally
with their other children under the statute of distribution.

**Source.** 1860, 2343:1. GS 161:15. GL 180:15. PS 174:18. PL 286:39. RL
338:42.

Uniform Marriage Recognition Law
--------------------------------

### Section 457:43

 **457:43 Residents. –** If any person residing and intending to
continue to reside in this state is prohibited from contracting marriage
under the laws of this state and goes into another jurisdiction and
there contracts a marriage prohibited and declared void by the laws of
this state, such marriage shall be null and void for all purposes in
this state, with the same effect as though such prohibited marriage had
been entered into in this state.

**Source.** 1979, 45:1, eff. June 10, 1979.

### Section 457:44

 **457:44 Nonresidents; Recognition of Same-Sex Marriage. –** Any
marriage of a same-sex couple contracted in this state on or after
January 1, 2010 by a party residing or intending to reside in another
jurisdiction is valid and legitimate as of the date of its
solemnization.

**Source.** 1979, 45:1, eff. June 10, 1979. 2014, 160:2, eff. July 10,
2014.

Civil Union Recognition; Obtaining Legal Status of Marriage
-----------------------------------------------------------

### Section 457:45

 **457:45 Civil Union Recognition. –** A civil union legally
contracted outside of New Hampshire, or any legal union other than a
marriage that provides substantially the same rights, benefits and
responsibilities as a marriage that is legally contracted outside of New
Hampshire, shall be recognized as a marriage in this state, and any
person in such legal union contracted outside of New Hampshire may also
marry the same party in New Hampshire without the dissolution of such
legal union, provided that the relationship does not violate the
prohibitions of this chapter.

**Source.** 2009, 59:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2010. 2014, 160:3, eff. July 10,
2014.

### Section 457:46

 **457:46 Obtaining Legal Status of Marriage. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 457-A, no new civil unions
shall be established on or after January 1, 2010. Two consenting persons
who are parties to a valid civil union entered into prior to January 1,
2010 pursuant to this chapter may apply and receive a marriage license
and have such marriage solemnized pursuant to RSA 457, provided that the
parties are otherwise eligible to marry under RSA 457 and the parties to
the marriage are the same as the parties to the civil union. Such
parties may also apply by January 1, 2011 to the clerk of the town or
city in which their civil union is recorded to have their civil union
legally designated and recorded as a marriage, without any additional
requirements of payment of marriage licensing fees or solemnization
contained in RSA 457, provided that such parties' civil union was not
previously dissolved or annulled. Upon application, the parties shall be
issued a marriage certificate, and such marriage certificate shall be
recorded with the division of vital records administration. Any civil
union shall be dissolved by operation of law by any marriage of the same
parties to each other, as of the date of the marriage stated in the
certificate.
                                             
 II. Two persons who are parties to a civil union established
pursuant to RSA 457-A that has not been dissolved or annulled by the
parties or merged into a marriage in accordance with paragraph I by
January 1, 2011 shall be deemed to be married under this chapter on
January 1, 2011 and such civil union shall be merged into such marriage
by operation of law on January 1, 2011.

**Source.** 2009, 59:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2010; 61:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2010 at
12:02 a.m.
