---
title: |
    CHAPTER 458-D PARENTAL RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES AND CHILD SUPPORT
    IMPACT SEMINARS
---

TITLE XLIII
                                             
DOMESTIC RELATIONS
==================

CHAPTER 458-D
                                             
PARENTAL RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES AND CHILD SUPPORT IMPACT SEMINARS
----------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 458-D:1

 **458-D:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to establish a
program which would provide a 4-hour mandatory session for married or
unmarried parents of minor children who are involved in allocating
parental rights and responsibilities and other issues which involve the
children so that the adverse impact on the children of the litigation
process and the family's separation will be minimized.

**Source.** 1993, 282:1, eff. Aug. 20, 1993. 2005, 273:11, eff. Oct. 1,
2005.

### Section 458-D:2

 **458-D:2 Seminar Required; Court Referral. –** In the event of any
action the court shall, no later than the respondent's filing of an
appearance, require the parties to attend a 4-hour information session.
This session shall be a seminar on how to help the children deal with
the issues surrounding divorce, separation, and the allocation of
parental rights and responsibilities.

**Source.** 1993, 282:1, eff. Aug. 20, 1993. 2005, 273:11, eff. Oct. 1,
2005.

### Section 458-D:3

 **458-D:3 Seminar. –**
                                             
 I. The seminar shall consist of the following:
                                             
 (a) The seminar shall be conducted by a certified family
therapist or other persons certified by the judicial branch family
division, to inform the parents of the best way to address problems
which the children face as the result of the divorce or separation.
Presenters shall be a male and a female.
                                             
 (b) Up to 1/2 hour of the session may be a segment on divorce
options such as arbitration, mediation, and litigation.
                                             
 II. The session shall be tailored to those issues concerning the
children which may be of particular concern during the divorce or
separation process including, but not limited to:
                                             
 (a) Understanding the process of divorce or separation:
interaction between parent and child, areas of adjustment, and areas of
concern.
                                             
 (b) Understanding how children react to the divorce or
separation, how to spot problems, what to tell them about divorce or
separation, how to keep communication open, and answering questions and
concerns they may have about the process.
                                             
 (c) How parents can help their children during the divorce or
separation: specific strategies, ideas, tools, and resources for
assistance.
                                             
 (d) How parents can help children after the divorce or
separation: new family structures, and how to deal with different sets
of rules.
                                             
 (e) Making clear that the general goal of cooperation between
parents may sometimes be inappropriate, particularly in cases of
domestic violence.

**Source.** 1993, 282:1, eff. Aug. 20, 1993. 2007, 301:1, eff. July 13,
2007.

### Section 458-D:4

 **458-D:4 Seminar Schedule. –** The judicial branch family division
shall encourage the presenters to schedule courses so that the seminar
is available twice monthly in each county unless the county's population
warrants otherwise. One parent need not attend the same seminar as the
other parent. In the case of domestic violence, parents shall attend
separate sessions. The seminar shall be completed within 45 days of
service of the original petition upon the original respondent.

**Source.** 1993, 282:1, eff. Aug. 20, 1993. 2007, 301:2, eff. July 13,
2007.

### Section 458-D:5

 **458-D:5 Disciplinary Action. –** Upon a party's failure to
complete the seminar pursuant to this chapter, the assigned judge may
take appropriate action including, but not limited to, actions for
contempt.

**Source.** 1993, 282:1, eff. Aug. 20, 1993.

### Section 458-D:6

 **458-D:6 Attendance. –**
                                             
 I. An alphabetical list of all parties eligible for the seminar
shall be provided to the presenters prior to each seminar. The list may
be utilized by the presenters and the court. As parties report to the
seminar selected by them, they will provide the presenters with
identification, and they will be recorded as present.
                                             
 II. Each person completing the seminar will be given a certificate
of attendance to present to the judge at the time of that person's court
appearance.

**Source.** 1993, 282:1, eff. Aug. 20, 1993.

### Section 458-D:7

 **458-D:7 Costs. –**
                                             
 I. Persons attending the seminar shall pay a seminar fee to the
presenter. Fees charged by the presenter shall be fair and reasonable as
directed by the administrative judge of the judicial branch family
division and may be paid to the court by credit card in lieu of cash
payment provided that the presenter agrees to accept, in full payment of
the seminar fee, the fee less credit card transaction costs incurred by
the court.
                                             
 II. Presenters shall accept recipients of need-based assistance
programs at reduced or no cost and, upon request of the court, shall
produce evidence of having done so.
                                             
 III. On the commencement of any proceeding involving the
determination of parental rights and responsibilities and for which a
fee is required, including petitions for divorce with minor children,
the court shall charge and collect an additional fee of 
                                             $2 from the
petitioner. These fees shall be in addition to any other fee required by
law. These fees shall be deposited into the general fund.

**Source.** 1993, 282:1, eff. Aug. 20, 1993. 2004, 114:3, eff. May 17,
2004. 2005, 273:12, eff. Oct. 1, 2005. 2007, 301:3, eff. July 13, 2007.
2009, 302:11, eff. July 31, 2009.

### Section 458-D:8

 **458-D:8 Waiver. –** In order to be exempted from attending a
seminar, parties may fill out an exception affidavit in which they shall
indicate that they meet one of the exceptions below. The affidavit may
be obtained from the clerk of court and may be submitted at any time.
Attendance at the seminar shall be waived under the following
circumstances:
                                             
 I. A party is incarcerated.
                                             
 II. A party has previously attended the seminar.
                                             
 III. The office of child support enforcement services has brought an
action to enforce or modify an existing order.
                                             
 IV. The court finds good cause to grant a waiver on any basis it
deems appropriate, including, but not limited to, domestic violence,
transportation or child care. Time extensions may be granted.

**Source.** 1993, 282:1, eff. Aug. 20, 1993.

### Section 458-D:9

 **458-D:9 Rulemaking. –**
                                             
 I. The administrative judge of the judicial branch family division,
subject to approval by the supreme court, may establish such rules and
orders of practice as are appropriate to effectuate this chapter and
administer this program including, but not limited to:
                                             
 (a) Continuing indefinitely to test operation, curriculum, and
format.
                                             
 (b) Certifying public or nonprofit providers to lead the
seminar.
                                             
 (c) The form and content of security at the seminar.
                                             
 (d) Any additional factors deemed necessary.
                                             
 II. The administrative judge shall utilize such in-state services as
the university of New Hampshire cooperative extension, Child and Family
Services of New Hampshire, and other agencies or individuals necessary
to effectuate the program.

**Source.** 1993, 282:1. 1995, 134:22; 308:88, eff. July 1, 1995. 2007,
301:4, eff. July 13, 2007.

### Section 458-D:10

 **458-D:10 Report. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2007, 301:5, eff. July 13, 2007.
                                             ]
