---
title: 'CHAPTER 458-E MILITARY PARENTS'' RIGHTS ACT'
---

TITLE XLIII
                                             
DOMESTIC RELATIONS
==================

CHAPTER 458-E
                                             
MILITARY PARENTS' RIGHTS ACT
----------------------------

### Section 458-E:1

 **458-E:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Deploy'' and "deployment'' mean military service in compliance
with military orders received by a member of the United States armed
forces, including any reserve component thereof, to report for combat
operations, contingency operations, peacekeeping operations, a remote
tour of duty, or other active service for which the deploying parent is
required to report unaccompanied by any family member. Deployment
includes a period during which a military parent remains subject to
deployment orders and remains deployed on account of sickness, wounds,
leave, or other lawful cause.
                                             
 II. (a) "Deploying parent'' means a military parent who has been
notified by military leadership that he or she will deploy or mobilize
with the United States armed forces, including any reserve component
thereof, or who is currently deployed or mobilized with the United
States armed forces, including any reserve component thereof.
                                             
 (b) "Nondeploying parent'' means a parent who is either not a
member of the United States armed forces, including any reserve
component thereof, or is a military parent who is currently not a
deploying parent.
                                             
 III. "Military parent'' means a natural parent, adoptive parent, or
legal parent of a child under the age of 18 whose parental rights have
not been terminated or transferred to the state or another person
through a juvenile proceeding pursuant to RSA 169-B, RSA 169-C, or RSA
169-D or guardianship pursuant to RSA 463 by a court of competent
jurisdiction, and who is a member of the United States armed forces,
including any reserve component thereof.
                                             
 IV. "Mobilization'' and "mobilize'' mean the call-up of national
guard or reserve service members to extended active service. For
purposes of this definition, "mobilization'' does not include national
guard or reserve annual training, inactive duty days, drill weekends,
temporary duty, or state active duty.
                                             
 V. "State active duty'' means the call-up by a governor for the
performance of any military duty in state status.
                                             
 VI. "Temporary duty'' means the transfer of a service member to a
geographic location outside New Hampshire for a limited period of time
to accomplish training or to assist in the performance of a noncombat
mission.

**Source.** 2012, 213:1, eff. June 13, 2012.

### Section 458-E:2

 **458-E:2 Final Order Modification. –**
                                             
 I. If a deploying parent is required to be separated from a child as
a result of deployment, a court shall not enter a final order modifying
parental rights and responsibilities and parent-child contact in an
existing order until 90 days after the deployment ends, unless such
modification is agreed to by the deploying parent.
                                             
 II. Absence created by deployment or mobilization or the potential
for future deployment or mobilization shall not be the sole factor
supporting a change in circumstances pursuant to RSA 458-C:5 and RSA
463:13.

**Source.** 2012, 213:1, eff. June 13, 2012.

### Section 458-E:3

 **458-E:3 Temporary Modification. –**
                                             
 I. Upon motion of a deploying or nondeploying parent, the court
shall enter a temporary order modifying parental rights and
responsibilities or parent-child contact during the period of deployment
or mobilization when:
                                             
 (a) A military parent who has shared sole or primary legal or
physical parental rights and responsibilities for a child or who has
parent-child contact pursuant to an existing court order has received
notice from military leadership that he or she will deploy or mobilize
in the near future; and
                                             
 (b) The deployment or mobilization would have a material effect
upon his or her ability to exercise such parental rights and
responsibilities or parent-child contact.
                                             
 II. Motions for modification because of deployment shall be heard by
the court as expeditiously as possible, and shall be a priority for this
purpose.
                                             
 III. (a) All temporary modification orders shall include a specific
transition schedule to facilitate a return to the predeployment order
over the shortest reasonable time period after the deployment ends,
taking into consideration the child's best interests.
                                             
 (b) The temporary order shall set a date certain for the end of
deployment and the start of the transition period. If deployment is
extended, the temporary order shall remain in effect during the extended
deployment, and the transition schedule shall take effect at the end of
the extended deployment. In that case, the nondeployed parent shall
notify the court of the extended deployment. Failure of the nondeployed
parent to notify the court in accordance with this subdivision shall not
prejudice the deployed parent's right to return to the prior order once
the temporary order expires as provided in subparagraph (c).
                                             
 (c) The temporary order shall expire upon the completion of the
transition, and the prior order for parental rights and responsibilities
and parent-child contact shall be in effect.
                                             
 IV. Upon motion of the deploying parent, the court may delegate his
or her parent-child contact rights, or a portion of them, to a family
member, a person with whom the deploying parent cohabits, or another
person with a close and substantial relationship to the minor child or
children for the duration of the deployment, upon a finding that it is
in the child's best interests. Such delegated contact does not create
separate rights to parent-child contact for a person other than a parent
once the temporary order is no longer in effect.
                                             
 V. A temporary modification order issued pursuant to this section
shall designate the deploying parent's parental rights and
responsibilities for and parent-child contact with a child during a
period of leave granted to the deploying parent, in the best interests
of the child.
                                             
 VI. A temporary order issued under this section may require any of
the following, if the court finds that it is in the best interests of
the child:
                                             
 (a) The nondeploying parent shall make the child reasonably
available to the deploying parent when the deploying parent has leave.
                                             
 (b) The nondeploying parent shall facilitate opportunities for
telephonic, electronic mail, and other such contact between the
deploying parent and the child during deployment.
                                             
 (c) The deploying parent shall provide timely information
regarding his or her leave schedule to the nondeploying parent. Actual
leave dates are subject to change with little notice due to military
necessity and shall not be used by the nondeploying parent to prevent
parent-child contact.
                                             
 VII. A court order modifying a previous order for parental rights
and responsibilities or parent-child contact because of deployment shall
specify that the deployment is the basis for the order, and it shall be
entered by the court as a temporary order. The order shall further
require the nondeploying parent to provide the court and the deploying
parent with 30 days' advance written notice of any change of address and
any change of telephone number.

**Source.** 2012, 213:1, eff. June 13, 2012.

### Section 458-E:4

 **458-E:4 Emergency Motion to Modify; Permanent Modification. –**
                                             
 I. Upon the return of the deploying parent, either parent may file a
motion to modify the temporary order on the grounds that compliance with
the order will result in immediate danger of irreparable harm to the
child, and may request that the court issue an ex parte order. The
deploying parent may file such a motion prior to his or her return. The
motion shall be accompanied by an affidavit in support of the requested
order. Upon a finding of irreparable harm based on the facts set forth
in the affidavit, the court may issue an ex parte order modifying
parental rights and responsibilities and parent-child contact. If the
court issues an ex parte order, the court shall set the matter for
hearing within ten days from the issuance of the order.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the court from hearing a
motion for permanent modification of parental rights and
responsibilities or parent-child contact prior to or upon return of the
deploying parent. Absence created by deployment or mobilization or the
potential for future deployment or mobilization shall not be the sole
factor supporting a change in circumstances pursuant to RSA 458-C:5 or
RSA 463:13.

**Source.** 2012, 213:1, eff. June 13, 2012.

### Section 458-E:5

 **458-E:5 Testimony and Evidence. –** Upon motion of a deploying
parent, provided reasonable advance notice is given and good cause
shown, the court shall allow such parent to present testimony and
evidence by electronic means with respect to parental rights and
responsibilities or parent-child contact matters instituted under this
section when the deployment of that parent has a material effect on his
or her ability to appear in person at a regularly scheduled hearing. In
this section, "electronic means'' includes communication by telephone or
video teleconference.

**Source.** 2012, 213:1, eff. June 13, 2012.

### Section 458-E:6

 **458-E:6 No Existing Final Order. –**
                                             
 I. If there is no existing order establishing the terms of parental
rights and responsibilities or parent-child contact and it appears that
deployment or mobilization is imminent, upon an action filed under this
chapter by either parent, the court shall expedite a hearing to
establish temporary parental rights and responsibilities and
parent-child contact to ensure the deploying parent has access to the
child, to ensure disclosure of information, to grant other rights and
duties set forth in this chapter, and to provide other appropriate
relief.
                                             
 II. Any initial pleading filed to establish parental rights and
responsibilities for or parent-child contact with a child of a deploying
parent shall be so identified at the time of filing by stating in the
text of the pleading the specific facts related to deployment.

**Source.** 2012, 213:1, eff. June 13, 2012.

### Section 458-E:7

 **458-E:7 Duty to Cooperate and Disclose Information. –**
                                             
 I. Because military necessity may preclude court adjudication before
deployment, the parties shall cooperate with each other in an effort to
reach a mutually agreeable resolution of parental rights and
responsibilities, parent-child contact, and child support. Each party
shall provide information to the other in an effort to facilitate
agreement on these issues.
                                             
 II. Within 14 days of receiving notification of deployment or
mobilization in the near future from his or her military leadership, the
military parent shall provide written notice to the nondeploying parent
of the same. If less than 14 days' notice is received by the military
parent, notice shall be given immediately upon receipt of notice to the
nondeploying parent.

**Source.** 2012, 213:1, eff. June 13, 2012.

### Section 458-E:8

 **458-E:8 Failure to Exercise Parent-Child Contact Rights. –** In
determining whether a parent has failed to exercise parent-child
contact, the court shall not count any time periods during which the
parent did not exercise such contact due to the material effect of that
parent's military duties on the contact schedule.

**Source.** 2012, 213:1, eff. June 13, 2012.

### Section 458-E:9

 **458-E:9 Attorney Fees. –** In making determinations pursuant to
this chapter, the court may award attorney's fees and costs based on the
court's consideration of:
                                             
 I. Unreasonable failure of either party to accommodate the other
party in parental rights and responsibilities or parent-child contact
matters related to a deploying parent. A parent's refusal to accommodate
the other parent shall not be considered unreasonable if the parent
demonstrates a reasonable fear for his or her safety or the safety of
his or her child.
                                             
 II. Unreasonable delay caused by either party in resolving parental
rights and responsibilities or parent-child contact related to a
deploying parent.
                                             
 III. Failure of either party to provide timely information about
income and earnings information to the other party.
                                             
 IV. Other factors as the court may consider appropriate and as may
be required by law.

**Source.** 2012, 213:1, eff. June 13, 2012.
