---
title: 'CHAPTER 458-A UNIFORM CHILD CUSTODY JURISDICTION AND ENFORCEMENT ACT'
---

TITLE XLIII
                                             
DOMESTIC RELATIONS
==================

CHAPTER 458-A
                                             
UNIFORM CHILD CUSTODY JURISDICTION AND ENFORCEMENT ACT
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 458-A:1

 **458-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Abandoned'' means left without provision for reasonable and
necessary care or supervision.
                                             
 II. "Child'' means an individual who has not attained 18 years of
age.
                                             
 III. "Child-custody determination'' means a judgment, decree, or
other order of a court providing for the legal custody, physical
custody, or visitation with respect to a child. The term includes a
permanent, temporary, initial, and modification order. The term does not
include an order relating to child support or other monetary obligation
of an individual.
                                             
 IV. "Child-custody proceeding'' means a proceeding in which legal
custody, physical custody, or visitation with respect to a child is an
issue. The term includes a proceeding for divorce, separation,
dissolution of civil union as defined by RSA 457-A, neglect, abuse,
dependency, guardianship, paternity, determination of parental rights
and responsibilities, termination of parental rights, and protection
from domestic violence, in which the issue may appear. The term does not
include a proceeding involving juvenile delinquency, children in need of
services as defined by RSA 169-D, or contractual emancipation or
enforcement under RSA 458-A:22 through RSA 458-A:38.
                                             
 V. "Commencement'' means the filing of the first pleading in a
proceeding.
                                             
 VI. "Court'' means an entity authorized under the law of a state to
establish, enforce, or modify a child-custody determination.
                                             
 VII. "Home state'' means the state in which a child lived with a
parent or a person acting as a parent for at least 6 consecutive months
immediately before the commencement of a child-custody proceeding. In
the case of a child less than 6 months of age, the term means the state
in which the child lived from birth with any of the persons mentioned. A
period of temporary absence of any of the mentioned persons is part of
the period.
                                             
 VIII. "Initial determination'' means the first child-custody
determination concerning a particular child.
                                             
 IX. "Issuing court'' means the court that makes a child-custody
determination for which enforcement is sought under this chapter.
                                             
 X. "Issuing state'' means the state in which a child-custody
determination is made.
                                             
 XI. "Modification'' means a child-custody determination that
changes, replaces, supersedes, or is otherwise made after a previous
determination concerning the same child, whether or not it is made by
the court that made the previous determination.
                                             
 XII. "Person'' means an individual, corporation, business trust,
estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, association,
joint venture, government, governmental subdivision, agency, or
instrumentality; public corporation; or any other legal or commercial
entity.
                                             
 XIII. "Person acting as a parent'' means a person, other than a
parent, who:
                                             
 (a) Has physical custody of the child or has had physical custody
for a period of 6 consecutive months, including any temporary absence,
within one year immediately before the commencement of a child-custody
proceeding; and
                                             
 (b) Has been awarded legal custody by a court or claims a right
to legal custody under the law of this state.
                                             
 XIV. "Physical custody'' means the physical care and supervision of
a child.
                                             
 XV. "State'' means a state of the United States, the District of
Columbia, Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, or any
territory or insular possession subject to the jurisdiction of the
United States.
                                             
 XVI. "Tribe'' means an Indian tribe or band, or Alaskan Native
village, which is recognized by federal law or formally acknowledged by
a state.
                                             
 XVII. "Warrant'' means an order issued by a court authorizing law
enforcement officers to take physical custody of a child.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:2

 **458-A:2 Proceedings Governed by Other Law. –** This chapter does
not govern an adoption proceeding or a proceeding pertaining to the
authorization of emergency medical care for a child.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:3

 **458-A:3 Application to Indian Tribes. –**
                                             
 I. A child-custody proceeding that pertains to an Indian child as
defined in the Indian Child Welfare Act, 25 U.S.C. section 1901 et seq.,
is not subject to this chapter to the extent that it is governed by the
Indian Child Welfare Act.
                                             
 II. A court of this state shall treat a tribe as if it were a state
of the United States for the purpose of applying RSA 458-A:1 through RSA
458-A:21.
                                             
 III. A child-custody determination made by a tribe under factual
circumstances in substantial conformity with the jurisdictional
standards of this chapter must be recognized and enforced under RSA
458-A:22 through RSA 458-A:38.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:4

 **458-A:4 International Application of Chapter. –**
                                             
 I. A court of this state shall treat a foreign country as if it were
a state of the United States for the purpose of applying RSA 458-A:1
through RSA 458-A:21.
                                             
 II. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph III, a child-custody
determination made in a foreign country under factual circumstances in
substantial conformity with the jurisdictional standards of this chapter
must be recognized and enforced under RSA 458-A:22 through RSA
458-A:38.
                                             
 III. A court of this state need not apply this chapter if the child
custody law of a foreign country violates fundamental principles of
human rights.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:5

 **458-A:5 Effect of Child-Custody Determination. –** A child-custody
determination made by a court of this state that had jurisdiction under
this chapter binds all persons who have been served in accordance with
the laws of this state or notified in accordance with RSA 458-A:7 or who
have submitted to the jurisdiction of the court, and who have been given
an opportunity to be heard. As to those persons, the determination is
conclusive as to all decided issues of law and fact except to the extent
the determination is modified.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:6

 **458-A:6 Priority. –** If a question of existence or exercise of
jurisdiction under this chapter is raised in a child-custody proceeding,
the question, upon request of a party, shall be given priority on the
calendar and handled expeditiously.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:7

 **458-A:7 Notice to Persons Outside State. –**
                                             
 I. Notice required for the exercise of jurisdiction when a person is
outside this state may be given in a manner prescribed by the law of
this state for service of process or by the law of the state in which
the service is made. Notice must be given in a manner reasonably
calculated to give actual notice but may be by publication if other
means are not effective.
                                             
 II. Proof of service may be made in the manner prescribed by the law
of this state or by the law of the state in which the service is made.
                                             
 III. Notice is not required for the exercise of jurisdiction with
respect to a person who submits to the jurisdiction of the court.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:8

 **458-A:8 Appearance and Limited Immunity. –**
                                             
 I. A party to a child-custody proceeding, including a modification
proceeding, or a petitioner or respondent in a proceeding to enforce or
register a child-custody determination, is not subject to personal
jurisdiction in this state for another proceeding or purpose solely by
reason of having participated, or of having been physically present for
the purpose of participating, in the proceeding.
                                             
 II. A person who is subject to personal jurisdiction in this state
on a basis other than physical presence is not immune from service of
process in this state. A party present in this state who is subject to
the jurisdiction of another state is not immune from service of process
allowable under the laws of that state.
                                             
 III. The immunity granted by paragraph I does not extend to civil
litigation based on acts unrelated to the participation in a proceeding
under this chapter committed by an individual while present in this
state.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:9

 **458-A:9 Communication Between Courts. –**
                                             
 I. A court of this state may communicate with a court in another
state concerning a proceeding arising under this chapter.
                                             
 II. The court may allow the parties to participate in the
communication. If the parties are not able to participate in the
communication, they must be given the opportunity to present facts and
legal arguments before a decision on jurisdiction is made.
                                             
 III. Communication between courts on schedules, calendars, court
records, and similar matters may occur without informing the parties. A
record need not be made of the communication.
                                             
 IV. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph III, a record must be
made of a communication under this section. The parties must be informed
promptly of the communication and granted access to the record.
                                             
 V. For the purposes of this section, "record'' means information
that is inscribed on a tangible medium or that is stored in an
electronic or other medium and is retrievable in perceivable form.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:10

 **458-A:10 Taking Testimony in Another State. –**
                                             
 I. In addition to other procedures available to a party, a party to
a child-custody proceeding may offer testimony of witnesses who are
located in another state, including testimony of the parties and the
child, by deposition or other means allowable in this state for
testimony taken in another state. The court on its own motion may order
that the testimony of a person be taken in another state and may
prescribe the manner in which and the terms upon which the testimony is
taken.
                                             
 II. A court of this state may permit an individual residing in
another state to be deposed or to testify by telephone, audiovisual
means, or other electronic means before a designated court or at another
location in that state. A court of this state shall cooperate with
courts of other states in designating an appropriate location for the
deposition or testimony.
                                             
 III. Documentary evidence transmitted from another state to a court
of this state by technological means that do not produce an original
writing may not be excluded from evidence on an objection based on the
means of transmission.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:11

 **458-A:11 Cooperation Between Courts; Preservation of Records. –**
                                             
 I. A court of this state may request the appropriate court of
another state to:
                                             
 (a) Hold an evidentiary hearing;
                                             
 (b) Order a person to produce or give evidence pursuant to
procedures of that state;
                                             
 (c) Order that an evaluation be made with respect to the custody
of a child involved in a pending proceeding;
                                             
 (d) Forward to the court of this state a certified copy of the
transcript of the record of the hearing, the evidence otherwise
presented, and any evaluation prepared in compliance with the request;
and
                                             
 (e) Order a party to a child-custody proceeding or any person
having physical custody of the child to appear in the proceeding with or
without the child.
                                             
 II. Upon request of a court of another state, a court of this state
may hold a hearing or enter an order described in paragraph I.
                                             
 III. Travel and other necessary and reasonable expenses incurred
under paragraphs I and II may be assessed against the parties according
to the law of this state.
                                             
 IV. A court of this state shall preserve the pleadings, orders,
decrees, records of hearings, evaluations, and other pertinent records
with respect to a child-custody proceeding until the child attains 18
years of age. Upon appropriate request by a court or law enforcement
official of another state, the court shall forward a certified copy of
those records.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

Jurisdiction
------------

### Section 458-A:12

 **458-A:12 Initial Child-Custody Jurisdiction. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in RSA 458-A:15, a court of this
state has jurisdiction to make an initial child-custody determination
only if:
                                             
 (a) This state is the home state of the child on the date of the
commencement of the proceeding, or was the home state of the child
within 6 months before the commencement of the proceeding and the child
is absent from this state but a parent or person acting as a parent
continues to live in this state.
                                             
 (b) A court of another state does not have jurisdiction under
subparagraph (a), or a court of the home state of the child has declined
to exercise jurisdiction on the ground that this state is the more
appropriate forum under RSA 458-A:18 or RSA 458-A:19, and:
                                             
 (1) The child and the child's parents, or the child and at
least one parent or a person acting as a parent, have a significant
connection with this state other than mere physical presence; and
                                             
 (2) Substantial evidence is available in this state concerning
the child's care, protection, training, and personal relationships.
                                             
 (c) All courts having jurisdiction under subparagraph (a) or (b)
have declined to exercise jurisdiction on the ground that a court of
this state is the more appropriate forum to determine the custody of the
child under RSA 458-A:18 or RSA 458-A:19.
                                             
 (d) No court of any other state would have jurisdiction under the
criteria specified in subparagraph (a), (b), or (c).
                                             
 II. Paragraph I is the exclusive jurisdictional basis for making a
child-custody determination by a court of this state.
                                             
 III. Physical presence of, or personal jurisdiction over, a party or
a child is not necessary or sufficient to make a child-custody
determination.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:13

 **458-A:13 Exclusive, Continuing Jurisdiction. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in RSA 458-A:15, a court of this
state which has made a child-custody determination consistent with RSA
458-A:12 or RSA 458-A:14 has exclusive, continuing jurisdiction over the
determination until:
                                             
 (a) A court of this state determines that neither the child, nor
the child and one parent, nor the child and a person acting as a parent
have a significant connection with this state and that substantial
evidence is no longer available in this state concerning the child's
care, protection, training, and personal relationships; or
                                             
 (b) A court of this state or a court of another state determines
that the child, the child's parents, and any person acting as a parent
do not presently reside in this state.
                                             
 II. A court of this state which has made a child-custody
determination and does not have exclusive, continuing jurisdiction under
this section may modify that determination only if it has jurisdiction
to make an initial determination under RSA 458-A:12.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:14

 **458-A:14 Jurisdiction to Modify Determination. –** Except as
otherwise provided in RSA 458-A:15, a court of this state may not modify
a child-custody determination made by a court of another state unless a
court of this state has jurisdiction to make an initial determination
under RSA 458-A:12, I(a) or (b) and:
                                             
 I. The court of the other state determines it no longer has
exclusive, continuing jurisdiction under RSA 458-A:13 or that a court of
this state would be a more convenient forum under RSA 458-A:18; or
                                             
 II. A court of this state or a court of the other state determines
that the child, the child's parents, and any person acting as a parent
do not presently reside in the other state.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:15

 **458-A:15 Temporary Emergency Jurisdiction. –**
                                             
 I. A court of this state has temporary emergency jurisdiction if the
child is present in this state and the child has been abandoned or it is
necessary in an emergency to protect the child because the child, or a
sibling or parent of the child, is subjected to or threatened with
mistreatment or abuse.
                                             
 II. If there is no previous child-custody determination that is
entitled to be enforced under this chapter and a child-custody
proceeding has not been commenced in a court of a state having
jurisdiction under RSA 458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:14, a child-custody
determination made under this section remains in effect until an order
is obtained from a court of a state having jurisdiction under RSA
458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:14. If a child-custody proceeding has not
been or is not commenced in a court of a state having jurisdiction under
RSA 458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:14, a child-custody determination made
under this section becomes a final determination, if it so provides and
this state becomes the home state of the child.
                                             
 III. If there is a previous child-custody determination that is
entitled to be enforced under this chapter, or a child-custody
proceeding has been commenced in a court of a state having jurisdiction
under RSA 458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:14, any order issued by a court of
this state under this section must specify in the order a period that
the court considers adequate to allow the person seeking an order to
obtain an order from the state having jurisdiction under RSA 458-A:12
through RSA 458-A:14. The order issued in this state remains in effect
until an order is obtained from the other state within the period
specified or the period expires.
                                             
 IV. A court of this state which has been asked to make a
child-custody determination under this section, upon being informed that
a child-custody proceeding has been commenced in, or a child-custody
determination has been made by, a court of a state having jurisdiction
under RSA 458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:14, shall immediately communicate
with the other court. A court of this state which is exercising
jurisdiction pursuant to RSA 458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:14, upon being
informed that a child-custody proceeding has been commenced in, or a
child-custody determination has been made by, a court of another state
under a statute similar to this section shall immediately communicate
with the court of that state to resolve the emergency, protect the
safety of the parties and the child, and determine a period for the
duration of the temporary order.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:16

 **458-A:16 Notice; Opportunity to be Heard; Joinder. –**
                                             
 I. Before a child-custody determination is made under this chapter,
notice and an opportunity to be heard in accordance with the standards
of RSA 458-A:7 must be given to all persons entitled to notice under the
law of this state as in child-custody proceedings between residents of
this state, any parent whose parental rights have not been previously
terminated, and any person having physical custody of the child.
                                             
 II. This chapter does not govern the enforceability of a
child-custody determination made without notice or an opportunity to be
heard.
                                             
 III. The obligation to join a party and the right to intervene as a
party in a child-custody proceeding under this chapter are governed by
the law of this state as in child-custody proceedings between residents
of this state.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:17

 **458-A:17 Simultaneous Proceedings. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in RSA 458-A:15, a court of this
state may not exercise its jurisdiction under this subdivision if, at
the time of the commencement of the proceeding, a proceeding concerning
the custody of the child has been commenced in a court of another state
having jurisdiction substantially in conformity with this chapter,
unless the proceeding has been terminated or is stayed by the court of
the other state because a court of this state is a more convenient forum
under RSA 458-A:18.
                                             
 II. Except as otherwise provided in RSA 458-A:15, a court of this
state, before hearing a child-custody proceeding, shall examine the
court documents and other information supplied by the parties pursuant
to RSA 458-A:20. If the court determines that a child-custody proceeding
has been commenced in a court in another state having jurisdiction
substantially in accordance with this chapter, the court of this state
shall stay its proceeding and communicate with the court of the other
state. If the court of the state having jurisdiction substantially in
accordance with this chapter does not determine that the court of this
state is a more appropriate forum, the court of this state shall dismiss
the proceeding.
                                             
 III. In a proceeding to modify a child-custody determination, a
court of this state shall determine whether a proceeding to enforce the
determination has been commenced in another state. If a proceeding to
enforce a child-custody determination has been commenced in another
state, the court may:
                                             
 (a) Stay the proceeding for modification pending the entry of an
order of a court of the other state enforcing, staying, denying, or
dismissing the proceeding for enforcement;
                                             
 (b) Enjoin the parties from continuing with the proceeding for
enforcement; or
                                             
 (c) Proceed with the modification under conditions it considers
appropriate.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:18

 **458-A:18 Inconvenient Forum. –**
                                             
 I. A court of this state which has jurisdiction under this chapter
to make a child-custody determination may decline to exercise its
jurisdiction at any time if it determines that it is an inconvenient
forum under the circumstances and that a court of another state is a
more appropriate forum. The issue of inconvenient forum may be raised
upon motion of a party, the court's own motion, or request of another
court.
                                             
 II. Before determining whether it is an inconvenient forum, a court
of this state shall consider whether it is appropriate for a court of
another state to exercise jurisdiction. For this purpose, the court
shall allow the parties to submit information and shall consider all
relevant factors, including:
                                             
 (a) Whether domestic violence has occurred and is likely to
continue in the future and which state could best protect the parties
and the child;
                                             
 (b) The length of time the child has resided outside this state;
                                             
 (c) The distance between the court in this state and the court in
the state that would assume jurisdiction;
                                             
 (d) The relative financial circumstances of the parties;
                                             
 (e) Any agreement of the parties as to which state should assume
jurisdiction;
                                             
 (f) The nature and location of the evidence required to resolve
the pending litigation, including testimony of the child;
                                             
 (g) The ability of the court of each state to decide the issue
expeditiously and the procedures necessary to present the evidence; and
                                             
 (h) The familiarity of the court of each state with the facts and
issues in the pending litigation.
                                             
 III. If a court of this state determines that it is an inconvenient
forum and that a court of another state is a more appropriate forum, it
shall stay the proceedings upon condition that a child-custody
proceeding be promptly commenced in another designated state and may
impose any other condition the court considers just and proper.
                                             
 IV. A court of this state may decline to exercise its jurisdiction
under this chapter if a child-custody determination is incidental to an
action for divorce or another proceeding while still retaining
jurisdiction over the divorce or other proceeding.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:19

 **458-A:19 Jurisdiction Declined by Reason of Conduct. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in RSA 458-A:15, if a court of this
state has jurisdiction under this chapter because a person seeking to
invoke its jurisdiction has engaged in unjustifiable conduct, the court
shall decline to exercise its jurisdiction unless:
                                             
 (a) The parents and all persons acting as parents have acquiesced
in the exercise of jurisdiction;
                                             
 (b) A court of the state otherwise having jurisdiction under RSA
458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:14 determines that this state is a more
appropriate forum under RSA 458-A:18; or
                                             
 (c) No court of any other state would have jurisdiction under the
criteria specified in RSA 458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:14.
                                             
 II. If a court of this state declines to exercise its jurisdiction
pursuant to paragraph I it may fashion an appropriate remedy to ensure
the safety of the child and prevent a repetition of the unjustifiable
conduct, including staying the proceeding until a child-custody
proceeding is commenced in a court having jurisdiction under RSA
458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:14.
                                             
 III. If a court dismisses a petition or stays a proceeding because
it declines to exercise its jurisdiction pursuant to paragraph I, it
shall assess against the party seeking to invoke its jurisdiction
necessary and reasonable expenses including costs, communication
expenses, attorney's fees, investigative fees, expenses for witnesses,
travel expenses, and child care during the course of the proceedings,
unless the party from whom fees are sought establishes that the
assessment would be clearly inappropriate. The court may not assess
fees, costs, or expenses against this state unless authorized by law
other than this chapter.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:20

 **458-A:20 Information to be Submitted to Court. –**
                                             
 I. In a child-custody proceeding, each party, in its first pleading
or in an attached affidavit, shall give information, if reasonably
ascertainable, under oath as to the child's present address or
whereabouts, the places where the child has lived during the last 5
years, and the names and present addresses of the persons with whom the
child has lived during that period. The pleading or affidavit must state
whether the party:
                                             
 (a) Has participated, as a party or witness or in any other
capacity, in any other proceeding concerning the custody of or
visitation with the child and, if so, identify the court, the case
number, and the date of the child-custody determination, if any;
                                             
 (b) Knows of any proceeding that could affect the current
proceeding, including proceedings for enforcement and proceedings
relating to domestic violence, protective orders, termination of
parental rights, and adoptions and, if so, identify the court, the case
number, and the nature of the proceeding; and
                                             
 (c) Knows the names and addresses of any person not a party to
the proceeding who has physical custody of the child or claims rights of
legal custody or physical custody of, or visitation with, the child and,
if so, the names and addresses of those persons.
                                             
 II. If the information required by paragraph I is not furnished, the
court, upon motion of a party or its own motion, may stay the proceeding
until the information is furnished.
                                             
 III. If the declaration as to any of the items described in
subparagraphs I(a), (b), and (c) is in the affirmative, the declarant
shall give additional information under oath as required by the court.
The court may examine the parties under oath as to details of the
information furnished and other matters pertinent to the court's
jurisdiction and the disposition of the case.
                                             
 IV. Each party has a continuing duty to inform the court of any
proceeding in this or any other state that could affect the current
proceeding.
                                             
 V. If a party alleges in an affidavit or a pleading under oath that
the health, safety, or liberty of a party or child would be jeopardized
by disclosure of identifying information, the information must be sealed
and may not be disclosed to the other party or the public unless the
court orders the disclosure to be made after a hearing in which the
court takes into consideration the health, safety, or liberty of the
party or child and determines that the disclosure is in the interest of
justice.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:21

 **458-A:21 Appearance of Parties and Child. –**
                                             
 I. In a child-custody proceeding in this state, the court may order
a party to the proceeding who is in this state to appear before the
court in person with or without the child. The court may order any
person who is in this state and who has physical custody or control of
the child to appear in person with the child.
                                             
 II. If a party to a child-custody proceeding whose presence is
desired by the court is outside this state, the court may order that a
notice given pursuant to RSA 458-A:7 include a statement directing the
party to appear in person with or without the child and informing the
party that failure to appear may result in a decision adverse to the
party.
                                             
 III. The court may enter any orders necessary to ensure the safety
of the child and of any person ordered to appear under this section.
                                             
 IV. If a party to a child-custody proceeding who is outside this
state is directed to appear under paragraph II or desires to appear
personally before the court with or without the child, the court may
require another party to pay reasonable and necessary travel and other
expenses of the party so appearing and of the child.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

Enforcement
-----------

### Section 458-A:22

 **458-A:22 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Petitioner'' means a person who seeks enforcement of an order
for return of a child under the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of
International Child Abduction or enforcement of a child-custody
determination.
                                             
 II. "Respondent'' means a person against whom a proceeding has been
commenced for enforcement of an order for return of a child under the
Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
or enforcement of a child-custody determination.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:23

 **458-A:23 Enforcement Under Hague Convention. –** Under this
subdivision a court of this state may enforce an order for the return of
the child made under the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of
International Child Abduction as if it were a child-custody
determination.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:24

 **458-A:24 Duty to Enforce. –**
                                             
 I. A court of this state shall recognize and enforce a child-custody
determination of a court of another state if the latter court exercised
jurisdiction in substantial conformity with this chapter or the
determination was made under factual circumstances meeting the
jurisdictional standards of this chapter and the determination has not
been modified in accordance with this chapter.
                                             
 II. A court of this state may utilize any remedy available under
other law of this state to enforce a child-custody determination made by
a court of another state. The remedies provided in this subdivision are
cumulative and do not affect the availability of other remedies to
enforce a child-custody determination.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:25

 **458-A:25 Temporary Visitation. –**
                                             
 I. A court of this state which does not have jurisdiction to modify
a child-custody determination, may issue a temporary order enforcing:
                                             
 (a) A visitation schedule made by a court of another state; or
                                             
 (b) The visitation provisions of a child-custody determination of
another state that does not provide for a specific visitation schedule.
                                             
 II. If a court of this state makes an order under subparagraph I(b)
it shall specify in the order a period that it considers adequate to
allow the petitioner to obtain an order from a court having jurisdiction
under the criteria specified in RSA 458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:21. The
order remains in effect until an order is obtained from the other court
or the period expires.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:26

 **458-A:26 Registration of Child-Custody Determination. –**
                                             
 I. A child-custody determination issued by a court of another state
may be registered in this state, with or without a simultaneous request
for enforcement, by sending to the office of the clerk of the superior
court:
                                             
 (a) A letter or other document requesting registration;
                                             
 (b) Two copies, including one certified copy, of the
determination sought to be registered, and a statement under penalty of
perjury that to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person
seeking registration the order has not been modified; and
                                             
 (c) Except as otherwise provided in RSA 458-A:20, the name and
address of the person seeking registration and any parent or person
acting as a parent who has been awarded custody or visitation in the
child-custody determination sought to be registered.
                                             
 II. On receipt of the documents required by paragraph I the
registering court shall:
                                             
 (a) Cause the determination to be filed as a foreign judgment,
together with one copy of any accompanying documents and information,
regardless of their form; and
                                             
 (b) Serve notice upon the persons named pursuant to subparagraph
I(c) and provide them with an opportunity to contest the registration in
accordance with this section.
                                             
 III. The notice required by subparagraph II(b) must state that:
                                             
 (a) A registered determination is enforceable as of the date of
the registration in the same manner as a determination issued by a court
of this state;
                                             
 (b) A hearing to contest the validity of the registered
determination must be requested within 20 days after service of notice;
and
                                             
 (c) Failure to contest the registration will result in
confirmation of the child-custody determination and preclude further
contest of that determination with respect to any matter that could have
been asserted.
                                             
 IV. A person seeking to contest the validity of a registered order
must request a hearing within 20 days after service of the notice. At
that hearing, the court shall confirm the registered order unless the
person contesting registration establishes that:
                                             
 (a) The issuing court did not have jurisdiction under RSA
458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:21;
                                             
 (b) The child-custody determination sought to be registered has
been vacated, stayed, or modified by a court having jurisdiction to do
so under RSA 458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:21; or
                                             
 (c) The person contesting registration was entitled to notice,
but notice was not given in accordance with the standards of RSA
458-A:7, in the proceedings before the court that issued the order for
which registration is sought.
                                             
 V. If a timely request for a hearing to contest the validity of the
registration is not made, the registration is confirmed as a matter of
law and the person requesting registration and all persons served must
be notified of the confirmation.
                                             
 VI. Confirmation of a registered order, whether by operation of law
or after notice and hearing, precludes further contest of the order with
respect to any matter that could have been asserted at the time of
registration.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:27

 **458-A:27 Enforcement of Registered Determination. –**
                                             
 I. A court of this state may grant any relief normally available
under the law of this state to enforce a registered child-custody
determination made by a court of another state.
                                             
 II. A court of this state shall recognize and enforce, but may not
modify, except in accordance with RSA 458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:21, a
registered child-custody determination of a court of another state.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:28

 **458-A:28 Simultaneous Proceedings. –** If a proceeding for
enforcement under this subdivision is commenced in a court of this state
and the court determines that a proceeding to modify the determination
is pending in a court of another state having jurisdiction to modify the
determination under RSA 458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:21, the enforcing
court shall immediately communicate with the modifying court. The
proceeding for enforcement continues unless the enforcing court, after
consultation with the modifying court, stays or dismisses the
proceeding.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:29

 **458-A:29 Expedited Enforcement of Child-Custody Determination.
–**
                                             
 I. A petition under this subdivision must be verified. Certified
copies of all orders sought to be enforced and of any order confirming
registration must be attached to the petition. A copy of a certified
copy of an order may be attached instead of the original.
                                             
 II. A petition for enforcement of a child-custody determination must
state:
                                             
 (a) Whether the court that issued the determination identified
the jurisdictional basis it relied upon in exercising jurisdiction and,
if so, what the basis was;
                                             
 (b) Whether the determination for which enforcement is sought has
been vacated, stayed, or modified by a court whose decision must be
enforced under this chapter and, if so, identify the court, the case
number, and the nature of the proceeding;
                                             
 (c) Whether any proceeding has been commenced that could affect
the current proceeding, including proceedings relating to domestic
violence, protective orders, termination of parental rights, and
adoptions and, if so, identify the court, the case number, and the
nature of the proceeding;
                                             
 (d) The present physical address of the child and the respondent,
if known;
                                             
 (e) Whether relief in addition to the immediate physical custody
of the child and attorney's fees is sought, including a request for
assistance from law enforcement officials and, if so, the relief sought;
and
                                             
 (f) If the child-custody determination has been registered and
confirmed under RSA 458-A:26, the date and place of registration.
                                             
 III. Upon the filing of a petition, the court shall issue an order
directing the respondent to appear in person with or without the child
at a hearing and may enter any order necessary to ensure the safety of
the parties and the child. The hearing must be held on the next judicial
day after service of the order unless that date is impossible. In that
event, the court shall hold the hearing on the first judicial day
possible. The court may extend the date of hearing at the request of the
petitioner.
                                             
 IV. An order issued under paragraph III must state the time and
place of the hearing and advise the respondent that at the hearing the
court will order that the petitioner may take immediate physical custody
of the child and the payment of fees, costs, and expenses under RSA
458-A:33, and may schedule a hearing to determine whether further relief
is appropriate, unless the respondent appears and establishes that:
                                             
 (a) The child-custody determination has not been registered and
confirmed under RSA 458-A:26 and that:
                                             
 (1) The issuing court did not have jurisdiction under RSA
458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:21;
                                             
 (2) The child-custody determination for which enforcement is
sought has been vacated, stayed, or modified by a court having
jurisdiction to do so under RSA 458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:21; or
                                             
 (3) The respondent was entitled to notice, but notice was not
given in accordance with the standards of RSA 458-A:7, in the
proceedings before the court that issued the order for which enforcement
is sought; or
                                             
 (b) The child-custody determination for which enforcement is
sought was registered and confirmed under RSA 458-A:26, but has been
vacated, stayed, or modified by a court of a state having jurisdiction
to do so under RSA 458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:21.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:30

 **458-A:30 Service of Petition and Order. –** Except as otherwise
provided in RSA 458-A:32, the petition and order must be served, by any
method authorized by the law of this state, upon the respondent and any
person who has physical custody of the child.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:31

 **458-A:31 Hearing and Order. –**
                                             
 I. Unless the court issues a temporary emergency order pursuant to
RSA 458-A:15, upon a finding that a petitioner is entitled to immediate
physical custody of the child, the court shall order that the petitioner
may take immediate physical custody of the child unless the respondent
establishes that:
                                             
 (a) The child-custody determination has not been registered and
confirmed under RSA 458-A:26 and that:
                                             
 (1) The issuing court did not have jurisdiction under RSA
458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:21;
                                             
 (2) The child-custody determination for which enforcement is
sought has been vacated, stayed, or modified by a court of a state
having jurisdiction to do so under RSA 458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:21;
or
                                             
 (3) The respondent was entitled to notice, but notice was not
given in accordance with the standards of RSA 458-A:7, in the
proceedings before the court that issued the order for which enforcement
is sought; or
                                             
 (b) The child-custody determination for which enforcement is
sought was registered and confirmed under RSA 458-A:26 but has been
vacated, stayed, or modified by a court of a state having jurisdiction
to do so under RSA 458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:21.
                                             
 II. The court shall award the fees, costs, and expenses authorized
under RSA 458-A:33 and may grant additional relief, including a request
for the assistance of law enforcement officials, and set a further
hearing to determine whether additional relief is appropriate.
                                             
 III. If a party called to testify refuses to answer on the ground
that the testimony may be self-incriminating, the court may draw an
adverse inference from the refusal.
                                             
 IV. A privilege against disclosure of communications between spouses
and a defense of immunity based on the relationship of husband and wife
or parent and child may not be invoked in a proceeding under this
subdivision.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:32

 **458-A:32 Warrant to Take Physical Custody of Child. –**
                                             
 I. Upon the filing of a petition seeking enforcement of a
child-custody determination, the petitioner may file a verified
application for the issuance of a warrant to take physical custody of
the child if the child is immediately likely to suffer serious physical
harm or be removed from this state.
                                             
 II. If the court, upon the testimony of the petitioner or other
witness, finds that the child is imminently likely to suffer serious
physical harm or be removed from this state, it may issue a warrant to
take physical custody of the child. The petition must be heard on the
next judicial day after the warrant is executed unless that date is
impossible. In that event, the court shall hold the hearing on the first
judicial day possible. The application for the warrant must include the
statements required by RSA 458-A:29, II.
                                             
 III. A warrant to take physical custody of a child must:
                                             
 (a) Recite the facts upon which a conclusion of imminent serious
physical harm or removal from the jurisdiction is based;
                                             
 (b) Direct law enforcement officers to take physical custody of
the child immediately; and
                                             
 (c) Provide for the placement of the child pending final relief.
                                             
 IV. The respondent must be served with the petition, warrant, and
order immediately after the child is taken into physical custody.
                                             
 V. A warrant to take physical custody of a child is enforceable
throughout this state. If the court finds on the basis of the testimony
of the petitioner or other witness that a less intrusive remedy is not
effective, it may authorize law enforcement officers to enter private
property to take physical custody of the child. If required by exigent
circumstances of the case, the court may authorize law enforcement
officers to make a forcible entry at any hour.
                                             
 VI. The court may impose conditions upon placement of a child to
ensure the appearance of the child and the child's custodian.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:33

 **458-A:33 Costs, Fees, and Expenses. –**
                                             
 I. The court shall award the prevailing party, including a state,
necessary and reasonable expenses incurred by or on behalf of the party,
including costs, communication expenses, attorney's fees, investigative
fees, expenses for witnesses, travel expenses, and child care during the
course of the proceedings, unless the party from whom fees or expenses
are sought establishes that the award would be clearly inappropriate.
                                             
 II. The court may not assess fees, costs, or expenses against a
state unless authorized by law other than this chapter.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:34

 **458-A:34 Recognition and Enforcement. –** A court of this state
shall accord full faith and credit to an order issued by another state
and consistent with this chapter which enforces a child-custody
determination by a court of another state unless the order has been
vacated, stayed, or modified by a court having jurisdiction to do so
under RSA 458-A:12 through RSA 458-A:21.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:35

 **458-A:35 Appeals. –** An appeal may be taken from a final order in
a proceeding under this subdivision in accordance with expedited
appellate procedures in other civil cases. Unless the court enters a
temporary emergency order under RSA 458-A:15, the enforcing court may
not stay an order enforcing a child-custody determination pending
appeal.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:36

 **458-A:36 Role of Prosecutor or Public Official. –**
                                             
 I. In a case arising under this chapter or involving the Hague
Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction, the
prosecutor or other appropriate public official may take any lawful
action, including resort to a proceeding under this subdivision or any
other available civil proceeding to locate a child, obtain the return of
a child, or enforce a child-custody determination if there is:
                                             
 (a) An existing child-custody determination;
                                             
 (b) A request to do so from a court in a pending child-custody
proceeding;
                                             
 (c) A reasonable belief that a criminal statute has been
violated; or
                                             
 (d) A reasonable belief that the child has been wrongfully
removed or retained in violation of the Hague Convention on the Civil
Aspects of International Child Abduction.
                                             
 II. A prosecutor or appropriate public official acting under this
section acts on behalf of the court and may not represent any party.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:37

 **458-A:37 Role of Law Enforcement. –** At the request of a
prosecutor or other appropriate public official acting under RSA
458-A:36, a law enforcement officer may take any lawful action
reasonably necessary to locate a child or a party and assist a
prosecutor or appropriate public official with responsibilities under
RSA 458-A:36.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:38

 **458-A:38 Costs and Expenses. –** If the respondent is not the
prevailing party, the court may assess against the respondent all direct
expenses and costs incurred by the prosecutor or other appropriate
public official and law enforcement officers under RSA 458-A:36 or RSA
458-A:37.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

Miscellaneous Provisions
------------------------

### Section 458-A:39

 **458-A:39 Application and Construction. –** In applying and
construing this chapter, consideration must be given to the need to
promote uniformity of the law with respect to its subject matter among
states that enact it.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.

### Section 458-A:40

 **458-A:40 Severability Clause. –** If any provision of this chapter
or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.

**Source.** 2009, 191:1, eff. Dec. 1, 2010.
