---
title: 'CHAPTER 461-A PARENTAL RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES'
---

TITLE XLIII
                                             
DOMESTIC RELATIONS
==================

CHAPTER 461-A
                                             
PARENTAL RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
------------------------------------

### Section 461-A:1

 **461-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Decision-making responsibility'' means the responsibility to
make decisions for the child. It may refer to decisions on all issues or
on specified issues.
                                             
 II. "Mediation'' means a process in which a neutral third party
facilitates settlement discussions between parties.
                                             
 III. "Mediator'' means a family mediator, certified pursuant to RSA
328-C, who has contracted with the court to participate in
court-referred mediation under this chapter.
                                             
 IV. "Parental rights and responsibilities'' means all rights and
responsibilities parents have concerning their child.
                                             
 V. "Parenting plan'' means a written plan describing each parent's
rights and responsibilities.
                                             
 VI. "Parenting schedule'' means the schedule of when the child is in
the care of each parent.
                                             
 VII. "Residential responsibility'' means a parent's responsibility
to provide a home for the child.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005. 2009, 21:4, eff. Jan. 1,
2010.

### Section 461-A:2

 **461-A:2 Statement of Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. Because children do best when both parents have a stable and
meaningful involvement in their lives, it is the policy of this state,
unless it is clearly shown that in a particular case it is detrimental
to a child, to:
                                             
 (a) Support frequent and continuing contact between each child
and both parents.
                                             
 (b) Encourage parents to share in the rights and responsibilities
of raising their children after the parents have separated or divorced.
                                             
 (c) Encourage parents to develop their own parenting plan with
the assistance of legal and mediation professionals, unless there is
evidence of domestic violence, child abuse, or neglect.
                                             
 (d) Grant parents and courts the widest discretion in developing
a parenting plan.
                                             
 (e) Consider both the best interests of the child in light of the
factors listed in RSA 461-A:6 and the safety of the parties in
developing a parenting plan.
                                             
 II. This chapter shall be construed so as to promote the policy
stated in this section.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005.

### Section 461-A:3

 **461-A:3 Procedure and Jurisdiction. –**
                                             
 I. The procedure in cases concerning parental rights and
responsibilities, including child support, shall be the same as the
procedure for petitions for divorce and legal separation under RSA 458.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the court, upon proper
application and notice to the adverse party, may revise and modify any
order made by it, make such new orders as may be necessary, and may
award costs as justice may require.
                                             
 II. In cases where husband and wife or unwed parents are living
apart, the court, upon petition of either party, may make such order as
to parental rights and responsibilities and support of the children as
justice may require. All applicable provisions of this chapter and of
RSA 458-A, 458-B, 458-C, and 458-D shall apply to such proceedings.
                                             
 III. The jurisdiction granted by this section shall be limited by
the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction and Enforcement Act, if another
state has jurisdiction as provided in that act. For the purposes of
interpreting that act and any other provision of law which refers to a
custodial parent, including but not limited to RSA 458-A, any parent
with 50 percent or more of the residential responsibility shall be
considered a custodial parent.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005. 2009, 191:3, eff. Dec. 1,
2010.

### Section 461-A:4

 **461-A:4 Parenting Plans; Contents. –**
                                             
 I. In any proceeding to establish or modify a judgment providing for
parenting time with a child, except for matters filed under RSA 173-B,
the parents shall develop and file with the court a parenting plan to be
included in the court's decree. If the parents are unable to develop a
parenting plan, the court may develop it. In developing a parenting plan
under this section, the court shall consider only the best interests of
the child as provided under RSA 461-A:6 and the safety of the parties.
                                             
 II. A parenting plan may include provisions relative to:
                                             
 (a) Decision-making responsibility and residential
responsibility.
                                             
 (b) Information sharing and access, including telephone and
electronic access.
                                             
 (c) Legal residence of a child for school attendance.
                                             
 (d) Parenting schedule, including:
                                             
 (1) Holiday, birthday, and vacation planning.
                                             
 (2) Weekends, including holidays, and school in-service days
preceding or following weekends.
                                             
 (e) Transportation and exchange of the child.
                                             
 (f) Relocation of parents.
                                             
 (g) Procedure for review and adjustment of the plan.
                                             
 (h) Methods for resolving disputes.
                                             
 III. If the parties are insured and the parenting plan directs the
parties to participate in counseling, the court shall give due
consideration to selecting a counselor who accepts direct payment from
the parties' health insurance carrier.
                                             
 IV. If the parents have joint decision-making responsibility under
RSA 461-A:5, the parenting plan shall include the legal residence of
each parent unless the court finds that there is a history of domestic
abuse or stalking or that including such information would not be in the
best interest of the child. If the parenting plan includes a parent's
residence, the parent shall be responsible for promptly notifying the
court and the other parent of any change in residence. The failure to
provide such information may result in a finding of contempt of court.
                                             
 V. If the court orders supervised visitation, it may order that such
visitation shall take place only at a visitation center that uses a
metal detection device and has trained security personnel on-site.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005. 2011, 106:3, eff. July 30,
2011; 176:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2012. 2014, 107:3, eff. June 11, 2014.

### Section 461-A:4-a

 **461-A:4-a Judicial Enforcement of Parenting Plan. –** Any motion
for contempt or enforcement of an order regarding an approved parenting
plan under this chapter, if filed by a parent, shall be reviewed by the
court within 30 days.

**Source.** 2006, 251:1, eff. Aug. 4, 2006.

### Section 461-A:5

 **461-A:5 Decision-making Responsibility. –** Except as provided in
paragraph III, in the making of any order relative to decision-making
responsibility, there shall be a presumption, affecting the burden of
proof, that joint decision-making responsibility is in the best interest
of minor children:
                                             
 I. Where the parents have agreed to an award of joint
decision-making responsibility or so agree in open court at a hearing
for the purpose of determining parental rights and responsibilities for
the minor children of the marriage. If the court declines to enter an
order awarding joint decision-making responsibility, the court shall
state in its decision the reasons for the denial.
                                             
 II. Upon the application of either parent for joint decision-making
responsibility, in which case it may be awarded at the discretion of the
court. For the purpose of assisting the court in making a determination
whether an award of joint decision-making responsibility is appropriate
under this section, the court may appoint a guardian ad litem to
represent the interests of the children according to the provisions of
RSA 461-A:16. If the court declines to enter an order awarding joint
decision-making responsibility, the court shall state in its decision
the reasons for the denial.
                                             
 III. Where the court finds that abuse as defined in RSA 173-B:1, I
has occurred, the court shall consider such abuse as harmful to children
and as evidence in determining whether joint decision-making
responsibility is appropriate. In such cases, the court shall make
orders for the allocation of parental rights and responsibilities that
best protect the children or the abused spouse or both. If joint
decision-making responsibility is granted despite evidence of abuse, the
court shall provide written findings to support the order.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005.

### Section 461-A:6

 **461-A:6 Determination of Parental Rights and Responsibilities;
Best Interest. –**
                                             
 I. In determining parental rights and responsibilities, the court
shall be guided by the best interests of the child, and shall consider
the following factors:
                                             
 (a) The relationship of the child with each parent and the
ability of each parent to provide the child with nurture, love,
affection, and guidance.
                                             
 (b) The ability of each parent to assure that the child receives
adequate food, clothing, shelter, medical care, and a safe environment.
                                             
 (c) The child's developmental needs and the ability of each
parent to meet them, both in the present and in the future.
                                             
 (d) The quality of the child's adjustment to the child's school
and community and the potential effect of any change.
                                             
 (e) The ability and disposition of each parent to foster a
positive relationship and frequent and continuing physical, written, and
telephonic contact with the other parent, including whether contact is
likely to result in harm to the child or to a parent.
                                             
 (f) The support of each parent for the child's contact with the
other parent as shown by allowing and promoting such contact, including
whether contact is likely to result in harm to the child or to a
parent.
                                             
 (g) The support of each parent for the child's relationship with
the other parent, including whether contact is likely to result in harm
to the child or to a parent.
                                             
 (h) The relationship of the child with any other person who may
significantly affect the child.
                                             
 (i) The ability of the parents to communicate, cooperate with
each other, and make joint decisions concerning the children, including
whether contact is likely to result in harm to the child or to a
parent.
                                             
 (j) Any evidence of abuse, as defined in RSA 173-B:1, I or RSA
169-C:3, II, and the impact of the abuse on the child and on the
relationship between the child and the abusing parent.
                                             
 (k) If a parent is incarcerated, the reason for and the length of
the incarceration, and any unique issues that arise as a result of
incarceration.
                                             
 (l) Any other additional factors the court deems relevant.
                                             
 II. If the court finds by clear and convincing evidence that a minor
child is of sufficient maturity to make a sound judgment, the court may
give substantial weight to the preference of the mature minor child as
to the determination of parental rights and responsibilities. Under
these circumstances, the court shall also give due consideration to
other factors which may have affected the minor child's preference,
including whether the minor child's preference was based on undesirable
or improper influences.
                                             
 III. In determining parental rights and responsibilities under this
section, including residential responsibility, the court shall not apply
a preference for one parent over the other because of the sex of the
child, the sex of a parent, or the financial resources of a parent.
                                             
 IV. If the court finds that a parent has been convicted of sexual
assault or there has been a finding by a court of competent jurisdiction
of sexual abuse against such parent's minor child or minor stepchild,
the court may prohibit contact between such parent and the victim of the
abuse and any sibling or step-sibling of the victim. The court shall
make orders that best protect the victim of the abuse and the siblings
and step-siblings of such victim.
                                             
 (a) If a parent makes a good faith allegation based on a
reasonable belief supported by facts that the parent's child is a victim
of physical abuse or neglect or sexual abuse perpetrated by the other
parent and if the parent making the allegation acts lawfully and in good
faith in accordance with such belief to protect the child or seek
treatment for the child, the parent making the allegation shall not be
deprived of parenting time, or contact with the child based on
reasonable actions taken in accordance with that belief.
                                             
 (b) In this paragraph, "sexual abuse'' shall mean sexual abuse as
defined in RSA 169-C:3, XXVII-a, and "sexual assault'' shall mean sexual
assault as provided in RSA 632-A:2, RSA 632-A:3, and RSA 632-A:4.
                                             
 V. If the court determines that it is in the best interest of the
children, it shall in its decree grant reasonable visitation privileges
to a party who is a stepparent of the children or to the grandparents of
the children pursuant to RSA 461-A:13. Nothing in this paragraph shall
be construed to prohibit or require an award of parental rights and
responsibilities to a stepparent or grandparent if the court determines
that such an award is in the best interest of the child.
                                             
 VI. The court may appoint a guardian ad litem to represent the
interests of the child according to RSA 461-A:16.
                                             
 VII. At the request of an aggrieved party, the court shall set forth
the reasons for its decision in a written order.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005. 2010, 273:1, 2, eff. Sept.
6, 2010.

### Section 461-A:7

 **461-A:7 Mediation of Cases Involving Children. –**
                                             
 I. The general purpose of this section is to:
                                             
 (a) Manage conflict and decrease acrimony between parties in a
dispute concerning parental rights and responsibilities for minor
children.
                                             
 (b) Promote the best interest of children.
                                             
 (c) Improve the parties' satisfaction with the outcome of
disputes concerning parental rights and responsibilities.
                                             
 (d) Increase the parties' participation in making decisions for
themselves and their children.
                                             
 (e) Increase compliance with court orders.
                                             
 (f) Reduce the number and frequency of cases returning to court.
                                             
 (g) Improve court efficiency.
                                             
 II. The mediator has no authority to make a decision or impose a
settlement upon the parties. The mediator shall attempt to focus the
attention of the parties upon their needs and interests rather than upon
their positions. Any settlement is entirely voluntary. In the absence of
settlement, the parties lose none of their rights to a resolution of
their dispute through litigation.
                                             
 III. In all cases involving disputed parental rights and
responsibilities or grandparents' visitation rights, including requests
for modification of prior orders, the court may order the parties to
participate in mediation. If the parties are ordered to participate in
mediation under this section, all issues relevant to their case,
including but not limited to child support and issues relative to
property settlement and alimony under RSA 458, shall also be mediated
unless the court orders otherwise.
                                             
 IV. Reasons the court may choose not to order mediation include, but
are not limited to, the following:
                                             
 (a) A showing of undue hardship to a party.
                                             
 (b) An agreement between the parties for alternate dispute
resolution procedures.
                                             
 (c) An allegation of abuse or neglect of the minor child.
                                             
 (d) A finding of alcoholism or drug abuse, unless all parties
agree to mediation.
                                             
 (e) An allegation of serious psychological or emotional abuse.
                                             
 (f) Lack of an available, suitable mediator within a reasonable
time period.
                                             
 V. The court shall not order mediation if there is a finding of
domestic violence as defined in RSA 173-B:1, unless all parties agree to
mediation.
                                             
 VI. Either party may move to have the mediator replaced for good
cause.
                                             
 VII. Mediation proceedings shall be held in private, and all
communications, oral or written, made during the proceedings, which
relate to the issues being mediated, whether made by the mediator, or a
party, or any other person present, shall be privileged and confidential
and shall not be disclosed and shall not be admissible in court, except
as provided in RSA 328-C:9.
                                             
 VIII. Any mediated agreement reached by the parties on all or some
of the disputed issues shall be reduced to writing, signed by each
party, and filed with the court as soon as practicable.
                                             
 IX. The parties shall participate at mediation in good faith. If the
mediator determines that mediation is not helpful in resolving the
dispute, the mediator shall report that fact to the court and return the
matter to the court for adjudication of the underlying issues.
                                             
 X. In the event both parties are indigent, the mediator shall be
paid a set fee for his or her services. The amount of the fee shall be
set annually by supreme court rule. The court may order each party to
pay a proportional amount of said fee. The fee shall be paid from the
mediation and arbitration fund established in RSA 490-E:4 and repaid by
the parties in accordance with RSA 461-A:18, including fees for pre-suit
marital mediation authorized pursuant to RSA 490-E:2, V. The supreme
court shall determine by rule a percentage amount of the entry fee paid
to each clerk of court for each petition in domestic relations cases to
be deposited into the mediation and arbitration fund to be used to pay
for mediation where both parties are indigent. At no time shall the
percentage amount exceed 25 percent of the entry fee for each petition.
                                             
 XI. The supreme court shall establish rules and take such action as
necessary to effectuate the purpose of this section.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005. 2011, 224:69, eff. July 1,
2011.

### Section 461-A:8

 **461-A:8 Temporary Orders. –** After the filing of a petition
concerning a minor child under this chapter, the court may issue orders
with such conditions and limitations as the court deems just. The orders
may be issued ex parte. The orders may include the following:
                                             
 I. The temporary allocation of parental rights and responsibilities
of any minor child as provided in RSA 461-A:6.
                                             
 II. Payment of temporary support for the child, including the
provision of health insurance.
                                             
 III. If paternity is a contested and relevant issue, orders for
paternity testing in accordance with RSA 522.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005.

### Section 461-A:9

 **461-A:9 Ex Parte Orders. –**
                                             
 I. After the filing of a petition concerning a minor child under
this chapter, the court may issue ex parte temporary orders. Ex parte
orders may be granted without written or oral notice to the adverse
party only if the court finds from specific facts shown by affidavit or
by the verified petition, that immediate and irreparable injury or loss
will result to the applicant or the child before the adverse party or
attorney can be heard in opposition.
                                             
 II. No ex parte order shall be granted without:
                                             
 (a) An affidavit from the moving party verifying the notice given
to the other party or verifying the attempt to notify the other party.
                                             
 (b) A determination by the court that such notice or attempt at
notice was timely so as to afford the other party an opportunity to be
present.
                                             
 III. If temporary orders are made ex parte, the party against whom
the orders are issued may file a written request with the clerk of the
court and request a hearing thereon. Such a hearing shall be held no
later than 5 days after the request is received by the clerk.
                                             
 IV. Ex parte orders may include the following terms:
                                             
 (a) Directing any party to refrain from abusing or interfering in
any way with the person or liberty of the other party.
                                             
 (b) Enjoining any party from entering the premises wherein the
other party resides upon a showing that physical or emotional harm would
otherwise result.
                                             
 (c) Enjoining any party from contacting the other party at, or
entering, the other party's place of employment or school.
                                             
 (d) Enjoining any party from harassing, intimidating, or
threatening the other party, the other party's relatives regardless of
their place of residence, or the other party's household members in any
way.
                                             
 (e) The temporary allocation of parental rights and
responsibilities of any minor children as provided in RSA 461-A:6.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005.

### Section 461-A:10

 **461-A:10 Restraining Orders. –**
                                             
 I. After the filing of a petition concerning a minor child under
this chapter, the court may issue restraining orders with such
conditions and limitations as the court deems just. At the discretion of
the court, such orders may be made on a temporary or permanent basis.
Temporary orders may be issued ex parte as provided in RSA 461-A:9. The
orders may include the following:
                                             
 (a) Directing any party to refrain from abusing or interfering in
any way with the person or liberty of the other party.
                                             
 (b) Enjoining any party from entering the premises wherein the
other party resides upon a showing that physical or emotional harm would
otherwise result.
                                             
 (c) Enjoining any party from contacting the other party at, or
entering, the other party's place of employment or school.
                                             
 (d) Enjoining any party from harassing, intimidating or
threatening the other party, other party's relatives regardless of their
place of residence, or the other party's household members in any way.
                                             
 II. When a party violates a restraining order issued under this
section by committing assault, criminal trespass, criminal mischief,
stalking, or another criminal act, that party shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and peace officers shall arrest the party, detain the party
pursuant to RSA 594:19-a and refer the party for prosecution. Such
arrests may be made within 12 hours after a violation without a warrant
upon probable cause whether or not the violation is committed in the
presence of a peace officer.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005.

### Section 461-A:11

 **461-A:11 Modification of Parental Rights and Responsibilities.
–**
                                             
 I. The court may issue an order modifying a permanent order
concerning parental rights and responsibilities under any of the
following circumstances:
                                             
 (a) The parties agree to a modification.
                                             
 (b) If the court finds repeated, intentional, and unwarranted
interference by a parent with the residential responsibilities of the
other parent, the court may order a change in the parental rights and
responsibilities without the necessity of showing harm to the child, if
the court determines that such change would be in accordance with the
best interests of the child.
                                             
 (c) If the court finds by clear and convincing evidence that the
child's present environment is detrimental to the child's physical,
mental, or emotional health, and the advantage to the child of modifying
the order outweighs the harm likely to be caused by a change in
environment.
                                             
 (d) If the parties have substantially equal periods of
residential responsibility for the child and either each asserts or the
court finds that the original allocation of parental rights and
responsibilities is not working, the court may order a change in
allocation of parental rights and responsibilities based on a finding
that the change is in the best interests of the child.
                                             
 (e) If the court finds by clear and convincing evidence that a
minor child is of sufficient maturity to make a sound judgment, the
court may give substantial weight to the preference of the mature minor
child as to the parent with whom he or she wants to live. Under these
circumstances, the court shall also give due consideration to other
factors which may have affected the minor child's preference, including
whether the minor child's preference was based on undesirable or
improper influences.
                                             
 (f) The modification makes either a minimal change or no change
in the allocation of parenting time between the parents, and the court
determines that such change would be in the best interests of the child.


                                             [Paragraph I(g) effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]


                                             
 (g) If one parent's allocation of parenting time was based in
whole or in part on the travel time between the parents' residences at
the time of the order and the parents are now living either closer to
each other or further from each other by such distance that the existing
order is not in the child's best interest.


                                             [Paragraph I(h) effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]


                                             
 (h) If one parent's allocation or schedule of parenting time was
based in whole or in part on his or her work schedule and there has been
a substantial change in that work schedule such that the existing order
is not in the child's best interest.


                                             [Paragraph I(i) effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]


                                             
 (i) If one parent's allocation or schedule of parenting time was
based in whole or in part on the young age of the child, the court may
modify the allocation or schedule or both based on a finding that the
change is in the best interests of the child, provided that the request
is at least 5 years after the prior order.


                                             [Paragraph II effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph II
set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 II. Except as provided in RSA 461-A:11, I(b)-(f) for parenting
schedules and RSA 461-A:12 for a request to relocate the residence of a
child, the court may issue an order modifying any section of a permanent
parenting plan based on the best interest of the child. RSA 461-A:5, III
shall apply to any request to modify decision-making responsibility.


                                             [Paragraph II effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph II set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 II. Except as provided in RSA 461-A:11, I(b)-(i) for parenting
schedules and RSA 461-A:12 for a request to relocate the residence of a
child, the court may issue an order modifying any section of a permanent
parenting plan based on the best interest of the child. RSA 461-A:5, III
shall apply to any request to modify decision-making responsibility.
                                             
 III. For the purposes of this section, the burden of proof shall be
on the moving party.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005. 2006, 232:1, eff. June 1,
2006. 2007, 213:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2008. 2011, 162:1, 2, eff. Aug. 13,
2011. 2016, 134:1, 2, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 461-A:12

 **461-A:12 Relocation of a Residence of a Child. –**
                                             
 I. This section shall apply if the existing parenting plan, order on
parental rights and responsibilities, or other enforceable agreement
between the parties does not expressly govern the relocation issue. This
section shall not apply if the relocation results in the residence being
closer to the other parent or to any location within the child's current
school district.
                                             
 II. This section shall apply to the relocation of any residence in
which the child resides at least 150 days a year.
                                             
 III. Prior to relocating, the parent shall provide reasonable notice
to the other parent. For purposes of this section, 60 days notice shall
be presumed to be reasonable unless other factors are found to be
present.
                                             
 IV. At the request of either parent, the court shall hold a hearing
on the relocation issue.
                                             
 V. The parent seeking permission to relocate bears the initial
burden of demonstrating, by a preponderance of the evidence, that:
                                             
 (a) The relocation is for a legitimate purpose; and
                                             
 (b) The proposed location is reasonable in light of that
purpose.
                                             
 VI. If the burden of proof established in paragraph V is met, the
burden shifts to the other parent to prove, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the proposed relocation is not in the best interest of
the child.
                                             
 VII. If the court has issued a temporary order authorizing temporary
relocation, the court shall not give undue weight to that temporary
relocation as a factor in reaching its final decision.
                                             
 VIII. The court, in reaching its final decision, shall not consider
whether the parent seeking to relocate has declared that he or she will
not relocate if relocation of the child is denied.


                                             [Paragraph IX effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]


                                             
 IX. If the parties agree on or the court authorizes the relocation
of a residence of a child, the court may modify the allocation or
schedule of parenting time or both based on a finding that the change is
in the best interests of the child.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005. 2016, 134:3, eff. Jan. 1,
2017.

### Section 461-A:13

 **461-A:13 Grandparents' Visitation Rights. –**
                                             
 I. Grandparents, whether adoptive or natural, may petition the court
for reasonable rights of visitation with the minor child as provided in
paragraph III. The provisions of this section shall not apply in cases
where access by the grandparent or grandparents to the minor child has
been restricted for any reason prior to or contemporaneous with the
divorce, death, relinquishment or termination of parental rights, or
other cause of the absence of a nuclear family.
                                             
 II. The court shall consider the following criteria in making an
order relative to a grandparent's visitation rights to the minor child:
                                             
 (a) Whether such visitation would be in the best interest of the
child.
                                             
 (b) Whether such visitation would interfere with any parent-child
relationship or with a parent's authority over the child.
                                             
 (c) The nature of the relationship between the grandparent and
the minor child, including but not limited to, the frequency of contact,
and whether the child has lived with the grandparent and length of time
of such residence, and when there is no reasonable cause to believe that
the child's physical and emotional health would be endangered by such
visitation or lack of it.
                                             
 (d) The nature of the relationship between the grandparent and
the parent of the minor child, including friction between the
grandparent and the parent, and the effect such friction would have on
the child.
                                             
 (e) The circumstances which resulted in the absence of a nuclear
family, whether divorce, death, relinquishment or termination of
parental rights, or other cause.
                                             
 (f) The recommendation regarding visitation made by any guardian
ad litem appointed for the child pursuant to RSA 461-A:16.
                                             
 (g) Any preference or wishes expressed by the child.
                                             
 (h) Any such other factors as the court may find appropriate or
relevant to the petition for visitation.
                                             
 III. The petition for visitation shall be entered in the court which
has jurisdiction over the divorce, legal separation, or a proceeding
brought under this chapter. In the case of death of a parent, stepparent
adoption, or unwed parents, subject to paragraph IV, the petition shall
be entered in the court having jurisdiction to hear divorce cases from
the town or city where the child resides.
                                             
 IV. If the parent of the minor child is unwed, then any grandparent
filing a petition under this section shall attach with the petition
proof of legitimation by the parent pursuant to RSA 460:29 or
establishment of paternity pursuant to RSA 168-A.
                                             
 V. Upon the motion of any original party, the court may modify or
terminate any order made pursuant to this section to reflect changed
circumstances of the parties involved.
                                             
 VI. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to affect
the rights of a child or natural parent or guardian under RSA 463 or
adoptive parent under RSA 170-B:20.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005.

### Section 461-A:14

 **461-A:14 Support. –**
                                             
 I. After the filing of a petition for divorce, annulment,
separation, paternity, support, or allocation of parental rights and
responsibilities, including petitions filed by the department of health
and human services pursuant to RSA 161-B, 161-C, and 546-B, the court
shall make such further decree in relation to the support and education
of the children as shall be most conducive to their benefit and may
order a reasonable provision for their support and education for the
period of time specified in paragraphs IV, V, and XVI.
                                             
 II. In any proceeding concerning the support of children:
                                             
 (a) The parties shall certify in the initial pleading filed with
the court whether or not public assistance is or was paid for the
benefit of the children pursuant to RSA 167 and whether or not medical
assistance is being provided for the benefit of the children pursuant to
RSA 167. If public assistance is or was being provided or if medical
assistance is being provided, the initiating party shall provide the
department of health and human services, office of child support
enforcement services, with copies of any and all pleadings related to
medical and child support.
                                             
 (b) If, during the pendency of the action, the children become
the beneficiaries of public or medical assistance, both parties shall
notify the court of the public or medical assistance status of the
children and shall provide the department of health and human services
with copies of all pleadings related to medical and child support.
                                             
 (c) When notified that public or medical assistance is being
provided for the benefit of the children, the court shall provide the
office of child support with a copy of any hearing notice pertaining to
any medical or child support proceeding.
                                             
 (d) The department shall be granted leave to reopen any case to
modify, clarify, or vacate any order that was entered against its
interest when an assignment of rights pursuant to RSA 161 or RSA 167 is
or was in effect and the department was not given notice of the
proceeding.
                                             
 (e) In any case to establish, modify, or enforce an order of
support where the obligor is unable to meet child support obligations
for any reason, except as provided in RSA 461-A:14, XIII(a) and (b), the
court may order the obligor to apply for and, if qualified, participate
in food stamp and Medicaid programs, federal disability programs, and
all applicable department of employment security programs to enable or
enhance the obligor's ability to meet his or her support obligations.
When making such orders, the court shall include the requirement that
the obligor report to the court his or her compliance with the order.
                                             
 III. All support orders shall provide for the assignment of the
wages of the responsible parent pursuant to RSA 458-B, subject to the
exceptions listed in RSA 458-B:2.
                                             
 IV. The amount of a child support obligation shall remain as stated
in the order until the dependent child for whom support is ordered
completes his or her high school education or reaches the age of 18
years, whichever is later, or marries, or becomes a member of the armed
services, at which time the child support obligation, including all
educational support obligations, terminates without further legal
action. If the parties have a child with disabilities, the court may
initiate or continue the child support obligation after the child
reaches the age of 18. No child support order for a child with
disabilities which becomes effective after July 9, 2013 may continue
after the child reaches age 21.
                                             
 IV-a. If the order establishes a support obligation for more than
one child, and if the court can determine that within the next 3 years
support will terminate for one of the children as provided in paragraph
IV, the amount of the new child support obligation for the remaining
children may be stated in the order and shall take effect on the date or
event specified without further legal action. Termination of support for
any one of the children under paragraph IV is a substantial change of
circumstances for purposes of modification of the child support order
under RSA 458-C:7.
                                             
 V. No child support order shall require a parent to contribute to an
adult child's college expenses or other educational expenses beyond the
completion of high school, except as provided in RSA 461-A:21.
                                             
 VI. All support payments ordered or administered by the court under
this chapter shall be deemed judgments when due and payable. Such
judgments shall be given full faith and credit by all jurisdictions of
this state.
                                             
 VII. Liens shall arise by operation of law against real and personal
property for child support arrearages owed by an obligor who resides or
owns property in the state and shall incorporate any unpaid child
support which may accrue in the future. Full faith and credit shall be
given to such liens arising in another state when the state agency, a
party, or other entity authorized to enforce an order of support and
seeking to perfect the lien complies with the procedural rules relating
to recording or serving liens. Notwithstanding any law to the contrary,
such rules may not require judicial notice prior to perfecting the lien.
Notices of such liens, and any discharges or releases thereof, shall be
filed in the office of the secretary of state with respect to personal
property and in the registry of deeds for the county in which any real
property is located. No fees shall be charged for such filings and
recordings.
                                             
 VIII. No modification of a support order shall alter any arrearages
due prior to the date of filing the motion for modification.
                                             
 IX. (a) Each child support order shall include the court's
determination and findings relative to health insurance and the payment
of uninsured medical expenses for the child.
                                             
 (b) The court shall determine whether private health insurance is
accessible and is available to either parent at a cost that is at or
below the reasonable medical support obligation amount, as established
and ordered pursuant to RSA 458-C:3, V, or is available by combining the
reasonable medical support obligations of both parents, and, if so
available, the court shall order the parent, or parents, to provide such
insurance for the child. The cost of providing private health insurance
is the cost of adding the child to existing coverage, or the difference
between individual and family coverage. Accessible health insurance
means the primary care services are located within 50 miles or one hour
from the child's primary residence.
                                             
 (c) If the court determines that private health insurance is not
accessible or available at a cost that is at or below the reasonable
medical support obligation amount, the court shall establish a cash
medical support obligation for either or both parents, equal to the
reasonable medical support obligation amount, and order that either or
both parents shall obtain such private health insurance if it
subsequently becomes accessible and available at a cost that is at or
below the reasonable medical support obligation amount. When ordered in
lieu of private health insurance, an obligation for cash medical support
shall be suspended and shall not accrue during such time as the
obligated parent is providing private health insurance in accordance
with this paragraph.
                                             
 (d) In all cases where support is payable through the department,
or where the department is providing medical assistance for the child
under RSA 167, the court shall include the medical support obligation in
any order issued on or after the effective date of this paragraph.
                                             
 (e) A court may order either or both parents to pay a medical
support obligation, either to provide health insurance coverage or as
cash medical support, in excess of the reasonable medical support
obligation amount, in such other circumstances, as the court deems
appropriate.
                                             
 X. If both parents have coverage which provides medical insurance
benefits for the child, the insurance of the person who is obligated by
court order to provide medical insurance shall be the primary coverage
for the child. This paragraph shall not affect the obligation of the
insurance carrier of the parent who is not obligated to provide medical
insurance for the child to provide medical insurance benefits for any
claim under a policy held by such parent.
                                             
 XI. All support orders issued or modified in cases that are payable
through the department shall contain a provision requiring the obligor
to keep the department informed of the name and address of the obligor's
employer and whether the obligor has access to health insurance, and, if
so, the health insurance policy information as requested by the
department.
                                             
 XII. In any proceeding to enforce the payment of child support, the
posting of bail shall be for the purpose of securing the appearance of
the child support obligor and to guarantee the child support judgment
owed by the child support obligor. If a child support obligor defaults
for failure to appear or owes a child support arrearage, any bail money
posted by the obligor, or any other surety, which is on deposit with the
court shall be forfeited and paid to the obligee or the agency enforcing
the order for child support in satisfaction of the child support
judgment.
                                             
 XIII. (a) An order of support, for which there is in effect an
assignment to the department of health and human services pursuant to
RSA 161-C:22, shall be suspended and shall not accrue, and no public
assistance debt shall be incurred, during such time as the responsible
parent receives benefits pursuant to Title XVI of the Social Security
Act under the supplemental security income program or public assistance
pursuant to RSA 167 under any of the following programs:
                                             
 (1) Aid to the permanently and totally disabled.
                                             
 (2) Aid to the needy blind.
                                             
 (3) Aid to families with dependent children.
                                             
 (4) Old age assistance.
                                             
 (b) The department shall not enforce any order of support against
the responsible parent while that parent receives public assistance
through any of the programs listed in subparagraph (a), whether or not
an assignment of support rights to the department exists.
                                             
 XIV. When the court makes a temporary or final order for support
through the department of health and human services, the order shall
require the parties to furnish their social security numbers to the
department.
                                             
 XV. The court shall have jurisdiction to make such orders or
temporary orders of support to the children of divorced parents as
justice shall require in cases where the decree of divorce was not
granted in this jurisdiction, even though the divorce decree makes
provision for support, subject to the provisions of RSA 546-B.
                                             
 XVI. The court may establish a separate fund or trust for the
support, maintenance, education and general welfare of any minor or
incompetent child of the parties, including an incompetent child who is
18 years of age or older.
                                             
 XVII. The court may require security to be given for the payment of
child support.
                                             
 XVIII. Any motion for contempt of a court order regarding nonpayment
of child support, if filed by a parent, shall be reviewed by the court
within 30 days.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005. 2007, 121:2, eff. Aug. 10,
2007; 227:7, eff. June 25, 2007. 2008, 245:3, eff. June 24, 2008. 2010,
166:6, eff. June 17, 2010; 321:1, eff. Sept. 18, 2010. 2013, 154:1, eff.
Aug. 27, 2013; 201:1, eff. July 9, 2013. 2014, 225:1, eff. July 14,
2014.

### Section 461-A:15

 **461-A:15 Attorneys' Fees in Contempt Cases. –** In any proceeding
under this chapter in which a party alleges, and the court finds, that
the other party has failed without just cause to obey a prior order, the
court shall award reasonable costs and attorneys' fees to the prevailing
party.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005.

### Section 461-A:16

 **461-A:16 Guardian ad Litem. –**
                                             
 I. In all proceedings for divorce, separation, annulment, paternity,
or determination of parental rights and responsibilities, the court may
appoint a guardian ad litem to represent the interests of the children
of the parties, upon its own motion or motion of any party. The court
may, in its order of appointment, after considering the nature of the
issues raised in the case pending before it, specify the concerns to be
addressed by the guardian ad litem, and otherwise limit the scope of the
appointment. The guardian ad litem may be appointed to continue to serve
after the final decree of divorce has been granted.
                                             
 II. Persons accepting appointment as guardians ad litem agree to
serve as officers of the court and have such standing in the proceedings
as the court deems appropriate and may, upon approval of the court,
utilize the service of others found necessary by the court to represent
the child's best interest.
                                             
 III. Guardians ad litem shall respect communications between
themselves and the child and shall disclose such information only as
required by the court, in rendering a report with the guardian ad
litem's recommendations. All parties to the case shall have access to,
and receive a copy of, any report or recommendation made by the guardian
ad litem unless the court explicitly finds that such disclosure is not
in the child's best interest. When the child's ability to make
adequately considered decisions in connection with the representation is
impaired, whether because of minority, mental disability, or some other
reason, the guardian ad litem shall be the holder of the privilege and
shall have the authority to waive the privilege, but only if the
guardian ad litem reasonably believes that the child cannot adequately
act in the child's own interest.
                                             
 IV. When a guardian ad litem is appointed pursuant to this section,
the court shall establish a maximum fee for the appointment. The
guardian ad litem may exceed the maximum fee for the appointment, or
additional fees may be authorized, only with the prior approval of the
presiding judge and when all parties have been notified. The fees for
services for the guardian ad litem and others utilized by the guardian
and approved by the court shall be a charge against the parties in a
proportional amount as the court may determine.
                                             
 V. For good cause shown, the court may waive the requirements of
paragraph I. Good cause shall not include the lack of ability to pay by
either party.
                                             
 VI. The supreme court shall provide the following relative to
non-certified guardians ad litem appointed pursuant to this section:
                                             
 (a) Standards and requirements for registration as a guardian ad
litem.
                                             
 (b) Standards for practice, including but not limited to ethical
rules.
                                             
 (c) Disciplinary procedures for violating ethical rules and
requirements established under this paragraph.
                                             
 (d) Penalties for violation of ethical rules and requirements,
including, as the court may deem necessary, fines or disciplinary
action, or both.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005. 2011, 224:65, 79, eff. July
1, 2011. 2014, 301:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014. 2015, 23:1, eff. May 5, 2015.

### Section 461-A:17

 **461-A:17 Guardians Ad Litem and Mediators; Liability for Expenses.
–** The judicial council shall have no responsibility for the payment of
the costs of a mediator or guardian ad litem for any party under this
chapter.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005. 2011, 224:66, eff. July 1,
2011.

### Section 461-A:18

 **461-A:18 Repayment. –**
                                             
 I. In any case where a mediator has been appointed pursuant to RSA
461-A:7 or a guardian ad litem has been appointed pursuant to RSA
461-A:16 and the responsible party's proportional share of the expense
was ordered to be paid by the judicial council from the prior special
fund established pursuant to RSA 461-A:17 or is ordered to be paid by
the judicial branch from the mediation and arbitration fund pursuant to
RSA 490-E:4, the party shall be ordered by the court to repay the state
through the unit of cost containment, office of administrative services,
the fees and expenses paid on the party's behalf as the court may order
consistent with the party's ability to pay, such ability to be
determined by the unit of cost containment.
                                             
 II. The court's order of appointment of a mediator or a guardian ad
litem under the provisions of paragraph I shall indicate the initial
proportional share or shares of fees and expenses and shall contain an
order that the party or parties communicate with the unit of cost
containment so that it may determine the obligor's ability to reimburse
the state and establish the terms and conditions of reimbursement. A
copy of each order shall be sent to the unit of cost containment, office
of the commissioner of administrative services, at the time it is made.
                                             
 III. Any party subject to an order under this section may petition
the court having jurisdiction over the case for relief of the obligation
imposed by this section, which shall be granted only upon a finding that
the party is unable to comply with the terms of the court's order or any
modification of the order by the court or the terms of reimbursement
established by the unit of cost containment. In any such appeal the
burden of persuasion shall be upon the party to show why the
determinations of the unit of cost containment should not be enforced.
                                             
 IV. Any party subject to orders for repayment shall be required to
notify the clerk of the court and the unit of cost containment of each
change of mailing address and actual street address. Whenever notice to
the party is required, notice to the last known mailing address on file
shall be deemed notice to and binding on the party.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005. 2011, 224:70, eff. July 1,
2011.

### Section 461-A:19

 **461-A:19 Authorization for Emergency Treatment When Custodial
Parent Incapacitated. –**
                                             
 I. In cases where the parent having the care of the child, has sole
or shared decision-making responsibility and has become incapacitated
and is unable to make necessary decisions concerning the emergency
medical treatment of the child, such parent's spouse shall be authorized
to make such decisions subject to the following conditions:
                                             
 (a) The child is in the care of a medical facility whose policy
requires that all decisions regarding treatment of the type necessary
under the circumstances be made by a parent having sole or shared
decision-making responsibility; and
                                             
 (b) Either the incapacitated parent has sole decision-making
responsibility; or, if there is shared decision making responsibility,
the other parent cannot be located, and in the opinion of the treating
physician, circumstances make it necessary to make a decision regarding
treatment immediately.
                                             
 II. The right to authorize treatment granted under this section
shall under no circumstances last longer than 30 days, and otherwise
shall terminate upon the recovery of the parent to normal capacity, or
upon the establishment of contact with the other parent, whichever
occurs first.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005.

### Section 461-A:20

 **461-A:20 References to Child Custody and Custodial Parent. –** Any
provision of law that refers to the "custody'' of minor children shall
mean the allocation of parental rights and responsibilities as provided
in this chapter. Any provision of law which refers to a "custodial
parent'' shall mean a parent with 50 percent or more of the residential
responsibility and any reference to a non-custodial parent shall mean a
parent with less than 50 percent of the residential responsibility.

**Source.** 2005, 273:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2005.

### Section 461-A:21

 **461-A:21 Agreement on College Expenses. –** Parents may agree to
contribute to their child's college expenses or other educational
expenses beyond the completion of high school as part of a stipulated
decree, signed by both parents and approved by the court. The agreed-on
contribution may be made by one or both parents. The agreement may
provide for contributions to an account to save for college, for the use
of an asset, or for payment of educational expenses as incurred. Any
such agreement shall specify the amount of the contribution, a
percentage, or a formula to determine the amount of the contribution.

**Source.** 2013, 154:2, eff. Aug. 27, 2013.

### Section 461-A:22

 **461-A:22 Modification of Agreements on College Expenses. –** Every
agreement made under RSA 461-A:21 shall state whether the agreement
either is modifiable or is not modifiable. To qualify as not modifiable,
the agreement shall state a specific dollar amount to be contributed by
either or both parents. If the parents' agreement states that it is
modifiable, the legal test for modification shall be a substantial
change in circumstances that was not foreseeable when the agreement was
signed.

**Source.** 2013, 154:2, eff. Aug. 27, 2013.

### Section 461-A:23

 **461-A:23 Enforcement of Agreements on College Expenses. –** The
court shall enforce any parental agreement on educational expenses that
meets the requirements of RSA 461-A:21.

**Source.** 2013, 154:2, eff. Aug. 27, 2013.

### Section 461-A:24

 **461-A:24 Mediation of Agreements on College Expenses. –** Before
any court hearing to modify or enforce any agreement to contribute to
college expenses, the parties shall participate in mediation, either
privately contracted mediation or mediation under RSA 461-A:7.

**Source.** 2013, 154:2, eff. Aug. 27, 2013.
