---
title: 'CHAPTER 157-A BOILERS AND PRESSURE VESSELS'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 157-A
                                             
BOILERS AND PRESSURE VESSELS
----------------------------

### Section 157-A:1

 **157-A:1 Title. –** This chapter shall be known and cited as the
Boilers and Pressure Vessels Law and, except as otherwise provided in
the chapter, shall apply to all boilers and pressure vessels.

**Source.** 1967, 236:1. 1988, 31:2, eff. May 23, 1988.

### Section 157-A:2

 **157-A:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Owner'' means a person, partnership, association, or corporation
who is the holder of title to, or who leases a boiler or boilers or
pressure vessels from the holder of title to, a building in which there
are a boiler or boilers or pressure vessels as defined in this section.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of labor.
                                             
 III. "Boiler'' means a closed vessel in which water or other fluid
is heated, steam is generated, steam is superheated, or any combination
thereof, under pressure or vacuum for use externally to itself by the
direct application of heat from the combustion of fuels, or from
electricity or nuclear energy. This term also includes fired units for
heating or vaporizing liquids other than water where these units are
separate from processing systems and are complete within themselves. The
term "boiler'' shall also include the apparatus by which heat is
generated and all controls and safety devices associated with such
apparatus or closed vessels.
                                             
 IV. "Power boiler'' means a boiler in which steam or other vapor (to
be used externally to itself) is generated at a pressure of more than 15
psig.
                                             
 V. "High pressure-high temperature boiler'' means a boiler in which
water or other fluid is heated and operating at pressures exceeding 160
psig or temperatures exceeding 250%A1 F.
                                             
 VI. "Low pressure boiler'' means a steam boiler operating at
pressures not exceeding 15 psig, or a hot water heating boiler operating
at pressures not exceeding 160 psig or temperatures not exceeding 250%A1
F.
                                             
 VII. "Pressure vessel'' means a vessel in which the pressure is
obtained from an external source or by the application of heat from an
indirect source.
                                             
 VIII. "Certificate inspection'' means an inspection, the report of
which is used by the commissioner or the commissioner's authorized
representative to decide whether or not a certificate, as provided by
RSA 157-A:9, may be issued. This certificate inspection shall be an
internal inspection when the construction permits; otherwise, it shall
be an inspection as complete as possible.

**Source.** 1967, 236:1. 1988, 31:3, 4, 11. 1995, 142:1, 2, eff. July
23, 1995.

### Section 157-A:3

 **157-A:3 Rules. –**
                                             
 I. To carry out the purposes of this chapter, the commissioner shall
formulate definitions and adopt rules under RSA 541-A consistent with:
                                             
 (a) The boiler and pressure vessel code of the American Society
of Mechanical Engineers and the National Board Inspection Code as
published by the National Board of Boiler and Pressure Vessel
Inspectors, with the amendments and interpretations thereto; and
                                             
 (b) The code and amendments thereto adopted by the state building
code review board pursuant to RSA 155-A:3-a.
                                             
 I-a. In addition, the commissioner may adopt rules under RSA 541-A
to facilitate administration and enforcement of this chapter and RSA
155-A:3-a.
                                             
 II. All rules adopted by the commissioner under authority granted by
this chapter shall be adopted as provided by RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1967, 236:1. 1975, 441:5. 1983, 421:4. 1988, 31:5. 2010,
326:3, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 157-A:3-a

 **157-A:3-a Charge for Inspection. –** The commissioner shall charge

                                             $100 per hour for inspections performed by employees of the department
of labor.

**Source.** 1983, 421:5. 1989, 408:22. 2005, 177:97, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 157-A:4

 **157-A:4 New Boiler and Pressure Vessel Installation. –** No boiler
or pressure vessel which does not conform to the applicable codes and
amendments thereto and the rules adopted by the commissioner governing
new construction and installation shall be installed and operated in
this state unless the boiler or pressure vessel is of special design or
construction, and is not inconsistent with the spirit and safety
objectives of such codes and rules, in which case a special installation
and operating permit may at the commissioner's discretion be granted by
the commissioner.

**Source.** 1967, 236:1. 1988, 31:6. 1995, 142:3. 2010, 326:4, eff.
Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 157-A:5

 **157-A:5 Existing Boiler and Pressure Vessel Installation. –**
                                             
 I. The maximum allowable pressure of a boiler or of a pressure
vessel shall be determined by the applicable sections of the code,
amendments thereto, or rules under which it was constructed and
stamped.
                                             
 II. The maximum allowable pressure of a boiler or pressure vessel
which does not carry the ASME or API-ASME Code or EN 303-5 symbol shall
be computed in accordance with the inspection code of the National Board
of Boiler and Pressure Vessel Inspectors.
                                             
 III. This chapter shall not be construed as in any way preventing
the use, sale, or reinstallation of a boiler or pressure vessel referred
to in this section, provided it has been made to conform to the rules of
the commissioner governing existing installations and, provided further,
it has not been found upon inspection to be in an unsafe condition.

**Source.** 1967, 236:1. 1988, 31:7. 2010, 326:5, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 157-A:6

 **157-A:6 Exemptions. –**
                                             
 I. The inspection requirements of RSA 157-A:8, 9-a, and 10 shall not
apply to buildings used exclusively as private residences or apartment
houses of less than 3 family units.
                                             
 II. This chapter shall not apply to the following boilers:
                                             
 (a) Boilers under federal control, or United States Coast Guard
control.
                                             
 (b) Manually fired boilers for model locomotive, boat, tractor,
stationary engines, or antique motor vehicles constructed or maintained
only as a hobby for exhibition or educational or historical purposes,
not for commercial use; provided that such boilers have an inside
diameter of less than 12 inches or a grate area not in excess of 2
square feet and equipped with an ASME stamped safety valve of adequate
capacity and size, a water level indicator and a pressure gauge.
                                             
 (c) Boilers with less than 200,000 BTU/HR output in apartment
houses.
                                             
 III. This chapter shall not apply to the following pressure
vessels:
                                             
 (a) Pressure vessels under federal control, or United States
Coast Guard control.
                                             
 (b) Pressure vessels used for transportation or storage of
compressed gases when constructed in compliance with specification of
the Interstate Commerce Commission and when charged with gas, marked,
maintained, and periodically requalified for use, as required by
appropriate regulations of the Interstate Commerce Commission.
                                             
 (c) Air tanks located on vehicles operating under the rules of
the states' authorities and used for carrying passengers or freight.
                                             
 (d) Air tanks installed on the right of way of railroads and used
directly in the operation of trains.
                                             
 (e) Pressure vessels that do not exceed (1) 5 cubic feet in
volume or 250 psig, (2) 1- 1/2 cubic feet in volume or an inside
diameter of 6 inches, and 3,000 psig.
                                             
 (f) Pressure vessels operating at a working pressure not
exceeding 15 psig.
                                             
 (g) Water-containing vessels (excluding hot water heaters) having
a working pressure not to exceed 125 psig including those with air, the
compression of which serves only as a cushion.
                                             
 (h) Tanks containing air and liquids in which pressure is
maintained by pumps.
                                             
 (i) Group I refrigerant receivers (A.S.H.R.A.E.).
                                             
 IV. This chapter shall not apply to hot water heaters installed
after the effective date of this act provided that none of the following
limitations are exceeded:
                                             
 (a) Heat input of 200,000 BTU/HR.
                                             
 (b) Water temperature of 210 degrees Fahrenheit.

**Source.** 1967, 236:1. 1988, 31:8. 1995, 142:4, eff. July 23, 1995.
2014, 235:1, eff. Sept. 19, 2014.

### Section 157-A:7

 **157-A:7 Inspectors. –**
                                             
 I. A boiler and pressure vessel inspector shall hold an active
National Board commission and be qualified by the commissioner of
labor.
                                             
 II. A license shall be issued by the commissioner to an inspector
for a 1-year period. A fee of 
                                             $30 shall be charged for the license. A
license may be renewed every year upon payment of a fee of 
                                             $20.
Employees of the department of labor shall not be charged for the
issuance or renewal of a license.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may revoke any license issued by the
commissioner for cause shown, after a hearing, if so requested. The
holder of the license under question shall receive 7 days' written
notice informing the holder of the charges against such holder and of
the time and place of the hearing.
                                             
 IV. Any boiler or pressure vessel that does not conform to the
standards established under RSA 157-A:3 may be operated under the
following conditions:
                                             
 (a) Such boiler or vessel shall be operated only as a hobby or
for educational or historical purposes. Under no condition may it be
operated for commercial purposes.
                                             
 (b) An inspection of such boiler or vessel shall be conducted
annually by a person qualified under RSA 157-A:7 and in accordance with
rules adopted by the commissioner.
                                             
 (c) Such boiler or vessel shall conform to any conditions or
restrictions established by the commissioner to carry out the purposes
of this section.
                                             
 (d) No lap seam boiler permitted under this section may be
operated at a pressure exceeding 100 psig.
                                             
 V. Upon application and with the permission of the commissioner, any
person may temporarily operate a boiler or pressure vessel that is
normally located outside this state and which does not conform to the
standards under RSA 157-A:3 if:
                                             
 (a) Such vessel or boiler is permitted to be operated under the
laws or regulations or both of the state where it is normally located;
and
                                             
 (b) Such state laws and regulations equal or exceed the criteria
in this state as promulgated under paragraph IV.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner shall determine the permitted period of
temporary operation; but, in no case, shall such period exceed 7 days.
                                             
 VI. There is established the classified position of chief boiler
inspector in the department of labor.

**Source.** 1967, 236:1. 1975, 441:1. 1978, 28:1. 1983, 421:6. 1988,
31:9, 11; 124:1. 1995, 142:5. 2004, 120:1, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 157-A:8

 **157-A:8 Inspection of Boilers and Pressure Vessels. –**
                                             
 I. An inspector shall have free access during reasonable hours to
any premises in the state where a boiler or pressure vessel is being
constructed, or is being installed, or is being operated, for the
purpose of ascertaining whether such boiler is being constructed or is
being installed or operated in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
                                             
 II. Each boiler and pressure vessel used or proposed to be used
within this state, except boilers or pressure vessels exempt under RSA
157-A:6, shall be thoroughly inspected as to their construction,
installation, and condition as follows:
                                             
 (a) Power boilers and high pressure-high temperature boilers
shall receive a certificate inspection annually and shall also be
externally inspected annually while under pressure, if possible.
                                             
 (b) Low pressure steam or vapor heating boilers, except those
constructed of cast iron, shall receive a certificate inspection
biennially with an internal inspection at least every 4 years where
construction permits.
                                             
 (c) Hot water heating boilers, hot water supply boilers, except
those constructed of cast iron, hot water heaters and hot water storage
tanks shall receive a certificate inspection biennially with an internal
inspection at the discretion of the inspector.
                                             
 (d) Heating boilers and hot water supply boilers constructed of
cast iron shall receive a certificate inspection biennially.
                                             
 (e) Pressure vessels subject to internal corrosion shall receive
certificate inspection biennially.
                                             
 (f) Pressure vessels not subject to internal corrosion shall
receive a certificate inspection at intervals set by the commissioner,
but internal inspection shall not be required of pressure vessels, the
contents of which are known to be non-corrosive to the material of which
the shell, heads, or fittings are constructed, either from the chemical
composition of the contents or from evidence that the contents are
adequately treated with a corrosion inhibitor, provided that such
vessels are constructed in accordance with the rules of the
commissioner.
                                             
 (g) A grace period of 2 months beyond the period specified in
subparagraphs (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) of this paragraph may
elapse between certificate inspections. Prior to the expiration of the
2-month grace period, the owner or user of the boiler or pressure vessel
shall receive a written warning from the department of labor for any
required inspection which was not completed prior to the expiration of
the inspection certificate.
                                             
 (h) The commissioner may, at the commissioner's discretion,
permit longer periods between certificate inspection.
                                             
 (i) Under the provisions of this chapter, the commissioner is
responsible to provide for the safety of life, limb, and property of the
general public and therefore has jurisdiction over the interpretation
and application of the inspection requirements as provided for in the
rules the commissioner has adopted. Inspection during construction and
installation shall certify as to the minimum requirements for safety as
defined in the construction codes. Inspection requirements of operating
equipment shall be in accordance with generally accepted practice and
compatible with the actual service conditions, such as:
                                             
 (1) Previous experience, based on records of performance and
maintenance;
                                             
 (2) Location, with respect to personnel hazard;
                                             
 (3) Quality of operating personnel;
                                             
 (4) Provision for related safe operation controls;
                                             
 (5) Interrelation with other operations outside the scope of
this chapter.
                                             
 III. The inspections required under this section shall be made by a
boiler and pressure vessels inspector provided for in this chapter.
                                             
 IV. If, at the discretion of the inspector, a hydrostatic test or
other test is deemed necessary, it shall be made by the owner of the
boiler or pressure vessel.
                                             
 V. All boilers, other than cast iron sectional boilers, and pressure
vessels to be installed in this state shall be inspected during
construction as required by the applicable rules of the commissioner by
an inspector authorized to inspect boilers and pressure vessels in this
state or, if constructed outside this state, by an inspector holding a
commission or license as an inspector of boilers and pressure vessels
for a state that has substantially standard requirements to be an
inspector equal to those of this state.

**Source.** 1967, 236:1. 1988, 31:10. 1995, 142:6, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 157-A:9

 **157-A:9 Inspection Reports and Inspection Certificates. –**

                                             [Repealed 1975, 441:4, eff. Aug. 19, 1975.
                                             ]

### Section 157-A:9-a

 **157-A:9-a Inspection Reports and Certificates; Fee. –**
                                             
 I. Subsequent to the inspection of a boiler or pressure vessel, an
inspector shall file with the commissioner an inspection report on a
form prescribed by the commissioner indicating whether or not the
inspected object is certifiable and shall communicate the results of
such inspection to the owner or the owner's designee. When an object
passes inspection, the commissioner shall furnish an inspection
certificate to its owner or the owner's designee on a form prescribed by
the commissioner. A fee of 
                                             $50 shall be charged for each certificate.
If the fee is not paid within 30 days of the date on which the
certificate is issued, the certificate shall be void.
                                             
 II. If the object fails the inspection, the inspector shall furnish
the owner or the owner's designee an appropriate abstract of the
statutory requirements and recommendations for repairs necessary to
correct the deficiency.
                                             
 III. Upon compliance with the recommendations of an inspector,
either by repair or replacement, the owner of a boiler or vessel which
has failed to pass inspection, or the owner's designee, shall notify the
commissioner and inspector that the required repairs have been
completed.
                                             
 IV. The boiler or vessel shall, at the discretion of the inspector
or the commissioner, then be reinspected in accordance with this
section; and, upon finding compliance with the recommendations, an
inspection certificate shall be furnished to the owner or the owner's
designee.
                                             
 V. Certificates shall be conspicuously displayed in the vicinity of
the boiler or vessel.

**Source.** 1975, 441:2. 1983, 421:7. 1988, 31:11. 1989, 408:23. 2005,
177:98, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 157-A:10

 **157-A:10 Requirement for Inspection Certificates; Penalty. –** It
shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation to
operate in this state a boiler or pressure vessel except such boilers
and vessels as are exempted by provision of RSA 157-A:6, without a valid
inspection certificate. The operator of a boiler or pressure vessel
without such certificate, or at a pressure exceeding that specified in
such certificate, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person,
or guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1967, 236:1. 1973, 528:74. 1988, 31:11, eff. May 23, 1988.

### Section 157-A:10-a

 **157-A:10-a Civil Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. In addition to any criminal penalty provided under RSA 157-A:10,
the commissioner may, after hearing, impose a civil penalty not to
exceed 
                                             $500, as determined by the commissioner, for any violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter or of any rule adopted pursuant to
this chapter. Any person on whom a penalty is imposed under this section
may appeal as provided in RSA 273:11-c and 273:11-d. All moneys
collected under this section shall be deposited in the department of
labor restricted fund established in RSA 273:1-b.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall conduct hearings in the manner required
under rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A and 273:11-a, V.

**Source.** 1995, 142:7. 2011, 182:2, eff. Aug. 13, 2011; 224:53, eff.
July 1, 2011.

### Section 157-A:11

 **157-A:11 Disposition of Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 142:8, eff.
July 23, 1995.
                                             ]

### Section 157-A:12

 **157-A:12 Appeals. –** Any owner aggrieved by an order or act of an
inspector under this chapter may, within 15 days, appeal from such order
or act to the commissioner. Within 30 days thereafter, the commissioner
shall issue an appropriate order either approving or disapproving said
order or act. A copy of said order by the commissioner shall be given to
all interested parties. Within 30 days after any order or act of the
commissioner, any person aggrieved thereby may file a petition in the
appropriate county superior court. The court shall summarily hear the
petition and may make any appropriate order or decree.

**Source.** 1967, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1968.

### Section 157-A:13

 **157-A:13 Repeal. –** RSA 157, relative to steam boilers, is hereby
repealed. Any other act or parts of acts inconsistent with any
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.

**Source.** 1967, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1968.

### Section 157-A:14

 **157-A:14 Boiler and Elevator Inspection Fund. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1991,
355:55, eff. July 1, 1991.
                                             ]
