---
title: 'CHAPTER 159-D CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 159-D
                                             
CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS
--------------------------

### Section 159-D:1

 **159-D:1 Sale of Firearms; Criminal History Record and Protective
Order Check. –** The department of safety may become the point of
contact for the federal government for the purposes of the National
Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS).

**Source.** 1999, 336:1, eff. Nov. 3, 1999.

### Section 159-D:2

 **159-D:2 Confidentiality. –**
                                             
 I. If the department of safety conducts criminal background checks
under RSA 159-D:1, any records containing information pertaining to a
potential buyer or transferee who is not found to be prohibited from
receipt or transfer of a firearm by reason of state or federal law,
which are created by the department of safety to conduct the criminal
background check, shall be confidential and may not be disclosed by the
department or any officers or employees to any person or to another
agency. The department shall destroy any such records after it
communicates the corresponding approval number to the licensee and, in
any event, such records shall be destroyed within one day after the day
of the receipt of the licensee's request.
                                             
 II. The department shall retain records containing any information
pertaining to a potential buyer or transferee who is prohibited from
receipt or transfer of a firearm for 3 years.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the department
may maintain only a log of dates of requests for criminal background
checks and unique approval numbers corresponding to such dates for an
indefinite period.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow the
department to maintain records containing the names of licensees who
receive unique approval numbers or to maintain records of firearm
transactions, including the names or other identification of licensees
and potential buyers or transferees, including persons not otherwise
prohibited by law from the receipt or possession of firearms.

**Source.** 1999, 336:1, eff. Nov. 3, 1999.

### Section 159-D:3

 **159-D:3 Penalties for Attempts to Purchase Firearms Illegally. –**
A person who completes and signs an application for purchase of a
firearm and who knows that such purchase is illegal because he or she is
subject to a protective order shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor
for a first offense and a class B felony for a second or subsequent
offense.

**Source.** 2000, 152:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.
