---
title: 'CHAPTER 159-B SHOOTING RANGES'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 159-B
                                             
SHOOTING RANGES
---------------

### Section 159-B:1

 **159-B:1 Exemption. –** Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA
644:2, III(a) or any other law to the contrary, no person who owns,
operates, or uses a shooting range in this state shall be subject to
civil liability or criminal prosecution in any matter relating to noise
or noise pollution, provided that the owners of the range are in
compliance with any applicable noise control ordinances in existence at
the time the range was established, was constructed, or began
operations.

**Source.** 2004, 83:2, eff. May 7, 2004.

### Section 159-B:2

 **159-B:2 Injunctions. –** The owners, operators, or users of
shooting ranges shall not be subject to any action for nuisance and no
court shall enjoin the use or operation of a range on the basis of noise
or noise pollution, provided that the owners of the range are in
compliance with any noise control ordinance that was in existence at the
time the range was established, was constructed, or began operations.

**Source.** 2004, 83:2, eff. May 7, 2004.

### Section 159-B:3

 **159-B:3 Expansion. –** Subsequent physical expansion of the
shooting range or change in the types of firearms in use at the range
shall not establish a new date of commencement of operations for the
portion or portions in existence prior to the expansion for the purposes
of this chapter.

**Source.** 2004, 83:2, eff. May 7, 2004.

### Section 159-B:4

 **159-B:4 Retroactivity Prohibited. –** No administrative rule,
statute, or ordinance adopted, enacted, or proposed by the state of New
Hampshire or its political subdivisions shall be applied retroactively
to prohibit or limit the scope of the shooting activities previously
conducted at a shooting range, which was in operation prior to the
adoption, enactment, enforcement, or proposal of the administrative
rule, statute, or ordinance.

**Source.** 2004, 83:2, eff. May 7, 2004.

### Section 159-B:5

 **159-B:5 Nuisance. –** Notwithstanding any other law to the
contrary, a person may not maintain a nuisance action for noise or noise
pollution against a shooting range, or the owners, operators, or users
of the range, located in the vicinity of that person's property, if the
shooting range was established, constructed, or being used on a regular
basis as of the date the person acquired the property.

**Source.** 2004, 83:2, eff. May 7, 2004.

### Section 159-B:6

 **159-B:6 Exemption From State Standards. –** No standard in rules
adopted by any state agency for limiting levels of noise in terms of
decibel level, which may occur in the outdoor atmosphere, shall apply to
the shooting ranges exempted from liability under the provisions of this
chapter.

**Source.** 2004, 83:2, eff. May 7, 2004.

### Section 159-B:7

 **159-B:7 Cause of Action. –** The owners of a shooting range shall
have a right of action in superior court to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.

**Source.** 2004, 83:2, eff. May 7, 2004.

### Section 159-B:8

 **159-B:8 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Noise'' shall mean the intensity, duration, and character of
sounds from shooting.
                                             
 II. "Shooting range'' shall mean a property or properties designed
and operated for persons using rifles, shotguns, pistols, revolvers, or
blackpowder weapons; archery; air rifles; silhouettes; skeet ranges;
trap ranges; or other similar facilities.

**Source.** 2004, 83:2, eff. May 7, 2004.
