---
title: |
    CHAPTER 161-J ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCES, INDEPENDENT LIVING RETIREMENT
    COMMUNITIES, AND HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 161-J
                                             
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCES, INDEPENDENT LIVING RETIREMENT COMMUNITIES, AND HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 161-J:1

 **161-J:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to establish
standards for the uniform disclosure of information to consumers of
costs and services provided by assisted living residences, independent
living retirement communities, and housing for older persons, as well as
rules and policies governing advance payments, rate increases,
termination of agreements and the rights and responsibilities of
residents, to enable consumers to make informed choices and comparisons.

**Source.** 2002, 192:1. 2003, 114:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 161-J:2

 **161-J:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Adult'' means a person 18 years of age or older.
                                             
 II. "Assisted living residence'' means any entity that provides
housing and holds itself out, through marketing, advertising, or use of
the term "assisted living'' or a similar designation, as providing or
arranging for personal assistance or any health-related or supportive
service beyond room and board to one or more adults who are not related
to the owner of the residence by blood or marriage. "Assisted living
residence'' shall not include:
                                             
 (a) A correctional facility.
                                             
 (b) A facility for the treatment of alcoholism or substance
abuse.
                                             
 (c) An emergency shelter for homeless persons or victims of
domestic or family violence.
                                             
 (d) A hospital which means an institution which is engaged in
providing to patients, under supervision of physicians, diagnostic and
therapeutic services for medical diagnosis, treatment, and care of
injured, disabled, or sick persons, or rehabilitation services for the
rehabilitation of such persons. The term "hospital'' includes
psychiatric and substance abuse treatment hospitals.
                                             
 (e) A hotel, motel, or recreational facility providing temporary
overnight accommodations.
                                             
 (f) Any community living facility operating pursuant to RSA
126-A:19, provided that all of the residents of the facility have been
placed there in accordance with RSA 126-A:19.
                                             
 III. "Housing for older persons'' means housing which provides or
holds itself out as providing on-site personal assistance services over
and above service coordination which is:
                                             
 (a) Provided under any state or federal program that the
Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly persons as defined in the state or federal program; or
                                             
 (b) Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age
or older; or
                                             
 (c) Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55
years or older per unit.
                                             
 III-a. "Independent living retirement community'' means a facility,
housing unit, or community, however designated, which is free-standing
or part of a larger community, organization, or enterprise, that
furnishes to senior citizens 55 years of age and older, on a contractual
basis, housing and any additional on-site or off-site services.
                                             
 IV. "Personal assistance'' means providing or assisting a resident
in obtaining one or more of the following services:
                                             
 (a) Assistance with activities of daily living such as grooming,
toileting, eating, dressing, getting into or out of a bed or chair,
walking, or monitoring or supervision of medications.
                                             
 (b) Assistance with instrumental activities of daily living such
as doing laundry, cleaning of living areas, food preparation, managing
money and conducting business affairs, using public transportation,
writing letters, obtaining appointments, using the telephone, or
engaging in recreational or leisure activities.
                                             
 (c) Supportive services such as recreational and leisure
activities, transportation, social services, legal services, financial
management services, educational and vocational services, medical,
dental, and other health care services, habilitation or rehabilitation
services, respite services, case management, day care, or other services
required to meet a resident's needs.
                                             
 (d) Monitoring a resident's activities to provide for the
resident's and others' safety and well being.
                                             
 (e) The administration of medication by a person authorized to
administer medication.
                                             
 (f) General supervision or oversight of the physical and mental
well-being of a person who needs assistance to maintain his or her
residence in the facility or who needs assistance to manage his or her
personal or financial affairs, regardless of whether a guardian has been
appointed for the person.
                                             
 V. "Representative'' means a guardian, conservator, attorney, agent
or other person who is duly appointed or designated in the manner
required by law to act on behalf of another person.
                                             
 VI. "Residence'' means an assisted living residence or housing for
older persons as defined in this chapter.
                                             
 VII. "Resident'' means an adult who resides in an assisted living
residence or housing for older persons as defined in this chapter.

**Source.** 2002, 192:1. 2003, 114:3. 2012, 282:12, eff. June 30, 2015.

### Section 161-J:3

 **161-J:3 Applicability. –** This chapter shall apply to assisted
living residences as defined in RSA 161-J:2, II, independent living
retirement communities as defined in RSA 161-J:2, III-a, and housing for
older persons as defined in RSA 161-J:2, III. This chapter shall not
apply to continuing care communities as defined in RSA 420-D or
condominiums as defined in RSA 356-B:3, V.

**Source.** 2002, 192:1. 2003, 114:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 161-J:4

 **161-J:4 Residential Services Agreement. –**
                                             
 I. A person shall not begin residency in an assisted living
residence, an independent living retirement community, or housing for
older persons unless a representative of the residence and either the
proposed resident or the proposed resident's representative reads and
signs a residential services agreement that complies with the provisions
of this chapter. Upon signing of the agreement, the residence shall give
the resident and the resident's representative, if any, a copy of the
agreement and place a copy in the resident's file.
                                             
 II. A residential services agreement shall:
                                             
 (a) Set forth the rates charged by the residence, including the
base rate and the cost of any available services that are not included
in the base rate.
                                             
 (b) Specifically describe the services and accommodations to be
provided by the assisted living residence or housing for older persons,
and identify which services are included in the base rate.
                                             
 (c) Specify the policies relative to rate increases or increases
in the costs of services, including the period of advance notice that
will be provided to residents of changes in rates or costs.
                                             
 (d) Set forth the policies and procedures for termination of the
agreement.
                                             
 (e) State the amount and purpose of any advance payments required
by the residence.
                                             
 (f) Set forth the residence's policy for refund of advance
payments in the event of termination of the contract or death of the
resident.
                                             
 (g) If the residence is licensed pursuant to RSA 151, provide
notice of the resident's rights in the event of a temporary absence from
the facility, in accordance with RSA 151:25, and the resident's rights
in the event of a proposed transfer or discharge from the facility, in
accordance with RSA 151:26.
                                             
 (h) Set forth the circumstances under which an eviction,
discharge or transfer to another residence or facility may occur,
including situations in which the resident's needs would exceed what the
residence could provide, and the responsibility of the residence in
transitioning the resident to another location.
                                             
 (i) Include or attach a copy of the rules or policies governing
resident conduct and responsibilities and the procedures for handling
resident grievances.
                                             
 (j) Include as a cover sheet a standard disclosure summary in the
form set forth in RSA 161-J:5, using a minimum type size of 14 point.
                                             
 (k) Include a statement affirming that the proposed resident has
received the residential services agreement and attached standard
disclosure summary, that the resident has read it or it has been read to
the resident and that the resident understands its contents.
                                             
 (l) Include any other disclosures or information required by RSA
151 or RSA 420-D, if applicable and any other provisions of state or
federal law.

**Source.** 2002, 192:1. 2003, 114:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 161-J:5

 **161-J:5 Standard Disclosure Summary. –**
                                             
 I. The standard disclosure summary, which shall accompany a
residential services agreement, shall be in a form adopted by the
commissioner of the department of health and human services by rule
pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 II. A copy of the residential services agreement shall be given to
prospective residents upon request and at least 24 hours prior to
signing.

**Source.** 2002, 192:1. 2003, 114:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 161-J:6

 **161-J:6 Advance Payments and Security Deposits. –** The residence
shall establish a written policy for the refund of unused advance
payments or security deposits in the event of termination of a
residential services agreement or death of a resident which shall
include the terms and conditions under which the advance payment money
or security deposit may be withheld by the residence. Advance payments
other than security deposits shall be subject to the terms and
conditions contained in RSA 161-J:4, II. Security deposits shall be
subject to the terms and conditions contained in RSA 540-A:6 and RSA
540-A:7.

**Source.** 2002, 192:1. 2013, 61:1, eff. June 6, 2013.

### Section 161-J:7

 **161-J:7 Applicability of RSA 540 and 540-A. –** All provisions of
RSA 540 and RSA 540-A shall apply to independent living retirement
communities and housing for older persons where the residential
premises, however designated, are leased or rented to the resident,
unless otherwise provided by RSA 151 and RSA 420-D or other applicable
law.

**Source.** 2002, 192:1. 2003, 114:7. 2013, 61:2, eff. June 6, 2013.

### Section 161-J:7-a

 **161-J:7-a Applicability of RSA 161-M. –** All provisions of RSA
161-M shall apply to independent living retirement communities, defined
in RSA 161-J:2, III-a, and housing for older persons, defined in RSA
161-J:2, III.

**Source.** 2014, 203:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 161-J:8

 **161-J:8 Enforcement. –** In addition to other appropriate
penalties, any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute an unfair or deceptive act or practice within the meaning of
RSA 358-A. Any right, remedy or power set forth in RSA 358-A may be used
to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 2002, 192:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 161-J:9

 **161-J:9 Use of Term "Assisted Living.'' –** The term "assisted
living'' may only be used in a title, brochure, admission agreement, or
other written or promotional materials by an entity that is licensed
pursuant to RSA 151.

**Source.** 2003, 114:8, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 161-J:10

 **161-J:10 Registration With Department of Justice. –** Any person,
corporation, partnership, association or other entity operating an
independent living retirement community in this state shall file an
annual registration statement with the consumer protection bureau of the
department of justice, with a copy to the department of health and human
services, bureau of health facilities administration. The registration
statement shall include the name and address of the independent living
retirement community, the name and address of the registered agent if a
corporation, and a complete description of the type of all available
services. The independent living retirement community shall insure that
the registration statement is available to all current and prospective
residents of the community upon request.

**Source.** 2003, 114:8, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.
