---
title: 'CHAPTER 161-N HOME HEALTH CARE AGENCY SERVICES'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 161-N
                                             
HOME HEALTH CARE AGENCY SERVICES
--------------------------------

### Section 161-N:1

 **161-N:1 Purpose. –** Older adults and people with disabilities,
including children with special health care needs, require the support
of home health care services. The purpose of this chapter is to ensure
medically-necessary home health care services are available to Medicaid
recipients at their residences and in non-institutional locations
outside of the residence in which normal life activities take place.

**Source.** 2016, 273:1, eff. June 16, 2016.

### Section 161-N:2

 **161-N:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 II. "Home health care services'' means care provided by a home
health care agency licensed under RSA 151, when that care is provided at
the residence of the recipient or in a non-institutional setting where
normal life activities take place. The residence of the recipient shall
not include a hospital, a nursing facility, or an intermediate care
facility for individuals with intellectual disabilities, except for home
health care services in an intermediate care facility for individuals
with intellectual disabilities that are not required to be provided by
the facility.

**Source.** 2016, 273:1, eff. June 16, 2016.

### Section 161-N:3

 **161-N:3 Home Health Care Services Location. –** Medicaid coverage
of medically-necessary home health care services shall be available to
Medicaid recipients at their residences and in any non-institutional
setting in which normal life activities take place.

**Source.** 2016, 273:1, eff. June 16, 2016.

### Section 161-N:4

 **161-N:4 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Further definition of home health care services under RSA
161-N:3.
                                             
 II. Content and format of forms required under this chapter.
                                             
 III. Any other matter necessary to the proper administration of this
chapter.

**Source.** 2016, 273:1, eff. June 16, 2016.
