---
title: 'CHAPTER 161-L NEW HAMPSHIRE RX ADVANTAGE PROGRAM'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 161-L
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE RX ADVANTAGE PROGRAM
----------------------------------

### Section 161-L:1

 **161-L:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 II. "Covered drugs'' means drugs that are on the New Hampshire
preferred drug list.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 IV. "Dispensing fee'' means a fee for each prescription dispensed by
a pharmacy that is paid to the pharmacy.
                                             
 V. "Fund'' means the New Hampshire Rx advantage program fund,
established in RSA 161-L:5.
                                             
 VI. "Initial discounted price'' for a drug means the price which has
been discounted from a pharmacy's usual and customary charge that
participating retail pharmacies may charge qualified residents
participating in the program for that drug.
                                             
 VII. "Labeler'' means an entity or person that receives prescription
drugs from a manufacturer or wholesaler and repackages those drugs for
later retail sale and that has a labeler code from the federal Food and
Drug Administration under 21 C.F.R. section 207.20.
                                             
 VIII. "Participating retail pharmacy'' or "retail pharmacy'' means a
retail pharmacy located in this state, or another business licensed to
dispense prescription drugs in this state, that participates in the
program.
                                             
 IX. "Program'' means the New Hampshire Rx advantage program
established under this chapter.
                                             
 X. "Qualified resident'' means a resident of this state who has a
family income equal to or less than 300 percent of the federal poverty
level and who self-qualifies as an enrollee in the program. "Qualified
resident'' also means a resident of this state whose family incurs
unreimbursed expenses for prescription drugs that equal 5 percent or
more of family income or whose total unreimbursed medical expenses equal
15 percent or more of family income. For purposes of this definition,
the cost of drugs provided under this chapter shall be considered an
expense incurred by the family for eligibility determination purposes.
                                             
 XI. "Secondary discounted price'' means the initial discounted price
minus any further discounts paid for out of the fund.
                                             
 XII. "Usual and customary charge'' means the charge a pharmacy
charges a customer for a prescription drug.

**Source.** 2007, 297:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 161-L:2

 **161-L:2 New Hampshire Rx Advantage Program Established. –** The
department shall establish the New Hampshire Rx advantage program. The
department may coordinate this program with other programs and may take
actions to enhance efficiency, reduce the cost of prescription drugs,
and maximize the benefits to the programs and enrollees, including
providing the benefits of this program to enrollees in other programs.
The components of the program shall be as follows:
                                             
 I. A drug manufacturer or labeler that sells prescription drugs in
this state through any other publicly-supported pharmaceutical
assistance program may enter into a rebate agreement with the department
for this program. The rebate agreement shall require the manufacturer or
labeler to make rebate payments to the state each calendar quarter or
according to a schedule established by the department.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall negotiate the amount of the rebate
required from a manufacturer or labeler in accordance with this
paragraph.
                                             
 (a) The commissioner shall take into consideration the rebate
calculated under the Medicaid Rebate Program pursuant to 42 U.S.C.
section 1396r-8, the average wholesale price of prescription drugs, and
any other information on prescription drug prices and price discounts.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner shall use the commissioner's best efforts to
obtain an initial rebate amount equal to or greater than the rebate
calculated under rebates pursuant to 42 U.S.C. section 1396r-8.
                                             
 (c) With respect to the rebate taking effect no later than
October 1, 2009, the commissioner shall use the commissioner's best
efforts to obtain an amount equal to or greater than the amount of any
discount, rebate, or price reduction for prescription drugs provided to
the federal government.
                                             
 III. Each participating retail pharmacy shall sell covered drugs to
qualified residents at the lower of the initial discounted price and the
secondary discounted price as such prices are determined by the
department pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 (a) The department shall establish discounted prices for drugs
covered by a rebate agreement and shall promote the use of efficacious
and reduced-cost drugs, taking into consideration reduced prices for
state and federally-capped drug programs, differential dispensing fees,
administrative overhead, and incentive payments.
                                             
 (b) Beginning July 1, 2008, a participating retail pharmacy shall
offer the initial discounted price.
                                             
 (c) No later than October 1, 2009, a participating retail
pharmacy shall offer the secondary discounted price if available.

**Source.** 2007, 297:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 161-L:3

 **161-L:3 Retail Pharmacies; Rules; Operation of Program. –**
                                             
 I. The New Hampshire pharmacy board, established in RSA 318, shall
adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, requiring disclosure by
participating retail pharmacies to qualified residents relative to the
amount of savings provided as a result of the program. The rules shall
include protection of any information that is proprietary in nature.
                                             
 II. The department shall not impose transaction charges under this
program on retail pharmacies that submit claims or receive payments
under the program.
                                             
 III. A participating retail pharmacy shall submit claims to the
department to verify the amount charged to qualified residents.
                                             
 IV. On a weekly or biweekly basis, the department shall reimburse a
participating retail pharmacy for the difference between the initial
discounted price and the secondary discounted price provided to
qualified residents under the program.
                                             
 V. The department shall conduct ongoing quality assurance
activities.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner shall negotiate a per prescription dispensing
fee which shall not be less than the medicaid dispensing fee to be paid
to participating pharmacies.

**Source.** 2007, 297:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 161-L:4

 **161-L:4 Nonparticipating Manufacturers and Labelers. –**
                                             
 I. The names of manufacturers and labelers who do and do not enter
into rebate agreements pursuant to this chapter shall be public
information. The department shall release such information to health
care providers and the public on a regular basis and shall publicize
participation by manufacturers and labelers that is of particular
benefit to the public.
                                             
 II. The department may impose prior authorization requirements in
the program, as permitted by law, to the extent the department
determines it is appropriate to do so in order to encourage manufacturer
and labeler participation in the program and if the additional prior
authorization requirements remain consistent with the goals of the
program and the requirements of the federal Social Security Act, Title
XIX.

**Source.** 2007, 297:7, see effective date note below.

### Section 161-L:5

 **161-L:5 New Hampshire Rx Advantage Program Fund. –** There is
hereby established in the office of the state treasurer a fund to be
known as the New Hampshire Rx advantage program fund. The fund shall
receive revenue from manufacturers and labelers who pay rebates as
provided in 161-L:2, II and any appropriations or allocations designated
for the fund. The purposes of the fund shall include, but not be limited
to reimbursing retail pharmacies for discounted prices provided to
qualified residents; reimbursing the department for contracted services
including pharmacy claims processing fees, administrative and associated
computer costs, and other reasonable program costs; and benefiting any
state sanctioned low cost drug program subsequently established. Moneys
in the fund shall be nonlapsing and continually appropriated to the
department. Interest on fund balances shall accrue to the fund. Surplus
funds in the fund shall be used for the benefit of the program.

**Source.** 2007, 297:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 161-L:6

 **161-L:6 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Procedures for issuing program enrollment cards.
                                             
 II. Outreach efforts to build public awareness of the program and to
maximize enrollment of eligible residents.
                                             
 III. Content and format of any forms required under this chapter.
                                             
 IV. Procedures for entering into rebate agreements with drug
manufacturers or labelers.
                                             
 V. Manner of releasing information to the public under RSA 161-L:4.

**Source.** 2007, 297:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 161-L:7

 **161-L:7 Annual Report Required. –** The commissioner shall make an
annual report beginning January 1, 2009 relative to the enrollment and
financial status of the program, including any recommendations for
legislation, to the speaker of the house of representatives, the
president of the senate, and the governor.

**Source.** 2007, 297:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.
