---
title: 'CHAPTER 161-M SENIOR CITIZENS BILL OF RIGHTS'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 161-M
                                             
SENIOR CITIZENS BILL OF RIGHTS
------------------------------

### Section 161-M:1

 **161-M:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to establish a
senior citizens bill of rights, which shall apply to the management of
housing for older persons and independent living retirement communities,
as defined in this chapter.

**Source.** 2014, 203:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 161-M:2

 **161-M:2 Definition. –** In this chapter, "facility'' means
"housing for older persons'' as defined in RSA 161-J:2, III, and
"independent living retirement community'' as defined in RSA 161-J:2,
III-a. In this chapter "facility'' shall not include continuing care
retirement communities as defined in RSA 420-D, condominiums as defined
in RSA 356-B:3, V, manufactured housing parks as defined in RSA 205-A:1,
or any facility licensed under RSA 151.

**Source.** 2014, 203:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 161-M:3

 **161-M:3 Senior Citizens Bill of Rights. –** The management of a
facility shall establish policies consistent with the senior citizens
bill of rights as set forth in this chapter. The senior citizens bill of
rights shall inform residents of the facility that each resident has the
following rights:
                                             
 I. Dignity and privacy, including the right to:
                                             
 (a) Self-organize and meet with other residents or members to
discuss the policies, procedures, and services of the facility.
                                             
 (b) Be represented by an individual of your own choice.
                                             
 (c) Engage in concerted activities for your own purpose.
                                             
 (d) Individually and severally, obtain outside advice,
consultation, and services of your own choosing and at your own expense
on any matter, including, but not limited to, medical, legal, and
financial matters.
                                             
 (e) Independence and individuality, and to have your needs and
preferences recognized.
                                             
 (f) Privacy within a private residential unit, subject to rules
of the facility reasonably designed to promote the health, safety, and
welfare of the resident.
                                             
 (g) Personal space and the furnishing and decorating of personal
space as private.
                                             
 (h) Be free to select or refuse services and to accept
responsibility for the consequences.
                                             
 (i) Be free to develop and maintain social ties with
opportunities for meaningful interaction and involvement with the
community.
                                             
 (j) Recognition that ensuring your well-being does not violate
your civil rights.
                                             
 (k) Set your own schedule, have visitors, and leave and enter the
facility as you desire.
                                             
 (l) Private communications, including receiving and sending
unopened correspondence, telephone access, and visiting with persons of
your choice.
                                             
 (m) Freedom to participate in and benefit from community services
and activities so as to achieve the highest possible level of
independence, autonomy, and interaction within the community.
                                             
 (n) Exercise civil and religious liberties.
                                             
 II. Resolution of complaints, including the right to:
                                             
 (a) Acknowledgment that you are entitled to methods of resolving
complaints and freedom from abuse, neglect, and the use of chemical and
physical restraints.
                                             
 (b) Assurances that methods of preventing and responding to
incidents involving injury, loss of property, abuse, and neglect shall
be identified and implemented.
                                             
 (c) Be treated with consideration, respect, and due recognition
of personal dignity, individuality, and the need for privacy.
                                             
 (d) Present grievances and recommend changes in policies,
procedures, and services to the manager or staff of the facility,
government officials, or any other person without restraint,
interference, coercion, discrimination, or reprisal from the facility.
                                             
 (e) Be free from retaliation if the resident makes a complaint or
joins a tenant association.
                                             
 III. Due process, including the right to:
                                             
 (a) Not be evicted except upon execution of proper statutory
authority or court proceedings.
                                             
 (b) Have rules and regulations applied uniformly to all tenants.
                                             
 (c) Be free from unreasonable, arbitrary, or capricious rules and
regulations.
                                             
 (d) A 30-day written notice prior to any change of rules or
regulations, except for changes necessary to protect your health or
safety.
                                             
 (e) A 10-day period to correct a violation of rules or
regulations.
                                             
 (f) A 90-day written notice prior to increases of fees, charges,
or assessments.
                                             
 (g) Reasonable notice of any planned disruption of services.
                                             
 (h) Have essential services furnished at all times, including
water, electricity, and heat, subject to planned disruptions or
emergencies.
                                             
 (i) Annual lease renewal, if you remain in good standing.
                                             
 (j) Receive a copy of any rules or regulations of the facility.

**Source.** 2014, 203:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 161-M:4

 **161-M:4 Gardens. –** Each facility shall allow residents to
establish and maintain a garden if the facility has land appropriate for
use as a garden; provided, that any such resident establishing a garden
shall consult with the management of the facility regarding the type of
herbs, fruits, flowers, vegetables or other plants the resident would
like to plant in the garden.

**Source.** 2014, 203:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 161-M:5

 **161-M:5 Posting Requirement. –** The management of a facility
shall conspicuously post in an area accessible to residents, employees,
and visitors the following:
                                             
 I. A copy of the senior citizens bill of rights as provided in RSA
161-M:3. Management of a facility shall provide each resident with a
copy of the senior citizens bill of rights at the time of initial lease
execution and upon each lease renewal.
                                             
 II. A description of the complaint procedures established by the
management of a facility pursuant to the senior citizens bill of rights,
including the name, address, and telephone number of a person authorized
to receive complaints.
                                             
 III. A notice informing a resident that a violation of the senior
citizens bill of rights constitutes an unfair or deceptive act or
practice under the consumer protection laws of this state. The notice
shall inform the resident of the right to file a complaint with the New
Hampshire department of justice, office of the attorney general,
consumer protection and antitrust bureau, including the telephone number
and name of the person in the consumer protection and antitrust bureau
authorized to receive such complaints.

**Source.** 2014, 203:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 161-M:6

 **161-M:6 Penalty. –** Any facility or person who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an unfair or deceptive act
or practice as provided in RSA 358-A and shall be penalized in
accordance with RSA 358-A:6.

**Source.** 2014, 203:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.
