---
title: 'CHAPTER 161-E PERSONAL CARE FOR THE SEVERELY PHYSICALLY DISABLED'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 161-E
                                             
PERSONAL CARE FOR THE SEVERELY PHYSICALLY DISABLED
--------------------------------------------------

### Section 161-E:1

 **161-E:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Department'' shall mean the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 II. "Personal care attendant'' shall mean a qualified non-family
member whether or not that person is a professional or paraprofessional
and who, in accordance with a plan of care prescribed by a physician and
developed in conjunction with and reviewed by a registered nurse,
assists severely physically disabled persons to maintain themselves in
their homes and gain greater control over their own lives by providing
medically oriented long-term maintenance and supportive care.
                                             
 III. "Severely physically disabled person'' shall mean an adult
individual over the age of 18 who has been approved to participate in an
independent living program and who requires a minimum of 2 hours of
medically necessary personal care per day in order to maintain himself
or herself in a noninstitutional setting. Such care may include
assistance in the following areas: basic personal care and grooming,
assistance with bladder and bowel care, assistance with medications,
assistance with nutrition including meal preparation and essential
household services.

**Source.** 1979, 275:1. 1983, 291:1. 1991, 32:1. 1995, 310:28, eff.
Nov. 1, 1995. 2016, 306:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 161-E:2

 **161-E:2 Services Provided. –** The commissioner of the department
of health and human services shall develop a program under which
severely physically disabled persons eligible for coverage under medical
assistance programs are provided with personal care attendants to
provide medically necessary long-term maintenance and supportive care to
assist them, as is required in each individual case, to maintain
themselves in their homes and gain greater control over their own lives.
Personal care services under this chapter may be delivered in
noninstitutional locations in which normal life activities occur.

**Source.** 1979, 275:1. 1995, 310:182, eff. Nov. 1, 1995. 2016, 306:2,
eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 161-E:3

 **161-E:3 Federal Funds. –** The commissioner of the department of
health and human services shall attempt to obtain such federal funds as
are available to provide the services authorized under this chapter. The
commissioner shall be authorized to expend such monies as he receives
from the federal or state government or any other source for the
purposes of this chapter.

**Source.** 1979, 275:1. 1995, 310:182, 183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.
