---
title: |
    CHAPTER 161-C ALTERNATIVE METHOD OF SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT FOR DEPENDENT
    CHILDREN
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 161-C
                                             
ALTERNATIVE METHOD OF SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT FOR DEPENDENT CHILDREN
----------------------------------------------------------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 161-C:1

 **161-C:1 Purpose. –** Common law and statutory procedures governing
the enforcement of support for dependent children by responsible parents
have not proven sufficiently effective or efficient to cope with the
increasing incidence of financial dependency. It is hereby declared that
the common law and statutory remedies pertaining to desertion and
nonsupport of dependent children shall be augmented by additional
remedies directed to the real and personal property of the responsible
parents. In order to render resources more immediately available to meet
the needs of dependent children, it is the purpose of this chapter to
provide additional remedies for the support of dependent children, which
remedies shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, existing law. It
is declared to be the public policy of this state that this chapter be
construed and administered to the end that children shall be maintained
from the resources of responsible parents, thereby relieving, at least
in part, the burden presently borne by the general citizenry through
welfare programs. It is further declared to be the policy of this state
that this chapter be construed and administered to the end that children
shall be maintained from the resources of responsible parents,
regardless of whether or not these children are recipients of public
assistance.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1985, 331:6, eff. Oct. 1, 1985.

### Section 161-C:2

 **161-C:2 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter, the following
words shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
                                             
 I. "Legal order of support'' means any judgment or order including
an order in a final decree of divorce for the support of dependent
children issued by any court of the state of New Hampshire or another
state, or any body authorized by law to issue and modify support
orders.
                                             
 I-a. "Account'' means a demand deposit account, checking or
negotiable withdrawal order account, savings account, time deposit
account, money market mutual fund account, or brokerage account.
                                             
 II. "Dependent child'' means any natural or adoptive child who is
not self-supporting, married, or a member of the armed services, or who
has not reached the age of 18 years.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the New Hampshire department of health and
human services.
                                             
 IV. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the New Hampshire
department of health and human services, or his designee or authorized
representative.
                                             
 V. "Disposable earnings'' means that part of the earnings of any
individual remaining after the deduction from those earnings of any
amount required by law to be withheld.
                                             
 VI. "Earnings'' means compensation paid or payable for personal
services whether denominated as wages, salary, commission, bonus or
otherwise, and specifically includes periodic payments pursuant to
pension or retirement programs, or insurance policies of any type, and
all gain derived from capital, from labor or from both combined,
including profit gained through sale or conversion of capital assets but
does not include payments by any department or division of the state or
federal government based upon inability to work or obtain employment.
                                             
 VI-a. "Obligor'' means the person found to be legally liable for
child support.
                                             
 VI-b. "Financial institution'' means:
                                             
 (a) A depository institution, as defined in section 3(c) of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Act at 12 U.S.C. 1813(c).
                                             
 (b) An institution-affiliated party, as defined in section 3(u)
of such act at 12 U.S.C. 1813(u).
                                             
 (c) Any federal credit union or state credit union, as defined in
section 101 of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1752), including
an institution-affiliated party of such a credit union, as defined in
section 206(r) of such act at 12 U.S.C. 1786(r).
                                             
 (d) Any benefit association, insurance company, safe deposit
company, money market mutual fund, brokerage firm, federal or
state-chartered fiduciary bank, or similar entity.
                                             
 VII. "Person'' means an individual, trust, estate, partnership,
association, company, corporation, political subdivision of the state or
instrumentality of the state.
                                             
 VIII. "Public assistance'' means money payments made by the state
pursuant to RSA 161 or RSA 167 and any regulations promulgated
thereunder.
                                             
 IX. "Responsible parent'' means the natural or adoptive parent of a
dependent child.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1983, 291:1, I, II. 1985, 331:7. 1992, 119:1.
1995, 310:110. 1997, 263:10, 11. 2006, 185:4, 5, eff. May 26, 2006.

### Section 161-C:3

 **161-C:3 Service. –** Service of any notice or lien described in
RSA 161-C may be by certified mail, return receipt requested, by service
in hand as specified in civil actions or by publication as specified in
civil actions.
                                             
 I. Date of Service. Service shall be completed when the certified
mail is received or refused or when specified in civil actions for
service in hand or by publication.
                                             
 II. Branch Banks. Service on any bank or other financial institution
maintaining branch offices shall only be effective as to the accounts,
credits or other personal property of the responsible parent in the
particular branch on which service is made.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1994, 398:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-C:3-a

 **161-C:3-a Confidentiality of Records and Information; Information
From Financial Institutions. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 359-C or any other law to
the contrary, the commissioner is hereby authorized to request, on an
individually-named basis, and receive, on the same basis, from any bank,
trust company, savings and loan association, credit union, or other
financial institution doing business in this state information with
respect to the transactions with any institution and the assets of any
delinquent obligor or individual against whom the department is seeking
to establish or enforce an obligation of support. The institution shall
furnish the information within 15 days of the department's request.
After such time, an institution which fails to comply with these
provisions shall be liable for an administrative fine of 
                                             $50 per day.
                                             
 II. The commissioner is hereby authorized to request and receive
from any former or current employer, including for-profit, nonprofit,
and governmental employers, information necessary to the establishment
or enforcement of child support orders, including, but not limited to,
the dates of employment, number of hours worked, rate of pay, date of
birth, available health insurance, current address, payroll deductions,
and social security number of any delinquent obligor or individual
against whom the department is seeking to establish or enforce an
obligation of support. The institution shall furnish the information
within 15 days of the department's request. After such time, an employer
who fails to comply with these provisions shall be liable for an
administrative fine of 
                                             $50 per day.
                                             
 III. The department and any financial institution or employer who
discloses financial or employment records under this section shall not
be subject to civil liability or criminal prosecution which is based
upon its disclosure under this section, or for any other action taken in
good faith to comply with the requirements of this section. A financial
institution shall not be liable under federal or state law to any person
for encumbering or surrendering any assets held by such financial
institution in response to a notice of lien or levy issued by the
department.
                                             
 IV. Any records established or information collected pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be made available only to the
commissioner and the attorney general and their authorized designees,
attorneys employed by the office of child support, attorneys responsible
for the administration of RSA 546-B, attorneys employed by the
department in RSA 169-C proceedings, the client or the client's
authorized representative and courts or agencies in other states engaged
in the enforcement of support of minor children as authorized by the
rules of the department. Such records and information shall be available
and used only for purposes directly connected with the establishment,
enforcement, or modification of child support, the location and
notification of parents in RSA 169-C proceedings, and the administration
of this chapter. The records and information made available to the
client or the client's authorized representative shall not include
information provided to the department that is prohibited from release
by federal law, state statute, state case law, or by contract or
agreement between the department and another entity if such contract or
agreement prohibits release of such information.
                                             
 IV-a. Notwithstanding paragraph IV or any other provision of law,
custodial parents, guardians, and caretakers are authorized to request
and receive from any responsible parent's former or current employer
doing business in this state health insurance information necessary for
the enforcement and establishment of medical support orders, including
the availability of coverage.
                                             
 V. Any financial institution or employer who does not comply with
the requirements under this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                             
 VI. The department is authorized to obtain access to certain records
held by public utilities, cellular mobile radio communications
companies, Internet service providers, and cable or satellite television
companies with respect to individuals who owe or are owed support, or
against or with respect to whom a support obligation is sought,
consisting of the names and addresses, including email addresses, of
such individuals and the names and addresses of the employers of such
individuals, pursuant to an administrative subpoena issued by the
commissioner.
                                             
 VII. The department is authorized to enter into agreements with
financial institutions doing business in the state:
                                             
 (a) To develop and operate, in coordination with such financial
institutions, a data match system, using automated data exchanges to the
maximum extent feasible, in which each financial institution is required
to provide for each calendar quarter the name, record address, social
security number or other taxpayer identification number, and other
identifying information for each obligor who maintains an account at the
financial institution and who owes past-due support, as identified by
the state by name and social security number or other taxpayer
identification number.
                                             
 (b) In response to a notice of lien or levy, to encumber or
surrender, as the case may be, assets held by such institution on behalf
of any obligor who is subject to a child support lien pursuant to RSA
161-C.
                                             
 VIII. The department shall pay a reasonable fee to a financial
institution for conducting the data match provided for in paragraph
VII(a), not to exceed actual costs incurred by such financial
institution.

**Source.** 1985, 344:4. 1989, 360:3. 1992, 270:3. 1994, 214:2, 3. 1995,
310:23, 175, 183. 1997, 263:12-14. 2003, 198:1. 2010, 24:1, eff. May 7,
2010.

### Section 161-C:3-b

 **161-C:3-b Medical Support Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. With respect to orders for medical support for which there is an
assignment pursuant to RSA 167:14-a, the office of child support
enforcement services, department of health and human services, shall
obtain health insurance coverage information regarding medical
assistance recipients and applicants for medical assistance and provide
this information to the office of medical services, department of health
and human services, for third party liability purposes.
                                             
 II. In all child support cases administered by the office of child
support enforcement services, when the responsible parent obtains health
insurance coverage for a dependent child, the responsible parent shall
provide sufficient health insurance policy information which would
permit a claim to be filed or, in the case of a health maintenance or
preferred provider organization, service to be provided, to the office
of child support enforcement services, department of health and human
services.
                                             
 III. The department of health and human services, upon receipt of
the health insurance policy information, is authorized to request and
receive notice from the responsible parent's insurance company or
employers, or both, when such health insurance policy has been
discontinued. The insurance company or employer, or both, shall furnish
the requested information within 15 days.
                                             
 IV. In all child support cases administered by the office of child
support enforcement services, when the parent or parents responsible for
providing health insurance pursuant to a court order obtains health
insurance coverage for a dependent child, the dependent child shall be
entitled to receive directly from the health insurance provider a copy
of the certificate of insurance and any accompanying endorsement and any
riders covering such dependent child upon request in writing by the
office of child support enforcement services, the dependent child, or
the child's parent or guardian.
                                             
 V. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department, a
parent, guardian, or caretaker shall be entitled to receipt of health
insurance policy information from a responsible parent's insurance
company or employer, or both. The parent, guardian, or caretaker shall
also be entitled to notice from the responsible parent's insurance
company or employer when such health insurance has been discontinued.
The insurance company or employer, or both, shall furnish the
information within 15 days of eligibility or discontinuance.
                                             
 VI. The department may provide certain information to health
carriers, as defined in RSA 420-G:2, public agencies or its contracted
agents concerning individuals who are subject to an order to provide
health insurance coverage for dependents administered by the office of
child support enforcement services, and their dependent children covered
by such medical support orders, as necessary to cross-match the
individuals with policyholder and subscriber information pursuant to RSA
161-C:3-e and rules adopted by the commissioner pursuant to that
section, for the purpose of enforcing orders for medical support. The
department may identify such individuals by name, the last 4 digits of
the individual's social security number or other taxpayer identification
number, date of birth, last known address, employer, or any combination
thereof.

**Source.** 1989, 121:1. 1992, 33:1. 1994, 214:4. 1995, 310:175, 181.
1996, 297:1. 2003, 145:1, eff. Aug. 16, 2003.

### Section 161-C:3-c

 **161-C:3-c Power to Subpoena Financial and Other Records. –**
Pursuant to the department's responsibilities, the commissioner shall
have the power to subpoena any financial or other information needed to
establish, modify, or enforce a support order.

**Source.** 1989, 360:4. 1995, 310:111. 1997, 263:15, eff. Aug. 18,
1997.

### Section 161-C:3-d

 **161-C:3-d Penalty for Failure to Comply With Subpoena. –** Any
person who owes or is owed a duty of support who knowingly fails to
comply with a subpoena issued pursuant to RSA 161-C:3-c:
                                             
 I. May be subject to license revocation under RSA 161-B:11; and
                                             
 II. Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1997, 263:16, eff. Aug. 18, 1997.

### Section 161-C:3-e

 **161-C:3-e Disclosure of Health Carrier Information for Medical
Child Support Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. Each health carrier, as defined in RSA 420-G:2, shall
electronically cross-match claims data, policyholder, and subscriber
information with the department of health and human services to provide
health insurance coverage information, for the purpose of enforcing
medical child support orders administered by the office of child support
enforcement services under RSA 161-C:3-b, concerning individuals subject
to an order to provide health insurance coverage for dependents
administered by the office of child support enforcement services, or
dependents covered by such medical support orders, in accordance with
rules adopted by the commissioner under RSA 161-C:28.
                                             
 II. Such electronic cross-match shall be made by any health carrier
upon certification by the department that all persons identified on the
electronic medium are individuals subject to an order to provide health
insurance coverage for dependents administered by the office of child
support enforcement services, or dependents covered by such medical
support orders.
                                             
 III. All information disclosed by the department for the purpose of
the electronic cross-match shall remain property of the state of New
Hampshire. Any health carrier, public agency, or contracted agent
engaged by the department to perform the electronic cross-match shall
purge any information received from the department pursuant to this
section concerning individuals or dependents from its records and
databases immediately upon the completion of the data match exchange.
                                             
 IV. In any case where the department administers a medical child
support order on behalf of a dependent child who does not receive
temporary assistance to needy families or medical assistance, the
transaction costs associated with the electronic cross-match shall be
paid in advance by the custodial parent or guardian, and the
non-custodial parent shall reimburse the custodial parent for such
transaction costs.
                                             
 V. Any health carrier who supplies information in accordance with
this section and with rules adopted under RSA 161-C:28 shall have
immunity from any civil or criminal liability that might otherwise be
imposed or incurred.

**Source.** 2003, 145:2, eff. Aug. 16, 2003.

### Section 161-C:3-f

 **161-C:3-f Child Support Insurance Settlement Intercept. –** The
department may provide certain information to public agencies or its
contracted agents in order to intercept insurance settlement payments or
judgments claimed by individuals who are subject to a child support lien
pursuant to RSA 161-C and who owe past-due support. The department may
identify such individuals by name, last 4 digits of the individual's
social security number or other taxpayer identification number, date of
birth, last known address, employer, or any combination thereof. Any
information provided by the department in accordance with this section
shall remain the property of the state of New Hampshire and shall be
purged by any public agency or contracted agent receiving said
information upon completion of the data match exchange. The department
may perform an audit to insure that any public agency or contracted
agent has purged said information. The specific penalty for failure to
purge the information shall be set forth in any contract or agreement
between the department and any public agency or contracted agent made
pursuant to this section. Any transaction cost incurred by the
department related to the data match exchange shall be directly
recovered by the department from any insurance settlement or judgment
proceeds. Insurance settlement payments for casualty loss to personal or
real property, past or future medical treatment, and a pro-rated amount
equal to 185 percent of the self-support reserve defined in RSA 458-C:2,
X for the period of lost work for which the settlement or judgment
constitutes recovery shall be exempt from this section. Reasonable
attorney fees and expenses related to obtaining the insurance settlement
or judgment shall be exempt from this section pursuant to RSA 311:13.
Any settlement, payment, or judgment received under the provision of
this section shall be held by the department for 60 days prior to its
release or distribution unless otherwise agreed to by the parties.

**Source.** 2003, 280:1, eff. Sept. 16, 2003.

Support Debt
------------

### Section 161-C:4

 **161-C:4 Creation of Support Debt. –**
                                             
 I. Any payment of public assistance made to or for the benefit of a
dependent child creates a debt due and owing to the department by any
responsible parent. Except as otherwise provided in RSA 161-C:5, the
amount of the debt shall be equal to the calculation of a weekly child
support obligation derived in accordance with RSA 458-C:3 as applied to
the responsible parent's current income, multiplied by the number of
weeks that public assistance was paid or the total amount of public
assistance that was paid, whichever is less.
                                             
 II. The court may consider the extenuating circumstances in RSA
458-C:5 when calculating the support debt to be paid by a responsible
parent.
                                             
 III. Any child support payments pursuant to a legal order of support
which remain unpaid create a debt due and owing by the responsible
parent in an amount equal to the amount of unpaid support.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1985, 331:8. 1994, 188:1. 1995, 310:175. 1996,
297:2, eff. June 10, 1996.

### Section 161-C:5

 **161-C:5 Limitation of Debt. –** The following limitations shall
apply to the debt created by RSA 161-C:4.
                                             
 I. (a) An order of support, for which there is in effect an
assignment to the department of health and human services pursuant to
RSA 161-C:22, shall be suspended and shall not accrue, and no public
assistance debt shall be incurred, during such time as the responsible
parent receives benefits pursuant to Title XVI of the Social Security
Act under the supplemental security income program or public assistance
pursuant to RSA 167 under any of the following programs:
                                             
 (1) Aid to the permanently and totally disabled.
                                             
 (2) Aid to the needy blind.
                                             
 (3) Aid to families with dependent children.
                                             
 (4) Old age assistance.
                                             
 (b) A debt previously incurred under RSA 161-C:4 shall not be
collected from any responsible parent while that parent receives public
assistance through any of the programs listed in RSA 161-C:5, I(a).
                                             
 (c) The department shall not enforce any order of support against
the responsible parent while that parent receives public assistance
through any of the programs listed in RSA 161-C:5, I(a), whether or not
an assignment of support rights to the department exists.
                                             
 II. Upon entry of a legal order for support obligating a responsible
parent to pay child support for the benefit of his or her dependent
children for whom public assistance is paid, and for so long as such
legal order for support remains in effect, the responsible parent shall
not be responsible for additional public assistance payments.
                                             
 III. When a periodic support payment has been established under RSA
161-C:8 the debt shall be limited to the amount stated in the decision.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1985, 331:22. 1994, 188:2, 3. 1996, 297:3, eff.
June 10, 1996.

### Section 161-C:5-a

 **161-C:5-a Posting Security Bonds. –**
                                             
 I. Any responsible parent who has accumulated an arrearage, pursuant
to a legal order for support, in an amount equal to the support
obligation for one month, may be required, if deemed appropriate by the
commissioner or a member of the judiciary, to post a bond or security or
to give some other guarantee to secure payment of the unpaid child
support. When the posting of a bond is required by a member of the
judiciary, the responsible parent shall be given proper notice of the
proceeding.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of the department of health and human services,
shall provide prior notice to the responsible parent of the requirement
for posting a bond or other security. Such notice shall provide
information to the responsible parent regarding procedures by which the
responsible parent may contest the department's action.

**Source.** 1985, 331:9. 1995, 310:175, 182, 183. 1996, 297:4, eff. June
10, 1996.

### Section 161-C:6

 **161-C:6 Subrogation. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall be subrogated to the right of any dependent
child or children or person having the care, custody, and control of
such child or children to prosecute or maintain any support action or
execute any administrative remedy existing under the laws of this state
to obtain reimbursement of public assistance paid by the department,
including, but not limited to, all remedies provided by RSA 167. If a
legal order of support enters judgment for an amount of support to be
paid by a responsible parent, the department shall be subrogated to the
debt created by such order, and such money judgment shall be deemed to
be in favor of the department. This subrogation shall specifically be
applicable to temporary support and maintenance orders and alimony
orders up to the amount paid by the department in public assistance
moneys to or for the benefit of such children on the basis of providing
necessaries for the caretaker of such children. The department shall not
be required to seek an amendment to the legal order of support in order
to subrogate itself to the rights of the payee.
                                             
 II. Upon application for services by an obligee under the terms of
RSA 161-B:3, together with such fees, if any, as have been established
by the commissioner, the department is authorized to prosecute or
maintain any support action or execute any administrative remedy
existing under the laws of this state, including, but not limited to,
all remedies provided under this chapter.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1985, 331:10. 1995, 310:175, 183. 1996, 297:5.
2001, 222:2, eff. Sept. 9, 2001.

### Section 161-C:7

 **161-C:7 Notice of Support Debt When Court Order Exists. –**
                                             
 I. When the department is subrogated to a legal order of support
under RSA 161-C:6, the commissioner may issue to any responsible parent
a notice of debt accrued or accruing under RSA 161-C:4.
                                             
 II. The notice of debt shall include:
                                             
 (a) A statement of the debt accrued or accruing under RSA
161-C:4;
                                             
 (b) A statement of the terms of the order, including the names of
the dependent children;
                                             
 (c) A statement that any property of the debtor is subject to
lien and foreclosure, administrative seizure and disposition, order to
withhold and deliver, or other collection actions;
                                             
 (d) A demand for payment of the support debt within 20 days of
service of the notice of debt;
                                             
 (e) A statement that the net proceeds of any collection action
will be applied to the satisfaction of the support debt; and
                                             
 (f) A statement of the procedures available for contesting the
action.
                                             
 III. Actions to collect any debt accrued or accruing under RSA
161-C:4 may commence after 20 days from the date of service of the
notice of debt described in this section.
                                             
 IV. If the commissioner finds that the collection of any support
debt accrued or accruing under RSA 161-C:4 is in jeopardy, the
commissioner may make demand under paragraph II for immediate payment of
the support debt, and upon failure or refusal immediately to pay, the
commissioner may file and serve liens pursuant to RSA 161-C:10 and
orders to withhold and deliver pursuant to RSA 161-C:12. No action under
RSA 161-C:13 and 14 may be taken and no demand made under RSA 161-C:12,
VI until the notice requirements of paragraph II are met.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1985, 331:11. 1994, 398:4. 1995, 310:175, 183,
eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-C:8

 **161-C:8 Notice and Determination of Financial Responsibility Where
no Legal Order Exists. –**
                                             
 I. If no legal order of support exists the department may, by
service on the responsible parent of a notice of hearing and finding of
financial responsibility and by hearing and other procedures set forth
below, require a responsible parent to appear and show cause in a
hearing held by the commissioner why the finding of responsibility or
the amount thereof, or both, is incorrect, should not be finally ordered
or should be rescinded or modified. The commissioner after hearing shall
establish a periodic payment to satisfy the responsible parent's support
obligation under the laws of this state, establish the debt accrued or
accruing, or both, under RSA 161-C:4, and establish a periodic payment
to satisfy that debt.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall serve the notice of hearing and finding
of financial responsibility not less than 20 days before the date of the
hearing.
                                             
 III. The notice shall contain:
                                             
 (a) The amount the department has determined the responsible
parent owes;
                                             
 (b) A statement of the debt accrued or accruing, or both, under
RSA 161-C:4 and periodic support payments in the future, all computable
on the basis of the amount of the monthly public assistance payment
previously paid, or need alleged and the ability of the responsible
parent to pay all or any portion of the amount so paid or being paid or
to be paid, or any combination thereof;
                                             
 (c) A statement of the periodic public assistance, where
appropriate; and
                                             
 (d) A statement of the name of the recipient of public assistance
and the names of the dependent children.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1985, 331:12. 1995, 310:175, 183, eff. Nov. 1,
1995.

### Section 161-C:9

 **161-C:9 Hearings. –**
                                             
 I. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearings officer in
accordance with rules for fair hearings adopted by the commissioner
pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 II. Within 20 days of the hearing, the person conducting the hearing
shall enter a decision. The responsible parent shall be served with the
decision. The decision shall include a statement of responsibility of
the alleged responsible parent, and a statement of the periodic support
payment, the amount of debt accrued and the periodic payment against the
accrued debt.
                                             
 III. The person conducting the hearing shall consider when deciding
on the amount of periodic payment, at least the following criteria:
                                             
 (a) The needs of the child;
                                             
 (b) The income, real property and personal property of the
responsible parent;
                                             
 (c) The ability of the responsible parent to borrow;
                                             
 (d) The ability of the responsible parent to earn;
                                             
 (e) The amount of support debt accrued and accruing;
                                             
 (f) The need of the responsible parent;
                                             
 (g) The responsibility of the responsible parent for other
dependents;
                                             
 (h) The guidelines as established in RSA 458-C.
                                             
 IV. If the responsible parent fails to appear at the hearing on the
date specified by the notice of debt, the hearings officer shall enter a
decision pursuant to this section. Within 15 days of a decision pursuant
to this section the responsible parent may petition the department to
vacate the decision for cause shown.
                                             
 V. The decision of the department in the hearing shall establish the
debt of the responsible parent. The department may collect the debt
after service of the decision in the hearing without necessity of any
further action by the hearings officer.
                                             
 VI. A subsequent legal order of support shall supersede the decision
to the extent the legal order of support differs from the decision.
                                             
 VII. At any time after the entry of a decision either the
responsible parent or the commissioner may petition for a modification
of the decision based on a change of circumstances. In the event of any
such petition a hearing shall be held not less than 15 nor more than 30
days from the date of service of the petition, unless extended for good
cause shown. Prospective modification may be ordered, but only upon a
showing of good cause and material change of circumstances.
                                             
 VIII. All administrative support orders issued under this chapter
shall be filed with the clerk of the superior court in the county where
the obligor resides, and shall have the same force and effect as court
orders.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1979, 248:1. 1985, 331:23. 1989, 360:5, 6.
1995, 310:175, 183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

Collection of Support Debt
--------------------------

### Section 161-C:10

 **161-C:10 Assertion of Lien. –**
                                             
 I. Twenty-one days after service of notice of debt under RSA
161-C:7, or service of the decision under RSA 161-C:9, the amount stated
in the notice of debt or in the decision shall be a lien against all
property of the responsible parent and shall incorporate any unpaid
child support which may accrue in the future. This lien shall be
separate and apart from and in addition to any other lien created by or
provided for in this chapter.
                                             
 II. The lien shall attach to all real and personal property of the
responsible parent when the notice of debt or the decision is filed in
the county in which such property is located with the registry of deeds
and with the office appropriate for a notice with respect to personal
property and liens against earnings. The register of deeds or other
appropriate agency shall keep a suitable record of such notices without
charging any fee therefor and shall enter for the record an
acknowledgment of satisfaction upon written request from the
commissioner of the department of health and human services.
                                             
 III. Whenever the lien has been filed and there is in the possession
of any person having notice of the lien any property which may be
subject to the lien, such property shall not be paid over, released,
sold, transferred, encumbered or conveyed unless:
                                             
 (a) A release or waiver signed by the commissioner has been
delivered to the person in possession; or
                                             
 (b) A determination has been made in a hearing pursuant to RSA
161-C:9 or by a court ordering release of said support lien on the basis
that no debt exists or that the debt has been satisfied; or
                                             
 (c) Such property is transferred or paid over to or by a person
holding a prior lien on said property.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner may at any time after the filing of a support
lien serve a copy of said lien upon any person in possession of earnings
or deposits or balances held in any bank account of any nature which are
due, owing or belonging to the debtor.
                                             
 V. No lien created under this section shall have priority over any
prior recorded lien.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1985, 331:13. 1988, 234:1. 1995, 310:182, 183.
1997, 263:17, eff. Aug. 18, 1997.

### Section 161-C:11

 **161-C:11 Exemptions. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph II of this section, any property
otherwise exempt from trustee process, attachment and execution shall be
exempt from an order to withhold and deliver, administrative seizure and
disposition, and lien and foreclosure. Insurance settlement payments for
casualty loss to personal or real property and past or future medical
treatment shall be exempt from this section. Reasonable attorney fees
and expenses related to obtaining the insurance settlement or judgment
shall be exempt from this section pursuant to RSA 311:13.
                                             
 II. The following amounts shall be exempt from withholding and may
be disbursed to the responsible parent whether such earnings are paid or
to be paid weekly, monthly, or at other regular intervals and whether
there be due the parent earnings for one week or for a longer period:
                                             
 (a) If the responsible parent supports a second family, 50
percent of the parent's disposable earnings; provided, however, that if
the arrearage is more than 12 weeks old, 45 percent of the parent's
disposable earnings shall be exempt;
                                             
 (b) If the responsible parent does not support a second family,
40 percent of the parent's disposable earnings; provided, however, that
if the arrearage is more than 12 weeks old, 35 percent of the parent's
disposable earnings shall be exempt.
                                             
 III. Any lien or order to withhold and deliver served pursuant to
this chapter shall continue to operate and require any person so served
to withhold the nonexempt portion of earnings at each succeeding
earnings disbursement interval until the entire amount of the support
debt stated in the lien or order to withhold and deliver has been
withheld.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1985, 331:14. 2003, 280:2, eff. Sept. 16, 2003.

### Section 161-C:12

 **161-C:12 Order to Withhold and Deliver. –**
                                             
 I. An order to withhold and deliver property of any kind, including
but not restricted to earnings which are due, owing or belonging to a
responsible parent, may be served on any person when the commissioner
has reason to believe that there is in the possession of any such person
property which is due, owing or belonging to the debtor.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may serve an order to withhold and deliver when
a notice of debt has been served in accordance with RSA 161-C:7, or 21
days have elapsed from the date since a decision has been served under
RSA 161-C:9. Service under this section may be made by law enforcement
personnel or other agents authorized by the department.
                                             
 III. The order to withhold and deliver shall also be served on the
responsible parent.
                                             
 IV. The order to withhold and deliver shall state the amount of the
support debt accrued and accruing and the terms of RSA 161-C:11 and 19
and shall demand a listing of property, including wages, which is due or
belongs to the responsible parent.
                                             
 V. Any person served with an order to withhold and deliver shall
answer the order within 20 days of service of the order and shall make
true answers to the matters inquired of therein.
                                             
 VI. Any person served with an order to withhold and deliver shall
withhold immediately any property, including wages, due to or belonging
to the responsible parent. After 20 days from the date of service of
this order and upon demand of the commissioner, the property of the
responsible parent shall be delivered forthwith to the commissioner.
                                             
 VII. If the money is due under an express or implied contract or if
money is held subject to withdrawal by the responsible parent, the money
shall be delivered by check, payable to the department.
                                             
 VIII. Instead of the property of the responsible parent, the
commissioner may accept a bond conditioned upon final determination of
liability.
                                             
 IX. Delivery to the commissioner of the money or other property held
or claimed shall satisfy the requirement of the order to withhold and
deliver. Delivery to the commissioner shall serve as full acquittance
and the state warrants and represents that it shall defend and hold
harmless for such action persons withholding and/or delivering money or
property to the commissioner pursuant to this chapter from and against
any and all liability resulting from said delivery.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1985, 331:15. 1994, 398:5, 6. 1995, 310:175,
183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-C:13

 **161-C:13 Distraint, Seizure and Sale of Property Subject to Liens.
–**
                                             
 I. Whenever a support lien has been filed pursuant to RSA 161-C:10
the commissioner may collect the support debt stated in said lien by the
distraint, seizure and sale of the property subject to said lien. The
commissioner shall serve notice to the responsible parent and any person
known to have or claim an interest therein of the general description of
the property to be sold and the time and place of said property.
                                             
 II. A notice specifying the property to be sold shall be posted in
at least 2 public places in the county wherein the distraint has been
made. Except for good cause shown, the time of sale shall not be less
than 10 nor more than 20 days from the date of posting of such notices.
In no event shall a sale of property take place under this chapter until
20 days after the responsible parent has received notice of such
parent's rights to contest the proceeding. The sale shall be conducted
by the commissioner or designee who shall proceed to sell such property
by parcel or by lot at a public auction, and who may set a minimum
reasonable price to include the expenses of making a levy and of
advertising the sale. If the amount bid for such property at the sale is
not equal to the price so fixed, the commissioner may declare such
property to be purchased by the department for such price and pay off
all prior mortgages and liens or may conduct another sale of such
property pursuant to the provisions of this section. In the event of
sale, the responsible parent's account shall be credited with the amount
for which the property has been sold after paying off prior mortgages or
liens. In lieu of any such sale, the seized property may be distributed
in accordance with the rules for distribution established by the
department.
                                             
 III. Property acquired by the department as prescribed in this
section may be sold by the commissioner or designee at public or private
sale and the amount realized shall be placed in an appropriate state
fund to the credit of the department of health and human services. In
all cases of sale under this section, the commissioner shall issue a
bill of sale or a deed to the purchaser and such bill of sale or deed
shall be prima facie evidence of the right of the commissioner to make
such sale and conclusive evidence of the regularity of the
commissioner's proceeding in making the sale and shall transfer to the
purchaser all right, title and interest of the debtor in the property.
The proceeds of any such sale, except in those cases in which the
property has been acquired by the department, shall be first applied by
the commissioner to pay off prior mortgages or liens, then to
reimbursement of the costs of distraint and sale, and thereafter in
satisfaction of the delinquent account. Any excess which shall
thereafter remain in the hands of the commissioner shall be refunded to
the debtor.
                                             
 IV. Distraint, seizure, and sale under this section may be carried
out by law enforcement personnel and any other agents so authorized by
the department.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1983, 291:1, II. 1985, 331:16, 17. 1995,
310:175, 181, 183. 1996, 297:6, eff. June 10, 1996.

### Section 161-C:14

 **161-C:14 Foreclosure on Liens. –** Whenever a support lien has
been filed, an action in foreclosure of lien upon real or personal
property may be brought in the superior court of the county where real
or personal property is or was located and the lien was filed and
judgment shall be rendered against the obligor for the amount due, with
costs, and the court shall allow, as part of the costs, the moneys paid
for making and filing the claim of lien, and reasonable attorney fees,
and the court shall order any property upon which any lien provided for
by this chapter is established to be sold by the sheriff of the proper
county to satisfy the lien and costs. The payment of the lien, debt,
costs, and reasonable attorney fees, at any time before sale, shall
satisfy the judgment of foreclosure. Where the net proceeds of sale upon
application to the debt claimed do not satisfy the debt in full, the
plaintiff shall have judgment over for any deficiency remaining
unsatisfied and further levy and sales upon other property of the
judgment debtor may be made under the same execution. In all sales
contemplated under this section, advertising of notice shall only be
necessary for 2 weeks in a newspaper of daily circulation published in
the county where said property is located, and if there is no newspaper
in that county, then in the most convenient newspaper having a
circulation in such county. Remedies provided for in this section are
alternatives to remedies provided for in other sections of this chapter.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1985, 331:18, eff. Oct. 1, 1985.

### Section 161-C:15

 **161-C:15 Redemption. –** Any person owning real property, or any
interest in real property, against which a support lien has been filed
and foreclosure instituted, shall have the right to pay the amount due,
together with expenses of the proceedings and reasonable attorney fees
to the commissioner. Upon such payment the commissioner shall restore
the property or any interest in such property to such owner and all
further proceedings in the foreclosure action shall cease.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1995, 310:183. 1996, 297:7, eff. June 10, 1996.

### Section 161-C:16

 **161-C:16 Release of Excess to Debtor. –** If any person has,
subject to any order to withhold and deliver, earnings, deposits,
accounts or balances in excess of the amount of the debt claimed by the
department plus 
                                             $100, that person may, without liability under this
chapter, release the excess to the responsible parent.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-C:17

 **161-C:17 Release of Lien or Order to Withhold. –** The
commissioner may release a support lien or order to withhold and deliver
on all or part of the property of the responsible parent or return
seized property without liability, if the commissioner deems adequate an
assurance of payment or if the collection of the debt will be
facilitated. The release or return shall not operate to prevent further
action to collect from same or other property.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-C:18

 **161-C:18 Adjustment of Debt Payment. –** The commissioner may at
any time consistent with the income, earning capacity and resources of
the debtor, set or reset a level and schedule of payments to be paid
upon the debt.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-C:19

 **161-C:19 Failure to Comply With Order or Lien. –** Any person who
fails to answer within the time prescribed or fails to deliver property
pursuant to an order to withhold and deliver or after actual notice of
filing of a support lien fails to pay over, release, sell, transfer, or
convey real or personal property subject to a support lien to or for the
benefit of the responsible parent or any other person; or fails to
surrender property under RSA 161-C:13, or fails to honor an assignment
of wages presented by the commissioner, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-C:20

 **161-C:20 Employee Protected. –** No employer may discharge an
employee because any support lien or order to withhold and deliver has
been served against the employee's earnings.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1, eff. July 1, 1977.

### Section 161-C:21

 **161-C:21 Assignment of Earnings. –**
                                             
 I. Any person employing a person owing a support debt shall honor a
duly executed assignment of earnings presented by the commissioner. This
requirement to honor the assignment of earnings itself shall be
applicable whether the earnings are to be paid presently or in the
future and shall continue in force until released in writing by the
commissioner. Payment pursuant to an assignment of earnings presented by
the commissioner shall serve as full acquittance under any contract of
employment, and the state warrants that it shall defend and hold
harmless any person who honors the assignment of earnings for claims
arising from the action taken in honoring the assignment. The
commissioner shall not be liable for improper receipt of monies under an
assignment of earnings upon return of any monies so received.
                                             
 II. No employee shall be discharged by reason of any presentation of
an assignment of earnings.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-C:22

 **161-C:22 Assignment of Right of Support Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. The receipt of public assistance for a child shall constitute an
assignment by the recipient to the department of any and all rights,
title, and interest in and to support obligation owed to or for the
recipient or, the child or children, or both the recipient and any child
or children, up to the amount of public assistance money paid for or on
behalf of such child or such children which accrues during the period
that the public assistance is provided. Such assignment includes only
those arrearages which accrue during the period that the public
assistance is provided to the family.
                                             
 II. The recipient shall also be deemed, without the necessity of
signing any document, to have appointed the commissioner as his or her
attorney in fact to perform the specific act of endorsing over to the
department for the support of any dependent child, any and all drafts,
checks, money orders or other negotiable instruments.
                                             
 III. When an assignment of support rights has terminated and the
obligor and the recipient reunite, the obligor may request a suspension
of the collection of a support debt under RSA 161-C:4 and the office of
child support enforcement services shall not take any action to collect
such a debt for so long as the family remains reunited, provided that
the adjusted gross income of the family, as defined by RSA 458-C, is
equal to or less than 185 percent of the federal poverty guidelines as
set by the United States Department of Health and Human Services. If
collection of a support debt under RSA 161-C:4 is suspended, the obligor
shall provide the office of child support enforcement services with a
financial affidavit every 6 months evidencing the income of the reunited
family and shall notify the office of child support enforcement services
in writing within 10 days of any change in income or if the family is no
longer reunited. Failure to report changes in income or in the status of
the family as reunited, or to provide a financial affidavit as specified
herein, shall cause the suspension of collection to terminate until such
time as the required information is submitted and provided that such
information meets the criteria for obtaining a suspension of collection.
When a support obligation is established under RSA 161-C:4, the office
of child support enforcement services shall notify an obligor of the
right to request a suspension of the collection of a support debt.
                                             
 IV. Any person who has assigned support rights shall be entitled to
advance notice from the office of child support enforcement services of
any proceeding for the establishment, modification, or enforcement of
support and the opportunity to participate in any administrative
proceeding for the establishment, modification, or enforcement of
support.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1989, 360:7. 1994, 244:1. 1995, 310:175, 183.
2009, 80:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2009.

### Section 161-C:23

 **161-C:23 Interest. –** Interest at the rate specified in RSA 336:1
on any support debt due and owing to the department under RSA 161-C:4
may be collected by the commissioner. No provision of this chapter shall
be construed to require the commissioner to maintain interest balance
due accounts, and said interest may be waived by the commissioner, if
said waiver would facilitate the collection of the debt.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1988, 234:2. 1995, 310:175, 183, eff. Nov. 1,
1995.

Proceeds
--------

### Section 161-C:24

 **161-C:24 Distribution of Proceeds. –**
                                             
 I. Any money realized by the department by proceedings under this
chapter shall reduce the debt of a responsible parent under RSA
161-C:4.
                                             
 II. Any money realized by the department by proceedings under this
chapter shall be distributed in accordance with the rules for
distribution established by the department.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1985, 331:19. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-C:25

 **161-C:25 Unidentified Funds. –** All fees, costs, attorney fees,
interest payments and funds received by the commissioner, unidentifiable
as to the support account against which they should be credited, shall
be held in an administrative expense account from which the commissioner
may make disbursement for any expenses incurred in the administration of
this chapter.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-C:26

 **161-C:26 Charging Off Uncollected Funds. –** Any support debt due
the department from a responsible parent which the commissioner deems
uncollectible may be transferred from accounts receivable to a suspense
account and cease to be accounted as an asset; provided, that at any
time after 6 years from the date a support debt was incurred, the
commissioner may charge off as uncollectible any support debt upon which
the commissioner finds there is no available, practical, or lawful means
by which said debt may be collected; provided further that no
proceedings or action under the provisions of this chapter may be begun
after expiration of said 6-year period to institute collection of a
support debt. Nothing herein shall be construed to render invalid or
nonactionable a support lien filed prior to the expiration of said
6-year period or an assignment of earnings or order to withhold and
deliver executed prior to the expiration of said 6-year period.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1995, 310:175, 183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-C:26-a

 **161-C:26-a Reporting to Credit Agencies. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 359-C or any other law to
the contrary, any obligor who owes child support arrearages payable to
or through the department shall be deemed to have authorized disclosure
of such obligor's financial records to consumer reporting agencies by
the department.
                                             
 I-a. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 359-C or any other law to
the contrary, the department shall report to a consumer reporting agency
or agencies any obligor who accumulates an arrearage in an amount
greater than the legal order of support owed for 60 days payable to or
through the department, unless:
                                             
 (a) A legal order of support is being adhered to by the obligor;
                                             
 (b) The obligor's wages are assigned pursuant to RSA 458-B and
the wage assignment, pursuant to a court order or pursuant to RSA
458-B:4, addresses arrearages;
                                             
 (c) The department determines that reporting would cause the
obligor hardship in obtaining employment;
                                             
 (d) A motion to modify is pending which could reduce the
arrearage to an amount less than the legal order of support owed for 60
days; or
                                             
 (e) The department determines that there is good cause not to
report the obligor.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, any obligor who
owes child support arrearage payable to or through the department shall
be deemed to have authorized disclosure of such obligor's financial
records to the department of health and human services by consumer
reporting agencies.
                                             
 III. The department shall give prior notice to the obligor that such
financial disclosure is authorized and of the procedures through which
the obligor may contest such financial disclosure. If the obligor
contests the financial disclosure pursuant to this section, the
department shall provide written findings prior to reporting such
obligor.
                                             
 IV. The department and any consumer reporting agency which discloses
financial records under this section shall not be subject to civil
liability or criminal prosecution which is based upon its disclosure
under this section.

**Source.** 1985, 331:20. 1992, 119:2, 3. 1995, 310:175, 181. 1996,
297:8, 9, eff. June 10, 1996.

### Section 161-C:26-b

 **161-C:26-b Denial of Passports. –**
                                             
 I. The department is authorized to certify to the United States
Secretary of Health and Human Services, pursuant to section 652(k) of
the Social Security Act, that an obligor owes child support arrearages
in the amount specified by the federal law and is out of compliance with
a legal order of support.
                                             
 II. The obligor shall be given prior notice of the determination and
of the consequences and an opportunity to contest the determination.

**Source.** 1997, 263:18. 2007, 34:1, eff. July 13, 2007.

### Section 161-C:26-c

 **161-C:26-c Hiring Reports. –** The department shall be authorized
to receive from the state directory of new hires maintained by the
department of employment security pursuant to RSA 282-A:117-a, I,
reports made by an employing unit of the hire, rehire, or contracting of
services of any named individual whom the department seeks to locate for
purposes of establishing paternity and establishing, modifying, and
enforcing child support obligations.

**Source.** 1997, 263:18, eff. Aug. 18, 1997.

### Section 161-C:27

 **161-C:27 Judicial Review. –** Any person who is aggrieved by any
action of the commissioner relative to the administrative process under
this chapter may appeal to the superior court within 30 days of the
receipt of the decision of a hearings officer. Such appeal shall be
restricted to a review of the record. Upon review of the record, the
court in its discretion may request the submission of additional
evidence and order a hearing on the additional evidence.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1985, 331:21. 1989, 360:8. 1995, 310:183, eff.
Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-C:28

 **161-C:28 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner is hereby authorized,
subject to RSA 541-A, to adopt such rules not inconsistent with this
chapter as may be necessary to the efficient administration of the
functions with which the commissioner is charged under this chapter.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1. 1983, 242:4. 1995, 310:183. 1996, 297:10, eff.
June 10, 1996.

### Section 161-C:29

 **161-C:29 Separability of Provisions. –** If any provision of this
chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is
held invalid the remainder of the chapter, and the application of such
provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected
thereby.

**Source.** 1977, 589:1, eff. July 1, 1977.
