---
title: 'CHAPTER 161-I PERSONAL CARE SERVICES'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 161-I
                                             
PERSONAL CARE SERVICES
----------------------

### Section 161-I:1

 **161-I:1 Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. Many individuals require assistance with eating, bathing,
dressing, personal hygiene, and activities of daily living to maintain
their independence and dignity. Personal care services are non-medical,
hands-on supports that substitute for the loss of an individual's
physical or cognitive functioning.
                                             
 II. Many individuals requiring personal care services and families
who have children with special health care needs want to choose who
delivers personal care services and how and when these services are
delivered.
                                             
 III. This chapter provides individuals and families with the option
of receiving personal care services, including consumer-directed
services, from a home health agency or other qualified agency.

**Source.** 2000, 255:1, eff. June 12, 2000.

### Section 161-I:2

 **161-I:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 II. "Consumer-directed services'' means personal care services under
which the eligible consumer or his or her representative is responsible
for:
                                             
 (a) Participating in the development of the eligible consumer's
service plan;
                                             
 (b) Selecting the eligible consumer's personal care services
provider;
                                             
 (c) Setting the terms and conditions of work;
                                             
 (d) Training, supervising, and evaluating the personal care
services provider; and
                                             
 (e) Terminating his or her relationship with the personal care
services provider.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 IV. "Eligible consumer'' means a child with special health care
needs eligible for in-home supports or a person eligible for the home
and community-based care waiver for the elderly and chronically ill.
                                             
 V. "Eligible setting'' means a home, apartment, residential
facility, day program, or other community setting, but does not include
a hospital, nursing facility, or other institutional setting.
                                             
 VI. "Home health agency'' means a home health care provider licensed
under RSA 151.
                                             
 VII. "Intermediary services'' means an array of fiscal and
supportive services to facilitate the delivery of consumer-directed
services. Such services shall include:
                                             
 (a) Fiscal intermediary services, including but not limited to:
                                             
 (1) Computing of tax withholdings.
                                             
 (2) Filing and depositing employment taxes.
                                             
 (3) Preparing and disbursing payroll checks.
                                             
 (4) Collecting and verifying worker timesheets.
                                             
 (5) Processing and paying non-labor related invoices.
                                             
 (6) Processing criminal background checks on prospective
workers.
                                             
 (7) Overseeing the verification of workers' citizenship/legal
alien status.
                                             
 (8) Generating standardized reports depending on program
design.
                                             
 (b) Supportive services, including but not limited to:
                                             
 (1) Skills and advocacy training for the eligible consumer or
representative.
                                             
 (2) Assistance with recruiting, screening, hiring, and
training personal care services providers.
                                             
 (3) Creating and maintaining work registries.
                                             
 (4) Assessing and reassessing service needs.
                                             
 (5) Counseling and support.
                                             
 (6) Monitoring consumer satisfaction.
                                             
 VIII. "Legally responsible relative'' means a parent of a minor
child or a spouse.
                                             
 IX. "Other qualified agency'' means those entities authorized to
offer personal care services and/or intermediary services by the
department in accordance with rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 X. "Plan of care'' means a state-authorized guide to the provision
of services to an eligible consumer.
                                             
 XI. "Personal care services'' means services furnished by a personal
care services provider that assist an eligible consumer in maintaining
himself or herself in an eligible setting. Such services may include,
but are not limited to, basic personal care and grooming, assistance
with basic toileting and toileting hygiene measures, assistance with
oral and topical medications, assistance with nutrition, including meal
preparation, and essential household services.
                                             
 XII. "Personal care services provider'' means a person who:
                                             
 (a) Is selected by:
                                             
 (1) The eligible consumer;
                                             
 (2) The eligible consumer's legal guardian;
                                             
 (3) The eligible consumer's representative; or
                                             
 (4) A person granted power of attorney by the eligible
consumer; and
                                             
 (b) Is employed by a home health agency or other qualified agency
to provide personal care services; and
                                             
 (c) Is not:
                                             
 (1) The eligible consumer's legally responsible relative,
except as authorized pursuant to RSA 161-I:3-a;
                                             
 (2) The eligible consumer's legal guardian;
                                             
 (3) The eligible consumer's representative; or
                                             
 (4) A person granted power of attorney by the eligible
consumer.
                                             
 XIII. "Representative'' means a person:
                                             
 (a) Chosen by:
                                             
 (1) The eligible consumer;
                                             
 (2) The eligible consumer's legal guardian; or
                                             
 (3) A person granted power of attorney by the eligible
consumer; and
                                             
 (b) Deemed appropriate by the department to act on behalf of the
eligible consumer; and
                                             
 (c) Who:
                                             
 (1) Is not the personal care services provider; and
                                             
 (2) Does not have a financial relationship with a home health
agency or other qualified agency providing intermediary services to the
eligible consumer.

**Source.** 2000, 255:1. 2006, 132:1, eff. July 18, 2006.

### Section 161-I:3

 **161-I:3 Consumer Choice. –** An eligible consumer in need of
personal care services shall have the option to receive personal care
services, including consumer-directed services, through a home health
agency or other qualified agency. An individual not eligible for
department programs shall have the option to receive personal care
services, including consumer-directed services, through a provider of
personal care certified under RSA 161-I, home health care provider,
other qualified provider, or other facility licensed under RSA 151, or
through a private arrangement between individuals. Such choice shall be
subject to those limitations imposed by federal and state laws, rules,
and regulations.

**Source.** 2000, 255:1. 2003, 319:158, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 161-I:3-a

 **161-I:3-a Authorization of Legally Responsible Relative. –** The
department may authorize reimbursement to a parent who provides personal
care to a minor child with special health care needs residing at home.
Such reimbursement shall occur only when the department determines that
the needs of the child, the unavailability of appropriate providers or
suitable alternative care services, and cost efficiencies make
utilization of a parent for the provision of such services necessary and
appropriate. Reimbursement shall be limited to care that is medically
necessary due to specific health needs and shall not be made for care
generally expected and provided by parents to a child of similar age and
developmental stage. The department shall not authorize reimbursement to
a parent until a plan and rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A, are
reviewed and approved by the oversight committee on health and human
services, established in RSA 126-A:13.

**Source.** 2006, 132:2, eff. July 18, 2006.

### Section 161-I:4

 **161-I:4 Department Responsibilities. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall develop personal care services for
department programs that authorize personal care services. Eligible
consumers shall be afforded the option to receive their personal care
services through a home health agency or other qualified agency and/or a
consumer-directed services program.
                                             
 II. The department shall develop a process for allowing a
representative to act on the behalf of an eligible consumer.
                                             
 III. The department shall develop intermediary services for eligible
consumers using consumer-directed services.
                                             
 IV. Coverage of personal care services under department programs
shall be subject to the availability of appropriated funds.
                                             
 V. Nothing in this section shall be construed to change the personal
care program for the severely disabled as set forth in RSA 161-E.
                                             
 VI. Beginning September 2000, the department shall provide a
quarterly report to the governor, the president of the senate, and the
speaker of the house of representatives relative to the number of
clients served and expenditures under the home and community-based care
waiver for the elderly and chronically ill, and beginning in December
2000 an annual report on such qualitative measures on the care delivered
as the department deems appropriate.

**Source.** 2000, 255:1, eff. June 12, 2000.

### Section 161-I:5

 **161-I:5 Personal Care Services Provider Training. –** Any personal
care services provider serving an eligible consumer shall be required to
undergo training as required by rule, pursuant to RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 2000, 255:1, eff. June 12, 2000.

### Section 161-I:6

 **161-I:6 Plans of Care and Service Delivery Oversight. –** All
eligible consumers shall have a plan of care that details the provision
of personal care services. The delivery of personal care services, as
outlined in the plan of care, to an eligible consumer shall be monitored
by a case manager either employed or contracted by the department.
Should the delivery of personal care services to an eligible consumer
necessitate specialized oversight, this shall be outlined in the plan of
care and such oversight of the personal care services provider shall be
arranged by the case manager.

**Source.** 2000, 255:1, eff. June 12, 2000.

### Section 161-I:6-a

 **161-I:6-a Criminal Record Check Required. –**
                                             
 I. Every applicant selected for employment with an other qualified
agency, as defined in RSA 161-I:2, IX, shall submit to the employer a
notarized criminal conviction record release authorization form, as
provided by the division of state police, which authorizes the release
of his or her criminal conviction record to the facility pursuant to RSA
106-B:14; provided, that the scope of employment includes the provision
of services in a client's home or otherwise involves direct contact with
a client.
                                             
 II. The other qualified agency shall submit the notarized criminal
conviction record release authorization form to the division of state
police after an applicant accepts a conditional offer of employment. The
other qualified agency shall review the results of the criminal
conviction record check before making a final offer of employment. An
employee shall not begin work before the final offer of employment is
made.
                                             
 III. (a) Upon receipt of a notarized criminal conviction record
release authorization form from an other qualified agency, the division
of state police shall conduct a criminal conviction record check
pursuant to RSA 106-B:14 and provide the results to the other qualified
agency. The other qualified agency shall maintain the confidentiality of
all criminal conviction records received pursuant to this section.
                                             
 (b) The cost of criminal conviction record checks for such
applicants shall be borne by the other qualified agency provided that
the other qualified agency may require an applicant to pay the actual
costs of the criminal conviction record check.
                                             
 IV. (a) The provisions of this section shall apply to any agency
providing temporary or per diem staff to an other qualified agency. The
agency shall not offer the services of any person until the agency has
reviewed the criminal history of the employee.
                                             
 (b) The cost of criminal history record checks for such temporary
or per diem staff shall be borne by the agency providing temporary or
per diem staff to an other qualified agency, provided that the agency
providing per diem staffing may require the selected applicant for
employment to pay the actual costs of the criminal conviction record
check.
                                             
 V. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person who
is licensed by the board of nursing pursuant to RSA 326-B.

**Source.** 2003, 185:2, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 161-I:7

 **161-I:7 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Criteria for approving home health or other qualified agencies to
offer personal care services, including but not limited to:
                                             
 (a) Qualifications and training of providers.
                                             
 (b) Oversight of providers.
                                             
 (c) Service definition.
                                             
 (d) Reporting requirements.
                                             
 (e) Record-keeping.
                                             
 (f) Personnel requirements.
                                             
 (g) Care planning.
                                             
 (h) Service delivery oversight.
                                             
 (i) Scope of service.
                                             
 (j) Quality assurance measures.
                                             
 (k) Structure of the business entity.
                                             
 II. The provision of personal care services by personal care
services providers, including the provision of consumer-directed
personal care services.
                                             
 III. The provision of intermediary services by a home health agency
or other qualified agency to facilitate the delivery of
consumer-directed personal care services.
                                             
 IV. The use of a representative in consumer-directed services.
                                             
 V. Guidelines for state-authorized plans of care.
                                             
 VI. Criteria for the authorization of reimbursement of a parent for
the provision of personal care services pursuant to RSA 161-I:3-a.

**Source.** 2000, 255:1. 2006, 132:3, eff. July 18, 2006.

Commission to Study the Shortage of Nurses and Other Skilled Health Care Workers for Home Health Care Services and Post-Acute Care Services
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 161-I:8


                                             


                                             [RSA 161-I:8 repealed by 2016, 252:2, effective November 1, 2016.
                                             ]

 **161-I:8 Commission to Study the Shortage of Nurses and Other
Skilled Health Care Workers for Home Health Care Services and Post-Acute
Care Services Established; Membership; Duties. –**
                                             
 I. (a) There is established a commission to study the shortage of
nurses and other skilled health care workers for home health care
services and post-acute care services. The members of the commission
shall be as follows:
                                             
 (1) One member of the senate, appointed by the president of
the senate.
                                             
 (2) Three members of the house of representatives, appointed
by the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (3) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (4) The commissioner of the department of insurance, or
designee.
                                             
 (5) The administrator of special medical services, department
of health and human services, or designee.
                                             
 (6) The director of the division of higher education,
department of education, or designee.
                                             
 (7) A representative of the New Hampshire Nurses Association,
appointed by the association.
                                             
 (8) A pediatrician who provides treatment to medically fragile
children, appointed by the New Hampshire Pediatric Society.
                                             
 (9) An individual with experience in palliative care,
appointed by the Foundation for Healthy Communities.
                                             
 (10) A representative of a New Hampshire health agency,
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (11) Two parents of children with disabilities who utilize
pediatric home health care services, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (12) A representative of the New Hampshire workforce
development entity, appointed by the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 (13) Two department deans or chairs of nursing programs from
New Hampshire universities or colleges, appointed by the chancellor of
the university system of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (14) The department dean or chair of the nursing program from
New Hampshire Technical Institute.
                                             
 (15) The executive director, or designee, from the Home Care
Association of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (16) An adult who utilizes home health services and/or private
duty nursing, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (17) A representative of the New Hampshire Health Care
Association, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (18) A representative of the New Hampshire Association of
Counties, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (19) A representative of the Granite State Home Health
Association, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (20) A representative of the Community Support Network, Inc.,
appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (21) A representative of the state advisory committee on the
education of children/students with disabilities, department of
education, appointed by the committee.
                                             
 (b) Legislative members of the commission shall receive mileage
at the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the commission.
                                             
 II. (a) The commission's study shall include, but not be limited
to:
                                             
 (1) Finding solutions to the shortage of nurses and other
skilled health care workers for home health care services and post-acute
care services, including a comprehensive examination and review of the
overall delivery system for home health care services throughout the
state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (2) Developing an effective strategy for workforce
development, recruitment, and retention of nurses and other skilled home
health care workers.
                                             
 (3) Identifying workforce demands to keep pace with New
Hampshire's integrated health care delivery based on population trends
and projected utilization of home health care services.
                                             
 (4) Training and professional development for specific
intensive medical needs, palliative care, coverage in schools, and
coverage by not only registered nurses and licensed practical nurses,
but also licensed nursing assistants and other skilled health care
workers.
                                             
 (b) The commission may solicit information from any person or
entity the commission deems relevant to its study.
                                             
 III. The members of the commission shall elect a chairperson from
among the members. The first meeting of the commission shall be called
by the senate member. The first meeting of the commission shall be held
within 45 days of the effective date of this section. Thirteen members
of the commission shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 IV. The commission shall report its findings and any recommendations
for proposed legislation to the president of the senate, the speaker of
the house of representatives, the senate clerk, the house clerk, the
governor, and the state library on or before November 1, 2016.

**Source.** 2016, 252:1, eff. June 10, 2016.
