---
title: 'CHAPTER 161-F ELDERLY AND ADULT SERVICES'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 161-F
                                             
ELDERLY AND ADULT SERVICES
--------------------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 161-F:1

 **161-F:1 Definitions. –** Unless the context indicates otherwise,
in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Adult'' means any person 18 years of age or older.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means commissioner of health and human
services.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 V. "Elderly'' means a person 60 years of age or older.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:112, 170, VII, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-F:2

 **161-F:2 Department of Health and Human Services. –** The
department of health and human services established under RSA 126-A:4
shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:12, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-F:3

 **161-F:3 Powers and Duties. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 310:16, eff. Nov.
1, 1995.
                                             ]

### Section 161-F:4

 **161-F:4 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of health and human
services may adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to social
services for the elderly and adult populations under this chapter.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:113, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

Older Americans Act
-------------------

### Section 161-F:5

 **161-F:5 Federal Funds. –** The department shall be the single
state agency responsible to administer in New Hampshire the Older
Americans Act of 1965 and subsequent legislation pursuant to that act
and to receive all federal funds under Title III of said act. The
department is also authorized to receive federal funds other than from
the Administration on Aging to administer that act. The state treasurer
shall receive and place in an account all federal funds paid to the
state under that act, subject to requisition or disbursement by the
department as a single state agency. The department is authorized to
receive and expend federal funds made available to it.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-F:6

 **161-F:6 Administration of State Plan. –** The department shall be
the sole and final agency designated as the single state agency for
administering or supervising the administration of the New Hampshire
state plan for implementing the Older Americans Act of 1965, including
final decisions as to disposition of Title III project grant funds. The
department shall have authority to submit or revise the New Hampshire
state plan and shall be the sole state agency responsible for
administering the program described in the state plan and shall collect
and publish supporting statistics by county on the functional needs of
and the services available to the New Hampshire elderly.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

State Committee on Aging
------------------------

### Section 161-F:7

 **161-F:7 Committee Established; Organization; Meetings; Expenses.
–**
                                             
 I. There shall be a state committee on aging which shall consist of
18 members. The governor shall appoint 15 members with the approval of
the executive council. Those appointed by the governor shall include at
least one member from each county. The committee shall also include a
legislator appointed by the chair of the oversight committee on health
and human services, one representative appointed by the speaker of the
house, and one senator appointed by the president of the senate. Each of
the members shall serve for a term of 3 years except the legislative
members' terms shall be co-terminous with their 2-year legislative
terms. At least 8 members shall be 60 years of age or older at the time
of their appointment. A majority of the current members shall constitute
a quorum. No member shall serve more than 2 consecutive terms, and no
member shall have a material financial interest in any agency receiving
federal or other funds administered by the bureau of elderly and adult
services.
                                             
 II. The governor shall name one member of the committee to act as
chairman. The term of office as chairman shall be for 2 years. The
chairman shall call the first meeting of the committee. The committee
shall elect a vice-chairman and a clerk.
                                             
 III. The committee shall meet no less than once in each 3-month
period.
                                             
 IV. All members of the committee shall be reimbursed for actual
expenses, including any necessary in-state travel connected with
committee business at the mileage rate established for state employees,
within the limits of the appropriation made therefor.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1990, 193:3. 2000, 93:1. 2010, 268:4. 2011, 51:1,
eff. July 8, 2011.

### Section 161-F:8

 **161-F:8 Duties. –** The committee shall assist and advise the
commissioner in making a continuing assessment of problems relating to
older adults and shall advocate solutions to provide better integration
of older persons into the social and economic life of the state. The
committee shall solicit the cooperation and help of the various groups
concerned with the problems facing older adults and shall obtain from
such groups their views, experience, assistance, and recommendations in
the preparation and direction of future planning and administrative and
legislative action as the committee may from time to time deem necessary
and advisable. All governmental agencies within the state shall
cooperate with the committee in making available such information,
suggestions, and statistics to enable the committee to perform its
functions.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:183. 2011, 51:2, eff. July 8, 2011.

### Section 161-F:9

 **161-F:9 Establishment and Support of Programs by a Municipality.
–** Any city, county, or town may establish programs for the aged, and
such programs may be administered by appropriate existing offices or
departments, or new offices or departments, of such governmental units.
A city, county, or town may raise and appropriate funds for the
administration of these programs. Any city, county, or town, with the
advice of the state committee on aging, may raise the appropriate funds
to assist or fund, in whole or in part, nonprofit corporations or
agencies in administering programs for the aged.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

Office of the Long-Term Care Ombudsman
--------------------------------------

### Section 161-F:10

 **161-F:10 Office Established. –** There is hereby established the
office of the long-term care ombudsman to be administratively attached
to the department of health and human services under RSA 21-G:10 or
administered through contract with an independent non-profit agency
under the oversight of the department of health and human services. The
office shall be responsible for receiving, identifying, investigating,
and resolving complaints or problems made by, or on behalf of, elderly
residents of facilities that relate to the health, safety, welfare, and
rights of residents. The office shall investigate the administrative
acts and omissions of any facility or government agency, as defined in
RSA 161-F:11, V and VI and shall represent the interests of residents in
the development and implementation of public policy, rules, and laws
affecting residents of long-term care facilities.

**Source.** 2004, 110:2, eff. July 16, 2004.

### Section 161-F:11

 **161-F:11 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Act'' means any action of any individual, facility, or
government agency including any failure or refusal to act by such
individual, facility, or government agency.
                                             
 II. "Administrator'' means any person who is charged with the
general administration or supervision of a facility whether or not such
person has an ownership interest and whether or not such person's
functions and duties are shared with one or more other persons.
                                             
 III. "Complaint'' means a problem, concern, issue, or situation
identified or received by the office that is made by, or on behalf of,
residents that may adversely affect the health, safety, welfare and
rights of residents, including the appointment and activities of legal
representatives, providers of long-term care services, public agencies,
and health and social services agencies.
                                             
 IV. "Elderly'' means any person 60 years of age or older.
                                             
 V. "Facility'' means any residential facility or institution,
whether public or private, offering health or health related services,
personal care assistance or protective oversight for the elderly, and
which is subject to regulation, visitation, inspection, or supervision
by any government agency. Facilities include, but are not limited to,
nursing homes, skilled nursing homes, extended care facilities,
convalescent homes, homes for the aged, veterans' homes, assisted living
facilities, and any other residential care facility providing care for
the elderly licensed or certified under RSA 151.
                                             
 VI. "Government agency'' means any department, division, office,
bureau, board, commission, authority, or any other agency or
instrumentality created by any county or municipality or by the state,
or to which the state is a party, which is responsible for the
regulation, inspection, visitation, or supervision of facilities or
which provides services to residents of facilities.
                                             
 VII. "Legal representative'' means any individual, duly appointed or
designated in the manner required by law to act on behalf of another
individual, including:
                                             
 (a) An attorney.
                                             
 (b) A guardian or conservator.
                                             
 (c) An agent acting pursuant to a power of attorney.
                                             
 VIII. "Long-term care ombudsman'' means the person who is the
administrator and chief executive officer of the office.
                                             
 IX. "Long-term care ombudsman representative'' means any employee or
volunteer who is designated by the long-term care ombudsman to
represent, or act on behalf of, the office.
                                             
 X. "Non-elderly'' means any person under 60 years of age.
                                             
 XI. "Office'' means the office of the long-term care ombudsman,
established by RSA 161-F:10.
                                             
 XII. "Resident'' means any person 60 years of age or older who
resides in a facility as defined in RSA 161-F:11, V.

**Source.** 2004, 110:2, eff. July 16, 2004.

### Section 161-F:12

 **161-F:12 Long-Term Care Ombudsman. –** The commissioner, in
consultation with the attorney general, shall designate a person as the
administrator and chief executive officer of the office who shall be
called the long-term care ombudsman and who shall be a person with
expertise and experience in the field of long-term care advocacy. The
long-term care ombudsman shall designate such other qualified persons
needed to perform the functions of this office. The long-term care
ombudsman shall devote his or her entire time to the duties of the
position. The long-term care ombudsman shall receive such salary as
shall be provided in a classified position as determined by the division
of personnel, unless administered on a contract basis.

**Source.** 2004, 110:2, eff. July 16, 2004.

### Section 161-F:13

 **161-F:13 Powers and Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The long-term care ombudsman shall:
                                             
 (a) Investigate any act, omission, practice, policy or procedure
of any individual, facility, or government agency that may adversely
affect the health, safety, welfare, or civil or human rights of:
                                             
 (1) Any elderly resident of a facility; or
                                             
 (2) Any non-elderly resident of a facility where such
investigation shall:
                                             
 (A) Benefit elderly residents of that facility or
facilities generally; and
                                             
 (B) Not significantly diminish the long-term care
ombudsman's ability to investigate complaints regarding elderly
residents of facilities.
                                             
 (b) Represent the interests of residents before governmental
agencies and seek administrative, legal, and other remedies to protect
the health, safety, welfare, and rights of residents.
                                             
 (c) Establish an advisory committee, which shall include
residents and their legal representatives, older persons, providers of
services, representatives of government agencies and representatives of
community organizations serving older people, which shall meet quarterly
in order to provide consultation to the long-term care ombudsman in
planning and operating this subdivision.
                                             
 (d) Provide information as appropriate to facilities, other
agencies, and the public regarding the problems and concerns of
residents of facilities.
                                             
 (e) Inform residents, family members, and others acting on behalf
of residents how to access the assistance and services of the office and
the services and assistance of other providers or agencies, including
legal services.
                                             
 (f) Ensure regular and timely access to and response from the
office.
                                             
 (g) Comment on, facilitate public comment on, and recommend
changes to existing or proposed laws, rules, regulations and other
governmental policies and actions that affect the health, safety,
welfare, and rights of residents.
                                             
 (h) Provide technical support for the development of resident and
family councils to protect the well-being and rights of residents.
                                             
 (i) Provide for education and training of the long-term care
ombudsman office staff and volunteers.
                                             
 (j) Educate facilities, agencies, and staff members concerning
the rights and welfare of residents.
                                             
 (k) Promote and support development of citizen organizations to
participate in the ombudsman program.
                                             
 II. The files maintained by the office shall be confidential and
shall not be disclosed unless such disclosure is authorized by law or
required by court order. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to
prohibit the disclosure of information gathered in any investigation to
any interested party as may be necessary to resolve the complaint.
                                             
 III. The long-term care ombudsman shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA
541-A, to ensure the efficient conduct of the business, duties, and
general administration of the office and to assure compliance with the
requirements of the Older Americans Act, as set forth in 42 U.S.C.
3058f-3058g.

**Source.** 2004, 110:2, eff. July 16, 2004.

### Section 161-F:14

 **161-F:14 Access to Facilities, Residents, and Records. –**
                                             
 I. In the course of an investigation, the representative of the
office shall:
                                             
 (a) Make the necessary inquiries and obtain such information as
he or she deems necessary.
                                             
 (b) Enter and inspect the premises of a facility or government
agency and inspect there any books, files, medical records, or other
records that pertain to residents, subject to RSA 161-F:14, II.
                                             
 (c) Conduct private interviews with residents, staff members, and
others deemed appropriate to the investigation and who consent to such
interviews.
                                             
 II. The representative of the office shall first seek to obtain the
written permission of the resident or the resident's legal
representative to inspect any books, files, medical records, or other
records which pertain to the resident. If the representative of the
office cannot obtain such permission because a resident is unable to
provide such permission and has no legal representative or the
investigation pertains to the acts or omissions of the legal
representative, the long-term care ombudsman representative shall, upon
written determination of the long-term care ombudsman that such
circumstances exist, inspect any books, files, medical records, or other
records which pertain to that resident. The written determination shall
be provided to the person in charge of the facility. The representative
of the office shall maintain the confidentiality of all books, files,
medical records, or other records inspected under the provisions of this
paragraph except as they may pertain to the resolution of the ongoing
investigation.
                                             
 III. In an investigation, the representatives of the office shall
have the authority to apply to the superior court for an order
authorizing entry when an administrator of a facility refuses such
representative entry as provided in subparagraph I(b) or paragraph II.
                                             
 IV. Authorized representatives of the office with proper
identification shall have access to residents of a facility to:
                                             
 (a) Visit, talk with, and make personal, social, and other
appropriate services available.
                                             
 (b) Inform them of their rights and entitlements and
corresponding obligations under federal and state law by distribution of
educational materials, discussion in groups, or discussion with
individual residents.
                                             
 (c) Engage in other methods of assisting, advising, and
representing residents or clients to extend to them the full enjoyment
of their rights.

**Source.** 2004, 110:2, eff. July 16, 2004.

### Section 161-F:15

 **161-F:15 Retaliation Prohibited; Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. No discriminatory, disciplinary, or retaliatory action shall be
taken against any officer or employee of a facility or government agency
by such facility or government agency; nor against any resident of a
facility; nor against any legal representative or family member of any
resident; nor against any volunteer for any communication by such
volunteer with the office or for any information given or disclosed by
him or her in good faith to aid the office in carrying out its duties
and responsibilities.
                                             
 II. No person shall interfere with the long-term care ombudsman or
with representatives of the office in the performance of their official
duties.
                                             
 III. Any person who knowingly or willfully violates the provisions
of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2004, 110:2, eff. July 16, 2004.

### Section 161-F:16

 **161-F:16 Cooperation Required. –** The office may request from any
government agency, and such agency is hereby authorized and directed to
provide, such cooperation and assistance, services, and data as will
enable the office to properly perform or exercise any of its functions,
duties, and powers under RSA 161-F:10 through 161-F:18.

**Source.** 2004, 110:2, eff. July 16, 2004.

### Section 161-F:17

 **161-F:17 Review; Reports Required. –**
                                             
 I. The long-term care ombudsman shall establish and maintain a
statewide reporting system to collect and analyze data relating to
complaints and conditions in facilities for the purpose of identifying
and resolving individual and systemic complaints, problems and issues
and for the purpose of developing reports as required pursuant to this
section.
                                             
 II. The office shall file a report of the activities of the
ombudsman program and the ombudsman activities concerning complaints and
conditions in facilities and the protection of the rights of residents
of the facilities with the commissioner of health and human services,
the governor, the general court, and the public within 120 days
following the end of each federal fiscal year.

**Source.** 2004, 110:2, eff. July 16, 2004.

### Section 161-F:18

 **161-F:18 Immunity From Liability. –** Any person, institution, or
official who in good faith participates in the reporting of a complaint,
or who in good faith investigates that complaint, participates in an
investigation, or provides access or information to those persons
carrying out the investigation or who participates in a judicial
proceeding resulting from that complaint, shall be immune from any civil
or criminal liability that might otherwise result by reason of these
actions. For the purpose of any civil or criminal proceedings, there
will be a rebuttable presumption that any person acting pursuant to this
subdivision did so in good faith.

**Source.** 2004, 110:2, eff. July 16, 2004.

### Section 161-F:19

 **161-F:19 Litigation Prohibited. –** The long-term care ombudsman
and all representatives of the office are prohibited from serving as
legal representatives of any person before state or federal courts in
any action that is related in any manner to the ongoing duties or
responsibilities of the office.

**Source.** 2004, 110:2, eff. July 16, 2004.

Golden Granite State Discount Card
----------------------------------

### Section 161-F:20-29

 **161-F:20 to 161-F:29 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 190:19, eff.
July 1, 1995.
                                             ]

Companion Animals
-----------------

### Section 161-F:30

 **161-F:30 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Animals'' means common domesticated household animals limited
to: dogs, cats, caged birds, and aquarium fish.
                                             
 II. "Housing for the elderly'' means public housing facilities
financed by either the state or federal government to provide living
accommodations for persons 60 years of age or older but shall not
include nursing homes or high-rise apartment buildings.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:31

 **161-F:31 Authority. –** Any housing for the elderly shall permit
the tenants of each housing project upon petition of 10 percent of all
the tenants to determine by a simple majority vote of those voting
whether or not to allow the tenants in their building to have companion
animals, provided that a 6-month period elapses between votes and that a
subsequent vote shall not affect animals already on the premises which
were permitted by a previous vote. If the vote permits tenants to
maintain companion animals on the premises, the tenants shall adopt,
with input from building management, rules relative to reasonable
limitations and restrictions to be imposed for maintaining a companion
animal that is not covered by RSA 161-F:33. Any complaints regarding a
tenant's companion animal shall be handled in the same manner as any
other tenant complaint and pursuant to the provisions of RSA 466:31.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:32

 **161-F:32 Damage Deposit. –** If companion animals are permitted,
tenants desiring to have them as pets shall post, with the management of
the building, a damage deposit which shall be a sum of money not to
exceed 1 1/2 times the amount of a month's rent paid by the tenant.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:33

 **161-F:33 Owner's Responsibility. –** The tenant owner of a
companion animal shall have the following responsibilities:
                                             
 I. (a) To provide the management with a signed agreement with some
person, or other legal entity, other than another tenant, that such
person or legal entity shall act as a temporary or permanent caretaker
for the companion animal if the owner cannot care for it, whether
temporarily or permanently.
                                             
 (b) The signed agreement shall also permit management to
implement the agreement referred to in subparagraph (a), if the animal
is not cared for properly or is abused in any manner.
                                             
 II. To provide the management with a veterinarian certificate
stating that the animal is in good health and, if the animal is a cat or
a dog, that it has been neutered or spayed, as applicable.
                                             
 III. To be totally responsible for the care and cleanliness of the
companion animal whether within the owner's building, on the building
grounds, or on adjacent property.
                                             
 IV. To be limited to no more than one companion animal per
apartment, with the exception of birds and aquarium fish.
                                             
 V. To abide by any local ordinances that may affect the custody of
certain companion animals.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

Congregate Services
-------------------

### Section 161-F:34

 **161-F:34 Title. –** This subdivision shall be known and may be
cited as the "Congregate Services Act.''

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:35

 **161-F:35 Purpose. –** The purpose of this subdivision is to
provide support for congregate services in order to serve those who
might otherwise be placed unnecessarily in institutional care.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:36

 **161-F:36 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Congregate housing'' means low-rent, publicly-owned housing with
which there is connected a central dining facility where wholesome and
economical meals can be served.
                                             
 II. "Congregate services programs'' means the programs undertaken by
qualified service providers to provide assistance, as needed, to
residents in order to maintain their independence. Such programs shall
include the following services:
                                             
 (a) Two nutritionally balanced meals, 7 days per week, served in
a central dining facility.
                                             
 (b) Regular assistance with housekeeping.
                                             
 (c) Personal assistance.
                                             
 (d) Transportation to scheduled doctors' appointments.
                                             
 (e) Administrative support services, supplied by a qualified
service provider.
                                             
 III. "Personal assistance'' means services provided which include,
but are not limited to, aid in grooming, dressing, and other activities
which maintain personal care and hygiene.
                                             
 IV. "Qualified service provider'' means a publicly owned housing
system that possesses the skills and experience necessary to supervise
and monitor resident services and to perform appropriate financial
management practices in a congregate services program.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:37

 **161-F:37 Administration; Services. –**
                                             
 I. The congregate services program shall be administered through the
department. The congregate services shall be provided through a
qualified service provider under contract with the department. The
experience acquired through each congregate services program shall be
shared with other congregate services programs established anywhere in
the state.
                                             
 II. Congregate services shall be provided on a full-time basis.
Eligible recipients shall contribute financially toward the services.
Eligibility and cost for these services shall be determined by rules
adopted by the commissioner under RSA 161-F:38.
                                             
 III. Administrative costs of the department shall not exceed 8
percent of the total state appropriation for congregate services
programs.
                                             
 IV. The department or qualified service provider shall be eligible
to receive private or public grants. Private or public grants shall be
in addition to funding appropriated by the state.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:175, 183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-F:38

 **161-F:38 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules under
RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 I. Eligibility for congregate services, based on financial,
psychological, and physical ability. For this purpose, the department
shall use, as appropriate, the federal guidelines for congregate housing
services programs.
                                             
 II. Costs to residents for services. These fees shall be reasonable,
may not exceed the cost of providing the service, and shall be
calculated on a sliding scale related to income, which permits the
provision of services to such residents who cannot afford meal and
service fees.
                                             
 III. Eligibility for national affordable housing act funding and
services. Such eligibility shall be based on federal and state
guidelines.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1992, 248:1. 1995, 310:175, 183, eff. Nov. 1,
1995.

### Section 161-F:39

 **161-F:39 Review. –** On or before December 1 of each year, the
commissioner shall submit a report on the program with recommendations
for improvement to the legislature. The qualified services provider
shall keep accurate and detailed records of activities involved in the
development and implementing of the congregate services programs.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

Senior Volunteer Grant Program
------------------------------

### Section 161-F:40

 **161-F:40 Establishment of Program. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a senior volunteer grant program in
the department. The program shall, within the limits of funds
appropriated, reimburse the senior companion and foster grandparents
programs for the volunteers' stipends, benefits, travel, and
administrative expenses incurred in providing volunteer services.
                                             
 II. The funds so appropriated shall be disbursed by the department
in quarterly payments. The funds shall be allocated to senior companion
and foster grandparents programs.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-F:41

 **161-F:41 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to procedures for reimbursement under
this subdivision.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

Protective Services to Adults
-----------------------------

### Section 161-F:42

 **161-F:42 Purpose. –** The purpose of this subdivision is to
provide protection for vulnerable adults who are abused, neglected, or
exploited. Implicit in this subdivision is the philosophy that whenever
possible an adult's right to self-determination should be preserved, and
that each adult should live in safe conditions and should live his own
life without interruption from state government. Only when these
principles become impossible to follow should legal proceedings be
initiated in order to care for and protect such adults.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990. 2016, 59:11, eff. July 4,
2016.

### Section 161-F:43

 **161-F:43 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Protective services'' means services and action which will,
through voluntary agreement or through appropriate court action, prevent
neglect, abuse or exploitation of vulnerable adults. Such services shall
include, but not be limited to, supervision, guidance, counseling and,
when necessary, assistance in the securing of nonhazardous living
accommodations, and mental and physical examinations.
                                             
 II. "Abuse'' means any one of the following:
                                             
 (a) "Emotional abuse'' means the misuse of power, authority, or
both, verbal harassment, or unreasonable confinement which results or
could result in the mental anguish or emotional distress of a vulnerable
adult.
                                             
 (b) "Physical abuse'' means the use of physical force which
results or could result in physical injury to a vulnerable adult.
                                             
 (c) "Sexual abuse'' means contact or interaction of a sexual
nature involving a vulnerable adult without his or her informed
consent.
                                             
 III. "Neglect'' means an act or omission which results or could
result in the deprivation of essential services or supports necessary to
maintain the minimum mental, emotional or physical health and safety of
a vulnerable adult.
                                             
 IV. "Exploitation'' means the illegal use of a vulnerable adult's
person or property for another person's profit or advantage, or the
breach of a fiduciary relationship through the use of a person or a
person's property for any purpose not in the proper and lawful execution
of a trust, including, but not limited to, situations where a person
obtains money, property, or services from a vulnerable adult through the
use of undue influence, harassment, duress, deception, or fraud.
                                             
 V. "Serious bodily injury'' means any harm to the body which causes
or could cause severe, permanent or protracted loss of or impairment to
the health or of the function of any part of the body.
                                             
 VI. "Self-neglect'' means an act or omission by a vulnerable adult
which results or could result in the deprivation of essential services
or supports necessary to maintain his or her minimum mental, emotional
or physical health and safety.
                                             
 VII. "'' "Vulnerable'' means that the physical, mental, or emotional
ability of a person is such that he or she is unable to manage personal,
home, or financial affairs in his or her own best interest, or he or she
is unable to act or unable to delegate responsibility to a responsible
caretaker or caregiver.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 2002, 36:2, eff. July 1, 2002. 2016, 59:1, eff.
July 4, 2016.

### Section 161-F:44

 **161-F:44 Self-Neglect. –** For the purposes of this subdivision,
instances of suspected self-neglect shall be construed and acted upon in
the same manner as instances of suspected neglect.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:45

 **161-F:45 Exception. –** Nothing in this subdivision shall be
construed to mean a person is abused, neglected, exploited, or in need
of protective services for the sole reason that he relies on or is being
furnished treatment by spiritual means alone through prayer in
accordance with the tenets and practices of a church or religious
denomination of which he is a member or adherent.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:46

 **161-F:46 Reports of Adult Abuse; Investigations. –** Any person,
including, but not limited to, physicians, other health care
professionals, social workers, clergy, and law enforcement officials,
suspecting or believing in good faith that any adult who is or who is
suspected to be vulnerable has been subjected to abuse, neglect,
self-neglect, or exploitation or is living in hazardous conditions shall
report or cause a report to be made as follows:
                                             
 I. An oral report, by telephone or otherwise, shall be made
immediately, followed by a written report, if so requested, to the
commissioner or his authorized representative. When oral reports are
made after working hours of the department, or on weekends or holidays,
such reports shall be made to the police department of the appropriate
political subdivision, or to the sheriff of the county, in which the
alleged abuse, neglect or exploitation occurred. Law enforcement
officials receiving reports under this paragraph shall notify the
commissioner within 72 hours of receipt of such reports.
                                             
 II. Within 72 hours following receipt by the commissioner or his
authorized representative of such oral reports, an investigation shall
be initiated by the commissioner or his authorized representative.
                                             
 III. Investigations shall not be made if the commissioner or his
authorized representative determines that the report is frivolous or
without a factual basis.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:175, 183. 2002, 36:3, eff. July 1,
2002. 2016, 59:2, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 161-F:47

 **161-F:47 Immunity From Liability. –** Any person or agency, other
than an alleged perpetrator, participating in good faith in the making
of a report of an alleged incident of adult abuse, neglect or
exploitation, providing information relative to such incident or
following a reporting protocol developed jointly with the department, or
who in good faith investigates the report, administers the registry, or
who participates in a judicial or administrative proceeding resulting
from that report, shall have immunity from any liability, civil or
criminal, that might otherwise be incurred or imposed. Any person or
agency providing information in good faith, including materials
requested by the department pursuant to RSA 161-F:56, shall have the
same immunity with respect to participation in any investigation by the
commissioner or his authorized representative or in any judicial
proceeding resulting from such report.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:183. 2002, 36:4. 2006, 289:1, eff. July
1, 2007.

### Section 161-F:48

 **161-F:48 Abrogation of Privileged Communication. –** The
privileged quality of communication between husband and wife and any
professional person and his patient or client, except that between
attorney and client, shall not apply to any proceedings instituted
pursuant to this subdivision and shall not constitute grounds for
failure to report as required by this subdivision.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:49

 **161-F:49 Registry. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be established a state registry at the department for
the purpose of maintaining a record of information on each founded
report of abuse, neglect, or exploitation toward an individual by a paid
or volunteer caregiver, guardian, or agent acting under the authority of
a power of attorney or any durable power of attorney. The registry shall
be confidential and subject to rules on access established by the
commissioner of the department under RSA 541-A. Unfounded reports shall
not be maintained on the registry. The department shall maintain
statistical, non-identifying information on founded reports as the
department determines is necessary to track and address trends. For the
purposes of this section:
                                             
 (a) "Individual'' means an individual, 18 years of age or older,
who is a vulnerable adult, as defined under RSA 161-F:43, VII.
                                             
 (b) "Investigator'' means a person designated or employed by the
department, in accordance with a protocol developed by the department to
ensure objectivity, thoroughness, timeliness, and uniformity in
methodology and format in the conduct of investigations and
investigation reports. An investigator may include an investigator
employed by an area agency or a community mental health center, if
designated by the department.
                                             
 (c) "Perpetrator'' means a person who, following a protective
investigation completed in accordance with RSA 161-F:42 through RSA
161-F:57, is found to have abused, neglected, or exploited a vulnerable
adult.
                                             
 (d) "Volunteer'' means a person who provides voluntary services
through any agency, program, or facility.
                                             
 II. Within 5 business days of completion of an investigation of
abuse, neglect, or exploitation of an individual by a paid or volunteer
caregiver, guardian, or agent acting under the authority of a power of
attorney or any durable power of attorney, the investigator shall
provide a summary of the investigation to the commissioner, or designee.
Except as provided in paragraph IV, for a founded report, the
commissioner, or designee, shall, within 5 business days, notify the
perpetrator:
                                             
 (a) Of the founded report against him or her and that such
information shall be entered on the registry and the consequences of
such a finding.
                                             
 (b) Of the right to contest the finding by appealing within 10
business days.
                                             
 (c) Of the right to receive a full and fair administrative
hearing, including the right to be represented by counsel at his or her
own expense.
                                             
 (d) Of the right to appeal an adverse administrative hearing
decision to the probate court in accordance with paragraph V.
                                             
 (e) That he or she may petition the probate court to expunge the
report from the registry pursuant to RSA 161-F:49, X.
                                             
 III. In response to a written request from an employer identified in
paragraph VII, the commissioner, or designee, shall notify the
employer:
                                             
 (a) Relative to a prospective or current employee, consultant,
contractor, or volunteer who is not on the registry of that fact within
5 business days of receipt of a request from the employer.
                                             
 (b) Relative to a prospective or current employee, consultant,
contractor, or volunteer who is on the registry of that fact within 5
business days of receipt of the request from the employer, and the
department shall include in the notice the date the person was placed on
the registry.
                                             
 IV. A founded report of abuse, neglect, or exploitation, and other
information the commissioner deems appropriate, shall be entered on the
registry upon:
                                             
 (a) Expiration of the 10-business-day period for appeal when the
perpetrator does not request an appeal.
                                             
 (b) An administrative hearing officer sustaining the finding,
unless an appeal is filed in accordance with paragraph V and an order of
stay is issued by the probate court.
                                             
 V. If the finding is sustained after an administrative hearing, a
perpetrator shall have the right to appeal as follows:
                                             
 (a) A perpetrator may file a petition in the Merrimack county
probate court to review the final order by the commissioner, or
designee, within 30 days of the date of the final order. Jurisdiction to
hear such appeals is vested in the Merrimack county probate court.
                                             
 (b) At the earliest practical time, the court shall review the
record as developed before the commissioner, or designee, together with
any written legal argument presented to the court. Based on that review,
the court may affirm or reverse the decision of the commissioner, or
designee, or order that oral argument be held. As justice may require,
the court may remand the case to the commissioner, or designee, for
further findings or rulings. The petition for appeal shall set forth all
the grounds upon which the final order is sought to be overturned.
Issues not raised by the appellant before the commissioner, or designee,
shall not be raised before the probate court. The burden of proof shall
be upon the appellant to show that the decision of the commissioner, or
designee, was clearly unreasonable or unlawful, and all findings of the
commissioner, or designee, upon all questions of fact properly before
him or her shall be deemed to be prima facie lawful and reasonable. The
order or decision appealed from shall not be vacated except for errors
of law, unless the court is satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the
evidence, that the order is unjust or unreasonable.
                                             
 (c) No new or additional evidence shall be introduced in the
probate court. The case shall be determined upon the record and evidence
transferred, except that in any case, if it shall be necessary in order
that no party shall be deprived of any constitutional right, or if the
court determines that justice requires the reception of evidence of
facts which have occurred since the hearing, or which by reason of
accident, mistake, or misfortune could not have been offered before the
commissioner, or designee, it shall remand the case to the commissioner,
or designee, to receive and consider such additional evidence.
                                             
 VI. If it is determined by the commissioner, or designee, or after a
hearing requested pursuant to subparagraph II(c) that a founded report
was caused by factors beyond the control of the perpetrator, then the
finding shall not be entered onto the registry as founded.
                                             
 VII. All employers of programs which are licensed, certified, or
funded by the department to provide services to individuals shall be
required before hiring a prospective employee, consultant, contractor,
or volunteer who may have contact with individuals to submit his or her
name, for review against the registry to determine whether the person is
on the registry. The employer shall not hire the prospective employee,
consultant, contractor, or volunteer if he or she is listed on the
registry unless the employer requests and obtains a waiver from the
department to hire such person. The employer, upon receiving notice that
a prospective employee, consultant, contractor, or volunteer is on the
registry and in order to determine whether to request a waiver from the
department, may request permission from the prospective employee,
consultant, contractor, or volunteer for the authority to obtain further
information about a founded report of abuse, neglect, or exploitation.
An employer may, with the consent of a current employee, consultant,
contractor, or volunteer, submit his or her name for review against the
registry. All employers, upon learning that the name of a current
employee, consultant, contractor, or volunteer of their agency is on the
registry shall take immediate action to ensure the safety of the
individuals in their care. Such action may include, but is not limited
to, termination, training, re-assignment, probationary employment,
and/or the provision of direct supervision of the employee, consultant,
contractor, or volunteer when working with individuals.
                                             
 VIII. Any person hiring or employing a paid or volunteer caregiver,
consultant, or contractor directly, or through an authorized
representative or fiscal intermediary, to provide personal care
services, as defined in RSA 161-E or RSA 161-I, may, with the consent of
the current or prospective caregiver, consultant, contractor, or
volunteer, submit his or her name for review against the registry and,
if he or she is on the registry, and with the further permission of the
current or prospective caregiver, consultant, contractor, or volunteer,
obtain information about any founded report. Any person considering
designating another to serve as his or her agent under a power of
attorney or any type of durable power of attorney may, with the consent
of the proposed agent, submit the proposed agent's name for review
against the registry. The person shall not be required in such
situations to obtain a waiver prior to hiring a person on the registry.
                                             
 VIII-a. It shall be unlawful for any employer other than those
specified under this section to require as a condition of employment
that the employee submit his or her name for review against the registry
of founded reports of abuse, neglect, or exploitation and any violation
of this provision shall be punishable as a violation.
                                             
 IX. Founded reports of abuse, neglect, or exploitation shall be
retained on the registry for a period of 7 years subject to the
perpetrator's right to petition for the earlier removal of the report
from the registry as provided in this section.
                                             
 X. Any perpetrator whose name is listed in the founded reports
maintained on the state registry may petition the probate court to have
a founded report expunged from the registry as follows:
                                             
 (a) A petition to expunge shall be filed in the probate court
where the petitioner resides or where the abuse, neglect, or
exploitation occurred.
                                             
 (b) A petition to expunge shall be filed on forms provided by the
probate courts. The petition shall include certified copies of the
petitioner's criminal record and may include any other information the
petitioner deems relevant.
                                             
 (c) When a petition to expunge is filed, the probate court shall
require the department to report to the court concerning any additional
founded abuse, neglect, or exploitation reports relative to the
petitioner and shall require that the petitioner submit the petitioner's
name, birth date, and address to the state police to obtain information
about criminal convictions. The court may require the department to
provide any additional information that the court believes may aid it in
making a determination on the petition.
                                             
 (d) Upon the receipt of the department's report, the court may
act on the petition without further hearing or may schedule the matter
for hearing at the request of either party. If the court determines that
the petitioner does not pose a present threat to the safety of
individuals and has exhibited best efforts to eliminate the likelihood
of reoccurrence of the type of behavior that resulted in his or her
entry onto the registry, the court shall grant the petition and order
the department to remove the founded report from the registry.
Otherwise, the petition shall be denied.
                                             
 XI. The department shall, in the notice it sends out pursuant to RSA
161-F:49, II(a), notify the perpetrator of his or her right to petition
to have his or her founded report expunged from the registry. No
petition to expunge a founded report shall be brought within one year
from the date that the report was initially entered on the registry. If
the petition to expunge is denied, no further petition shall be brought
more frequently than every 3 years thereafter.
                                             
 XII. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 (a) Setting forth the process and criteria for requesting and
granting a waiver pursuant to RSA 161-F:49, VII.
                                             
 (b) Safeguarding the confidentiality of and access to the
registry except for the functions necessary to comply with this section.
Such safeguards shall include limitations on which persons in an
employment situation may request and access the founded reports on the
registry.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:175, 183. 2006, 289:2. 2009, 179:1,
eff. July 13, 2009. 2016, 59:3, 4, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 161-F:50

 **161-F:50 Penalty for Violation. –** Any person who knowingly fails
to make any report required by RSA 161-F:46 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:51

 **161-F:51 Duties and Responsibilities. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner or his or her authorized representative, upon
the substantiation of a report of abuse, neglect, or exploitation of a
vulnerable adult, shall provide, when necessary, protective services to
such adults.
                                             
 II. The commissioner or his or her authorized representative shall
refer all cases of serious bodily injury to a vulnerable adult known or
suspected to be the result of abuse, neglect, or exploitation to local
law enforcement, the department of justice or to the county attorney for
possible criminal prosecution. The commissioner or his or her authorized
representative shall also report other cases of abuse, neglect, or
exploitation to local law enforcement, the department of justice, or the
office of the county attorney for possible criminal prosecution if there
is reason to believe a crime has been committed.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:175, 183. 2002, 36:5, eff. July 1,
2002. 2016, 59:5, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 161-F:52

 **161-F:52 Guardianship. –** If all other remedies are exhausted,
the commissioner or his authorized representative may seek to have a
guardian or conservator appointed by the probate court, pursuant to RSA
464-A, for any adult who is in need of protective services.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-F:53

 **161-F:53 Entry of Premises. –** If either a vulnerable adult
reported or suspected of being abused, neglected, or exploited refuses,
or a caretaker or caregiver refuses, to allow the representative of the
department entrance to the premises for the purpose of investigating a
report of abuse, neglect, or exploitation, the probate court, in the
county where the adult is found, upon a finding of probable cause, may
order an authorized representative of the commissioner, a police
officer, or other authorized individual to enter said premises in
furtherance of such investigation.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:175, 183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995. 2016,
59:6, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 161-F:54

 **161-F:54 Court Ordered Examination. –** The probate court, at any
time, may order a proposed ward to submit to a medical or psychiatric
examination to be completed within 30 days by a licensed psychologist,
licensed psychiatrist or physician, or local community mental health
center. A written report of such examination shall be forwarded to the
court and shall contain, but not be limited to, the proposed ward's
disease or disability, if any, the proposed ward's present mental
status, and the prognosis. If the proposed ward objects to the
evaluation, the probate court having jurisdiction shall be notified in
writing within 5 days after notification of the time and place of such
evaluation, and the court shall hold a hearing to consider the objection
prior to ordering such evaluation or, upon good cause shown, may excuse
the proposed ward from the provisions of this section.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1998, 234:4, eff. Oct. 31, 1998.

### Section 161-F:55

 **161-F:55 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt such rules
under RSA 541-A as are necessary to carry out the purpose of this
subdivision, including, but not limited to, rules relative to access to
records under RSA 161-F:49.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-F:56

 **161-F:56 Access to Information. –** In the course of an
investigation conducted pursuant to this subdivision, the department's
authorized representative may make any inquiries and obtain such
information as is necessary to further such investigation. The
department's authorized representative may review and photocopy any
books, files, medical records, financial records, photographs or other
records on any medium of an alleged victim of abuse, neglect, or
exploitation. In the event any person or agency refuses to allow the
department access to materials necessary to further its investigation,
the probate court, upon a finding of probable cause, may order the
person or agency to release its records to the department.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:114. 2002, 36:6, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 161-F:57

 **161-F:57 Access to Files; Confidentiality. –** The files
maintained by the department which relate to investigations of alleged
instances of abuse, neglect, or exploitation shall be disclosed only
with the written consent of the victim, or his guardian or attorney, or
if such disclosure is required by court or administrative order. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to prohibit the disclosure of
information gathered pursuant to an investigation to a service provider
as may be necessary to devise or implement a service plan, to a facility
and the appropriate licensing authority or authorities for an incident
occurring within a facility, as defined in RSA 151, to the extent
necessary to protect the victim or other facility residents or to comply
with state or federal law, to local law enforcement, the department of
justice, or a county attorney, pursuant to RSA 161-F:51, II, or to any
court in any proceeding where the welfare of the alleged victim or
actions of a fiduciary acting on behalf of an alleged victim are at
issue.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:175. 2002, 36:7, eff. July 1, 2002.

Homemaker Services
------------------

### Section 161-F:58

 **161-F:58 Title. –** This subdivision shall be known and may be
cited as the "Homemaker Services Act.''

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:59

 **161-F:59 Purpose. –** The purpose of this subdivision is to
support homemaker programs to serve those who need such care and who
otherwise might be placed in inappropriate institutional care and to
provide training in the home to allow individuals and families to remain
in their homes and to become as self-sufficient as their capabilities
permit.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:60

 **161-F:60 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Homemaker'' means a carefully trained, supervised person who
works as a member of a team composed of professional and allied workers
providing health and social services.
                                             
 II. "Provider agency'' means:
                                             
 (a) Homemaker service agency;
                                             
 (b) Homemaker program of a family or child welfare service;
                                             
 (c) An organization serving the aged;
                                             
 (d) A visiting nurse association; or
                                             
 (e) Any similar profit or nonprofit organization.
                                             
 III. "Qualified'' means that the provider of the service has been
monitored and evaluated as meeting the basic standards set by the
department.
                                             
 IV. "Supervision'' means the initial assessment and reassessment of
individual or family needs to determine the appropriate kinds of service
and the direction given to the homemaker by a nurse, social worker, or
other member of the professional team responsible for determining and
carrying out the plan of care.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-F:61

 **161-F:61 Homemaker; Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The trained homemaker, working for a provider agency, shall carry
out assigned tasks in the family's or individual's residence. The
assignments shall be carried out under supervision of a professional,
who shall assess the need for the service and implement the plan of
care.
                                             
 II. Duties of the homemaker shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
                                             
 (a) Respite family relief.
                                             
 (b) Special diet planning and meal preparation.
                                             
 (c) Limited assistance with personal care needs.
                                             
 (d) Budgeting.
                                             
 (e) Home management.
                                             
 (f) Light housekeeping, laundry, shopping, and errands.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:62

 **161-F:62 Administration; Services. –**
                                             
 I. The homemaker services shall be administered through the
department and shall be coordinated with any existing homemaker
services. The services shall be provided through the purchase of
qualified service and, to the extent feasible, shall be coordinated
through local agencies. To be certified by the department, any agency,
whether public or private, nonprofit or profit, shall meet the basic
standards for licensure under RSA 151.
                                             
 II. Benefits provided to an individual or family may include full or
part-time care and services. Normally, the services will be on a
part-time basis. Persons who are eligible under rules adopted by the
commissioner may receive the benefits of the services.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:175, 183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-F:63

 **161-F:63 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules, under
RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Eligibility for services.
                                             
 II. Cost and payment of services.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:183. 2012, 171:26, VII, eff. Aug. 10,
2012.

### Section 161-F:64

 **161-F:64 Review. –** On or before December 1 of each year, the
commissioner shall submit a report on the program with recommendations
for improvements to the legislature.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders
-----------------------------------------

### Section 161-F:65

 **161-F:65 Statement of Purpose. –** The general court finds that
Alzheimer's disease and related disorders (ADRD) affect an alarmingly
high percentage of citizens and that ADRD creates a great strain on the
families of victims of the disease. In enacting this subdivision, it is
the intent of the general court to address these concerns and to promote
public awareness of ADRD.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:66

 **161-F:66 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "ADRD'', Alzheimer's disease and related disorders, means a
condition which receives a differential diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease
or a similar irreversible dementia.
                                             
 II. "Eligible person'' means any adult who is unable to attend to
his daily needs without the assistance or regular supervision of a
primary caregiver due to ADRD.
                                             
 III. "Primary caregiver'' means the family member or other natural
person who normally provides the home care and supervision of a victim
of ADRD.
                                             
 IV. "Respite care service'' means care provided on an intermittent
basis to the eligible person to relieve the primary caregiver from the
demands of home care for a limited period of time.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:67

 **161-F:67 Respite Care Service Established. –** The commissioner
shall establish and administer a statewide respite care service for the
purpose of providing respite care for eligible persons by trained
respite care providers. The service shall be purchased through
contracts, and to the extent feasible shall be coordinated through local
agencies.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-F:68

 **161-F:68 Guidelines; Fees Established by Rules. –** Respite care
service may be on a planned or emergency basis either in the home of the
eligible person, in an out-of-home respite care setting, or in a
licensed nursing home. The commissioner shall adopt rules pursuant to
RSA 541-A, relative to appropriate fees for respite care services.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1991, 128:1. 1995, 310:115, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-F:69

 **161-F:69 Training. –** The commissioner shall establish
comprehensive training programs for persons providing services to
eligible persons.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-F:70

 **161-F:70 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Training programs as required under RSA 161-F:69.
                                             
 II. Eligibility requirements for respite care service.
                                             
 III. Appropriate fees for respite care services.
                                             
 IV. Cost and method of payment for services.
                                             
 V. What constitutes appropriate respite care service.
                                             
 VI. What constitutes an appropriate respite care setting.
                                             
 VII. The administration of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1991, 128:2, 3. 1995, 310:116, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

Adult In-Home Care
------------------

### Section 161-F:71

 **161-F:71 Title. –** This subdivision shall be known and may be
cited as the "Adult In-Home Care Act.''

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:72

 **161-F:72 Purpose. –** The purpose of this subdivision is to
provide adult in-home care services to persons in need of such care, who
otherwise might be inappropriately placed in an institutional care
setting.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 161-F:73

 **161-F:73 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Adult in-home care'' means caring by a person who is neither a
professional nor a paraprofessional for an elderly or vulnerable adult's
needs for food, activity, home care, and personal care for a portion of
the 24-hour day in the adult's independent living situation. Such
services are limited to those the department finds are appropriate and
are determined by the provider agency to be within the expertise and
abilities of the caregiver and may include, but not be limited to,
assistance in the following: walking, dressing, bathing, eating, meal
preparation, shopping, light housekeeping, sewing, laundry and other
errands.
                                             
 II. "Adult in-home care provider'' means any organization, business
entity, or subdivision of such organization or entity, whether public or
private, whether operated for profit or not, which is engaged in
arranging or providing, directly or through contract arrangement, adult
in-home care services. An adult in-home care provider may also be an
individual, 18 years of age or older who, in the judgment of the
department, is reliable and able to meet the needs of the individual
being cared for.
                                             
 III. "Supervision'' means the initial assessment and reassessment by
the provider of the person requiring the in-home care to determine the
necessary and appropriate services. Supervision also includes the
directions given by nurses, social workers, or other professionals to
the person providing the actual care.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995. 2016, 59:11,
eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 161-F:74

 **161-F:74 Administration; Services. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall administer this subdivision and shall
coordinate adult in-home care services with existing home care
resources. The department shall provide the services on behalf of
eligible adults from adult in-home care providers. To the extent
possible, the purchase of services shall be coordinated through local
agencies.
                                             
 II. Services provided to an individual may be on a full- or
part-time basis. The eligibility of persons shall be determined under
rules adopted by the commissioner.

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:175, 183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161-F:75

 **161-F:75 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Cost and the methods of payment for adult in-home care services.
                                             
 II. Qualifications of providers.
                                             
 III. Further definition of services to be provided under this
subdivision.
                                             
 IV. Requirements for eligibility for services.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1989, 7:1. 1995, 310:183. 2012, 171:26, VIII, eff. Aug. 10,
2012.

Caregiver Support Services
--------------------------

### Section 161-F:76

 **161-F:76 Purpose. –** Over 80 percent of long-term care services
are provided by unpaid family caregivers. It is in the state's best
interest to support these caregivers to maintain their family member at
home. The purpose of this chapter is to provide support to these
caregivers in their role as primary caregivers for aging family members.

**Source.** 2010, 81:1, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 161-F:77

 **161-F:77 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Caregiver support services'' includes, but is not limited to,
assessment, individual and caregiver centered planning and assistance,
information and referral, respite care, caregiver support groups,
educational materials, and emergency and outreach services.
                                             
 II. "ServiceLink Resource Center'' or "SLRC'' means the statewide
network of locally administered community-based resources for seniors,
adults with disabilities, and their families.

**Source.** 2010, 81:1, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 161-F:78

 **161-F:78 Administration; Services. –** Subject to available
federal, state, and local funding, the department shall administer this
subdivision and shall coordinate caregiver support services with
existing services to caregivers and older adults. Caregiver support
services shall be provided in a manner which develops person-centered,
comprehensive, responsive, and flexible support to caregivers in their
role as the primary caregivers for aging family members.

**Source.** 2010, 81:1, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 161-F:79

 **161-F:79 Regional Caregiver Support Services. –** The department
shall maintain a caregiver support program in each SLRC. A caregiver
support specialist shall be available within each SLRC region to assist
caregivers in assessing their needs and accessing support and services;
including generic community resources, state and federally funded
support services, and other services as available.

**Source.** 2010, 81:1, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 161-F:80

 **161-F:80 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules under
RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 I. Further definition of services to be provided under this
subdivision.
                                             
 II. Requirements for eligibility for services.
                                             
 III. Manner of providing services under RSA 161-F:78.
                                             
 IV. Assignment and roles of caregiver support specialists pursuant
to RSA 161-F:79.

**Source.** 2010, 81:1, eff. July 18, 2010.
