---
title: CHAPTER 161 HUMAN SERVICE
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 161
                                             
HUMAN SERVICE
-------------

### Section 161:1

 **161:1 Organization. –** 
                                             [Omitted.
                                             ]

### Section 161:2

 **161:2 Duties of the Department. –** Except as otherwise provided
by law, the duties of the department of health and human services with
respect to the public assistance and welfare activities of the state
shall be as hereinafter prescribed, for which funds appropriated for the
general purposes of this chapter or RSA 167 may be expended:
                                             
 I. General. Develop plans to provide assistance to needy aged,
blind, permanently and totally disabled persons, and dependent children;
administer or supervise the administration of these activities, child
welfare services, social service index and other activities hereinafter
mentioned; establish, maintain and direct an electronic benefits
disbursement system using automatic teller machines and point-of-sale
devices to distribute such assistance.
                                             
 II. Child Welfare Services. Develop and administer state
responsibilities for child welfare, and may administer directly such
child welfare activities. Child welfare activities shall include:
Protection and care of homeless, dependent and neglected children, and
children in danger of becoming delinquent; cooperation with any court
and with state and other institutions for children, including
investigation and follow-up services; services and care of children in
foster homes; and all other child welfare activities authorized by law;
provided, however, that nothing in this chapter or RSA 167 shall be
construed as authorizing any public official, agent, or representative,
in carrying out any of the provisions of this chapter or RSA 167 to take
charge of any child over the objection of either of the parents of such
child, or of the person standing in loco parentis to such child, except
pursuant to a proper court order.
                                             
 III. General Supervision. Have general supervision of all neglected
or dependent children and see that they receive suitable education,
training, and support; assist in the enforcement of all laws for the
protection of children and investigate charges that may be brought to
their attention, and if a crime allegedly has been committed, report to
the county attorney.
                                             
 IV. Supervision and Licensing. Supervise all foster family homes and
child placing agencies. The commissioner of the department of health and
human services shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A to ensure that a
wholesome living environment is provided to children in such homes.
                                             
 IV-a. Supervision of Residential Care Facilities. Supervise all
facilities which are shared by adult clients of the department of health
and human services which provide assistance, care or other direct
services to the aged, blind or other persons with disabilities.
                                             
 V. Blind. In cooperation with the department of education, in
connection with assistance to needy blind persons the department shall
give due consideration to the special needs associated with the
condition of blindness and shall: (a) promulgate rules and regulations
stating in terms of ophthalmic measurements the amount of visual acuity
which an applicant may have and be eligible for assistance and providing
for an examination by an ophthalmologist or physician skilled in
diseases of the eye or by an optometrist, whichever the individual may
select, in making the determination whether the individual is eligible
and fixing the fee for such examination; (b) establish the procedure for
securing competent medical examination; (c) designate or approve a
suitable number of ophthalmologists or physicians skilled in diseases of
the eye, and optometrists, who must be duly licensed or registered under
the laws of this state and actively engaged in the practice of their
professions, to examine applicants and recipients of aid to determine
their eligibility for assistance; (d) fix the fees to be paid for
medical examination from funds available to the department.
                                             
 VI. Medical Care. In cooperation with state health authorities and
county and local officials, develop and administer a state plan for
providing medical or other remedial assistance. The department of health
and human services shall not amend nor seek to amend, nor gain nor seek
to gain approval of waivers to, the state medicaid plan in any way that
would consolidate federal grants or allotments or would cap the federal
portion of medicaid spending or would in any way result in a change to
the state-federal proportional share of medicaid spending or any
component thereof, without the prior approval of the fiscal committee of
the general court.
                                             
 VII. Cooperation; State, Local. Cooperate with other departments,
agencies and institutions, both state and local, in performing services
in conformity with the purposes of this chapter or RSA 167.
                                             
 VIII. Cooperation, Federal. Cooperate with the federal government in
carrying out the purposes of the Federal Social Security Act, and in
other matters of mutual concern pertaining to public welfare, child
welfare services, and public assistance, including the adoption, so far
as is consistent with the provisions hereof, of such methods of
administration as are found by the federal government to be necessary
for the efficient operation of the plan for such public assistance and
welfare services.
                                             
 IX. Reports, Federal. Make such reports, in such form and containing
such information, as the federal government may from time to time
require, and comply with such provisions as the federal government may
from time to time find necessary to assure the correctness and
verification of such reports.
                                             
 X. Reciprocal Agreements. Have authority to enter into reciprocal
agreements with public welfare agencies in other states to grant
assistance to persons removing from such other states to this state, and
otherwise eligible for assistance in this state except for the residence
requirement.
                                             
 XI. Research. Carry on research and compile statistics relative to
public welfare throughout the state including dependency, physical or
mental incapacity, and related problems; and develop plans in
cooperation with other public and private agencies for the prevention as
well as treatment of conditions giving rise to public welfare problems.
                                             
 XII. Social Service Programs. Develop a broad range of social and
related services aimed at preventing dependency and family breakdown,
promoting child development and child care, protecting vulnerable
children and enabling them to live in their own homes or foster homes
rather than in institutions, assisting individuals to attain and
maintain self-support and strengthen family life, develop and operate
social service programs within the department of health and human
services, receive and distribute such federal funds which are allocated
specifically to the state for day care for children and adults, and
purchase or contract with other agencies or individuals to provide
direct grants from sums appropriated for such purpose to other agencies
upon submission of approvable plans within the objectives of this
paragraph.
                                             
 XII-a. Residential Care Facility Program. Develop a broad range of
social and related services aimed at protecting adults and enabling aged
and infirm adults to live in their own homes or residential care
facilities rather than in institutions, assisting individuals to attain
and maintain self-support and strengthen family life, develop and
supervise a residential care facility program, receive and distribute
federal funds which are allocated specifically to the state for adult
service programs, purchase or contract with other agencies or
individuals to provide direct grants from sums appropriated for such
purpose to other agencies upon submission of approvable plans within the
objectives of this paragraph.
                                             
 XIII. Food Stamp Program. Develop and administer a food stamp
program within the state under the provisions of the Federal Food Stamp
Act of 1964, as amended, and in accordance with Federal Regulations duly
promulgated by the United States Department of Agriculture and the
United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare.
                                             
 XIV. Child Support Program. Establish, direct and maintain a program
of child support based upon Title IV-D of the Social Security Act as
amended. The commissioner is authorized to enter into agreements with
any individual, state or local agency or governmental body and may
employ such assistants, including, but not limited to, persons with
legal training who are not licensed attorneys, as may be necessary to
carry out the purpose of this paragraph.
                                             
 XV. Special Investigations. Investigate and take any other
appropriate actions relating to suspected violations of law or rules
relative to programs administered by the department. The commissioner
may enter into agreements with any individual or any state, federal, or
local agency or governmental body and may employ individuals as may be
necessary to carry out the purposes of this paragraph.
                                             
 XVI. Collection of Child Support. Establish, maintain and direct a
system of collecting and disbursing payments, including an electronic
benefits disbursement system as described in paragraph I, ordered in
divorce, nonsupport and support for children of unwed parents cases when
so ordered by the court in accordance with regulations established under
Title IV-D of the Social Security Act. All current and future cases in
which the department of health and human services is ordered by the
court to collect and enforce an obligation for support shall require
IV-D status either through the receipt of public assistance under Title
IV-A of the Social Security Act or by application for IV-D support
services filed with the court and forwarded with the court order to the
department of health and human services.
                                             
 XVII. Review of Rates For Child Day Care Services. Review annually
the rates established for the purchase of child day care services on
behalf of eligible persons. This annual review shall consider the
effects of the established rates on current costs, quality and
availability of services.
                                             
 XVIII. Refugee Resettlement. Administer the New Hampshire refugee
resettlement program as funded by and in cooperation with the United
States Department of Health and Human Services under the Refugee Act of
1980.

**Source.** PL 108:7. 1937, 202:6. 1939, 8:5. 1941, 125:1. RL 126:6.
1951, 90:1; 139:1-3. RSA 161:2. 1970, 34:2. 1971, 131:1. 1973, 353:1, 2.
1974, 14:1. 1975, 265:2-5. 1977, 589:2. 1979, 149:1-3. 1981, 189:5;
568:91, III. 1982, 42:23. 1983, 291:1; 465:1, 2. 1985, 237:1, 2. 1987,
343:6. 1988, 178:7; 289:2. 1989, 142:1. 1991, 186:1, 2. 1993, 22:1.
1995, 310:105, 175, 181, 183. 1999, 18:1. 2004, 260:24. 2010, Sp. Sess.,
1:9, eff. June 10, 2010.

### Section 161:2-a

 **161:2-a Local Officials Authorized to be Issuing Agent for Food
Stamps. –** Any town, city, or county official, so designated in a
written agreement between the commissioner of the department of health
and human services and the selectmen of a town, the city council of a
city or the county commissioners of a county, may receive, store, issue
and sell food stamps under the food stamp program established under RSA
161:2, XIII, as agent of the commissioner in the respective town, city
or county, in accordance with and pursuant to the terms of said written
agreement. Said designated official shall be bonded and insured as such
agent in the manner and amount required by the commissioner, and the
commissioner shall pay the cost thereof from funds appropriated for the
administration of the food stamp program.

**Source.** 1975, 288:1. 1983, 291:1, II. 1995, 310:182, 183, eff. Nov.
1, 1995.

### Section 161:2-b

 **161:2-b Undeliverable Collections. –** Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, any amount collected pursuant to RSA 161:2, XVI which
is unclaimed or undeliverable to a recipient and which is in the opinion
of the commissioner of health and human services unreturnable to the
payor for a period of one year shall be deposited forthwith to the
general fund as unrestricted revenue. In the event that such recipient
or payor is later located and a claim is made, the commissioner of
health and human services is hereby authorized to expend such sums as
may be necessary to satisfy such claim and the governor is authorized to
draw his warrant for such sums out of any money in the treasury not
otherwise appropriated. The provisions of this section shall not be
construed to require the commissioner of health and human services to
return any sums collected to the payor if he is of the opinion that said
sums should be retained for later disbursement to the recipient.

**Source.** 1981, 568:148. 1995, 310:176, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161:3

 **161:3 Board of Public Welfare. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1961, 222:6, IV.
                                             ]

### Section 161:4

 **161:4 Duties of the Commissioner. –**
                                             
 I. Supervision. It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the
department of health and human services to supervise and direct the
department so that its duties herein defined be effectuated and take
action necessary or desirable to carry out the provisions of this
chapter or RSA 167.
                                             
 II. Personnel Standards. Based upon the number of applicants and
recipients in the localities, the commissioner of health and human
services shall determine the number of employees necessary for the
administration of public assistance, old age assistance, and aid to the
needy blind in all administrative units, state, county, and town,
subject to the regulations of the director of personnel.
                                             
 III. Liability Insurance. The commissioner of the department of
health and human services or designee shall have the authority, after
consultation with the insurance department and the risk management unit,
and in accordance with the procedures established by the commissioner of
administrative services under RSA 21-I:7-c, V, to purchase personal
liability coverage for individuals providing care to adults receiving
assistance from the department of health and human services who reside
in certified residential care facilities. The amount and nature of this
insurance coverage may vary in the discretion of the commissioner of
administrative services.
                                             
 IV. Hearings Officer. The commissioner may, in accordance with the
rules adopted by the director of personnel pursuant to RSA 541-A,
appoint a hearings officer or hearings officers, as necessary, to
preside over such hearings as are required to comply with federal and
state statutes and federal or state rules or regulations. The decision
of the officer shall not be contrary to rules adopted by the department
of health and human services pursuant to RSA 541-A. The officer's
decision shall be binding on all parties unless such decision is
overturned on appeal.
                                             
 V. There shall be no more than 60 percent of the total number of
children in the custody of the department living in foster care for more
than 24 months. The commissioner of the department of health and human
services may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, setting a lower limit
on the total number of children living in foster care.
                                             
 VI. Medical Assistance Program.
                                             
 (a) The commissioner of health and human services shall establish
rates of reimbursement to providers of medical services under the
medical assistance program administered under this chapter and RSA 167.
Publication of rates of reimbursement shall be exempt from the
provisions of RSA 541-A.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner of health and human services shall have the
authority to reorganize rules of the medical assistance program under
chapter He-W 500 of the department's administrative rules to conform to
the requirements of the uniform system of drafting and numbering adopted
by the director of legislative services. Changes shall be limited to
title, chapter, part, section and subsection designations and numbers
and shall be made subject to review by the director of legislative
services for compliance with the uniform system of numbering and
drafting. Such reorganized rules shall become effective when notice of
these changes is published by the director of legislative services in
the rulemaking register. Changes shall be submitted by the commissioner
of health and human services for review by the director of legislative
services before January 1, 1994. Changes authorized under this section
shall not affect the adoption or expiration date of rules reorganized
under this section.
                                             
 VII. The commissioner shall nominate a person duly qualified by
training and experience for appointment by the governor and council to
serve as the state senior physician, department of health and human
services, who shall receive a salary in accordance with RSA 94:1-a. Upon
appointment, the senior physician shall serve for a term of 4 years. Any
vacancy shall be filled for the full 4-year term in the same manner as
the original appointment. The provisions of RSA 21:33-a shall not apply
to appointments made under this paragraph.

**Source.** PL 108:7. 1937, 202:3, 6. 1939, 8:5. 1941, 107:2; 125:1. RL
126:3, 6. RSA 161:4. 1965, 352:11. 1970, 34:13. 1977, 340:4. 1979,
226:1; 464:1. 1981, 174:1. 1983, 242:1; 291:1, II. 1986, 12:4. 1988,
289:2. 1991, 127:1. 1993, 151:1. 1994, 403:4. 1995, 294:1; 310:11. 2006,
70:6. 2010, 136:2, eff. Aug. 13, 2010.

### Section 161:4-a

 **161:4-a Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of the department of
health and human services shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A relative
to:
                                             
 I. The development, administration and supervision of child welfare
services by the department of health and human services under RSA 161:2,
II.
                                             
 II. The determination of eligibility for assistance to needy blind
persons under RSA 161:2, V.
                                             
 III. The development and operation of social and related service
programs under RSA 161:2, XII.
                                             
 IV. The development and administration of the food stamp program
under RSA 161:2, XIII, including procedures for waiver of food stamp
overpayments.
                                             
 V. The establishment, maintenance and direction of a system of
collecting and disbursing court ordered support payments in divorce,
nonsupport and support of children of unwed parents cases under RSA
161:2, XVI.
                                             
 VI. The custody, use and preservation of records, papers, files and
communications relating to the department of health and human services.
                                             
 VII. The decision of hearings officers appointed under RSA 161:4,
IV.
                                             
 VIII. Limitations on the total number of children living in foster
care under RSA 161:4, V.
                                             
 VIII-a. The establishment, maintenance, and direction of a
reasonable and fair system of recouping payments made in error from
child support collected pursuant to RSA 161:2, XVI, or other means as
allowed by law. Such system shall include, but shall not be limited to,
grounds for appeal on the basis of economic hardship.
                                             
 IX. The implementation of the requirements of federal discretionary
grants awarded to the department of health and human services and any
other awards received through a successful department of health and
human services response to federal requests for applications and
requests for proposals.
                                             
 X. Sections 1902 through 1946 of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C.
section 1396, et seq. that reflect how the Title XIX program will be
administered in New Hampshire in order to carry out the purposes of the
Title XIX program. Such rules shall be adopted, consistent with the
provisions of the Title XIX program, as are necessary for the proper and
efficient administration of the Title XIX program in New Hampshire and
in conformity with the specific requirements of Title XIX, federal
regulations, and other official federal Health and Human Services
issuances. Such rules shall include, as applicable, but not be limited
to:
                                             
 (a) Recipient eligibility.
                                             
 (b) Provider participation requirements.
                                             
 (c) Types and ranges of services covered and non-covered.
                                             
 (d) Service limits.
                                             
 (e) Co-payment requirements.
                                             
 (f) Prior authorization requirements.
                                             
 (g) Documentation.
                                             
 (h) Third party liability.
                                             
 (i) Utilization review and control.
                                             
 (j) Payment for services.
                                             
 (k) Rate setting methodologies.
                                             
 (l) Administrative and operating procedures such as claim
submission requirements, forms, payment limits and adjustments, lock-in,
provider suspension and exclusion, board composition, board functions
and responsibilities, appeals, dispensing limitations, prescription
certifications, documentation retention policies, and informing
requirements.
                                             
 (m) Any other item necessary for proper operation of the title
XIX program consistent with efficiency, economy, and quality of care.
                                             
 XI. Requiring service providers and facilities to maintain liability
insurance, as necessary.
                                             
 XII. Any other matters necessary to implement his or her duties
under RSA 161 or any other law delegating the commissioner rulemaking
authority. As a condition of the commissioner invoking his or her
rulemaking authority under this paragraph, the department of health and
human services shall provide a written report detailing the necessity
for the proposed rule as set forth in the rulemaking notice, to include
any fiscal impact and or policy implications related to the adoption of
the proposed rule, to the house and senate executive departments and
administration committees, the house and senate finance committees, the
joint legislative committee on administrative rules, the oversight
committee on health and human services, and the fiscal committee of the
general court.

**Source.** 1983, 242:2; 291:1, II. 1992, 270:1. 1995, 310:181-183.
2006, 85:2. 2012, 171:10, eff. Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 161:5

 **161:5 Destruction of Certain Records. –** The commissioner of the
department of health and human services may destroy any reports, records
and other documents in the department which in his opinion are no longer
of any value to the state provided the records have been retained for a
sufficient period of time to comply with federal regulations and
provided that payrolls covering payments to recipients of benefits under
public welfare programs and medical audits shall be held for a period of
10 years from the date of filing or until such records have been
audited.

**Source.** 1943, 12:2. RSA 161:5. 1959, 232:1. 1979, 164:1. 1983,
291:1, II. 1995, 310:175, 182, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161:6

 **161:6 Commissioner of Public Welfare. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1961, 222:6,
IV.
                                             ]

### Section 161:7

 **161:7 Personnel; Duties. –** Subject to the rules of the division
of personnel, the commissioner shall appoint such personnel as may be
necessary for the efficient performance of the duties prescribed in this
chapter or RSA 167 and shall prescribe their duties.

**Source.** 1937, 202:5. RL 126:5. RSA 161:7. 1965, 352:12. 1983, 291:1,
II. 1990, 250:3. 1995, 310:106, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161:8

 **161:8 Probation Duties. –** If appointed by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the commissioner of the department of health and human
services shall perform, under the supervision of such court, the
function of probation officer or agent of the court in any welfare
matters which may be before the court.

**Source.** 1937, 202:7. RL 126:7. RSA 161:8. 1983, 291:1, II. 1995,
310:182, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161:9

 **161:9 Children in Need of Services. –** When the department is a
petitioner or respondent in contested cases involving children in need
of services, children who are alleged to be neglected or abused, and in
contested termination of parental rights cases or contested cases
involving protective services for adults, the commissioner may, with the
approval of the attorney general, contract with attorneys to represent
social workers of the department appearing in such cases. The
commissioner may compensate attorneys at a reasonable rate for such
representation.

**Source.** 1975, 89:1. 1979, 412:1. 1983, 291:1. 1986, 223:1. 1995,
310:107, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 161:10


                                             


                                             [RSA 161:10 contingently effective. See contingent 2006 note set out
below.
                                             ]

 **161:10 Food Stamp Program; Overpayment. –**
                                             
 To the extent permitted by the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended,
and federal regulations adopted thereunder, the department of health and
human services shall terminate or waive any claim to reimbursement for
the overpayment of food stamps if the overpayment was the result of
department error and:
                                             
 I. The amount of the overpayment is not more than 
                                             $450; or
                                             
 II. The recipient's income is less than or equal to 2 times the
federal poverty level.

**Source.** 2006, 85:1; for effective date, see contingent 2006
amendment note set out below.

### Section 161:11

 **161:11 Federal Health Care Reform. –** Before initiation of any
rulemaking proceeding or waiver request under Public Act 111-148, as
amended by Public Act 111-152, or any federal regulations,
interpretations, or guidance issued thereunder, the commissioner shall
obtain approval for the rule or waiver request from the joint health
care reform oversight committee established in RSA 420-N:3.

**Source.** 2011, 264:2, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 161:12


                                             


                                             [RSA 161:12 repealed by 2016, 269:2, effective September 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **161:12 Commission to Address Child Hunger in New Hampshire. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a commission to address child hunger in New
Hampshire. The membership of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) Two members of the senate, one of whom shall serve on the
health and human services committee and one of whom shall serve on the
finance committee, appointed by the senate president.
                                             
 (b) Two members of the house of representatives, one of whom
shall serve on the health, human services and elderly affairs committee
or the children and family law committee, and one of whom shall serve on
the finance committee, appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (d) The commissioner of the department of education, or
designee.
                                             
 (e) One member of the New Hampshire housing finance authority,
appointed by the authority.
                                             
 (f) One member of New Hampshire Kids Count, appointed by that
organization.
                                             
 (g) One representative of New Hampshire Hunger Solutions,
appointed by the coalition.
                                             
 (h) One representative of the Granite State Children's Alliance,
appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (i) One representative of the New Hampshire chapter of Every
Child Matters, appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (j) One representative of a community action agency, appointed by
the governor.
                                             
 (k) One representative of United Ways of New Hampshire, appointed
by that organization.
                                             
 (l) One representative of the New Hampshire Head Start Directors
Association, appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (m) One representative of a Boys and Girls Club of New Hampshire,
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (n) One representative of End 68 Hours of Hunger, appointed by
that organization.
                                             
 (o) One representative of Child and Family Services of New
Hampshire, appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (p) One pediatrician licensed in New Hampshire, appointed by the
New Hampshire Pediatric Society.
                                             
 (q) One public school principal, appointed by the New Hampshire
Association of School Principals.
                                             
 (r) One school superintendent, appointed by the New Hampshire
School Administrators Association.
                                             
 (s) One member of the New Hampshire Bar Association, appointed by
the association.
                                             
 (t) One representative of Catholic Charities New Hampshire,
appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (u) One representative of the Business and Industry Association
(BIA), appointed by the association.
                                             
 II. The commission shall address issues related to child hunger in
New Hampshire. The commission's duties shall include, but not be limited
to:
                                             
 (a) Review of current data regarding child hunger in New
Hampshire.
                                             
 (b) Review of current data regarding child hunger in New
Hampshire public schools.
                                             
 (c) Identification of causes for hunger affecting New Hampshire
children.
                                             
 (d) Development of corrective actions for ending child hunger in
New Hampshire.
                                             
 (e) Identification of current actions being taken to eliminate
child hunger in New Hampshire and their effectiveness.
                                             
 III. The members of the commission shall elect a chairperson from
among the members. The first meeting of the commission shall be called
by the first-named senate member. The first meeting of the commission
shall be held within 45 days of the effective date of this section.
Seven members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. The senate
health and human services committee staff shall provide clerical,
administrative, and research services to the commission as may be
needed.
                                             
 IV. Legislative members of the commission shall receive mileage at
the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the commission.
                                             
 V. The commission shall submit an interim report of its findings and
any recommendations for proposed legislation to the president of the
senate, the speaker of the house of representatives, the senate clerk,
the house clerk, the governor, and the state library on or before
November 1, 2016 and shall submit a final report on or before September
1, 2017.

**Source.** 2016, 269:1, eff. June 16, 2016.
