---
title: 'CHAPTER 162-Q COOS COUNTY JOB CREATION TAX CREDIT'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 162-Q
                                             
COOS COUNTY JOB CREATION TAX CREDIT
-----------------------------------

### Section 162-Q:1

 **162-Q:1 Definition. –**
                                             
 I. In this chapter "qualified tax credit employee'' means a new,
full-time, year-round employee hired in Coos county for work directly in
one or more business activities for which actual wages paid are equal to
or greater than 150 percent of the current state minimum wage.
"Qualified tax credit employee'' does not include an employee who is:
                                             
 (a) Shifted to a new position because of a merger, acquisition,
or restructuring; or
                                             
 (b) Laid-off and rehired within 270 days to the same or similar
position.
                                             
 (c) Not on the employer's payroll for at least 90 days prior to
the date on which the employer claims the credit for the first tax
period.
                                             
 II. For the purposes of calculating wages paid to the employee under
paragraph I, the amount paid by the employer for medical and dental
health care benefits for the employee shall be included in the amount of
actual wages paid.

**Source.** 2008, 172:4, eff. June 9, 2008.

### Section 162-Q:2

 **162-Q:2 Approval and Certification. –** The commissioner of the
department of resources and economic development, in consultation with
the commissioner of the department of revenue administration, shall
develop application forms with which taxpayers may apply for the job
creation tax credit. The forms shall be submitted by taxpayers to the
commissioner of the department of resources and economic development,
and the commissioner shall approve or deny such application and certify
to the commissioner of the department of revenue administration the
total credit awarded to each business organization that hires qualified
tax credit employees.

**Source.** 2008, 172:4, eff. June 9, 2008.

### Section 162-Q:3

 **162-Q:3 Reports. –** The commissioner of the department of
resources and economic development shall file a report detailing the
implementation of the tax credit program under RSA 77-E:3-c and the
results achieved. This report shall be filed with the president of the
senate, the speaker of the house of representatives, and the governor on
or before July 31 of each year, beginning with July 31, 2009. The report
shall include the following:
                                             
 I. Methods and activities used to implement the tax credit program.
                                             
 II. The number and type of jobs created in Coos county.
                                             
 III. The total amount of tax credits awarded.
                                             
 IV. Other information as deemed relevant.

**Source.** 2008, 172:4, eff. June 9, 2008.
