---
title: 'CHAPTER 162-M PRIVATE ACTIVITY BOND LIMIT'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 162-M
                                             
PRIVATE ACTIVITY BOND LIMIT
---------------------------

### Section 162-M:1

 **162-M:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
                                             
 I. "Carryforward purpose'' shall have the meaning given to it in
section 146(f)(5) of the code.
                                             
 II. "Code'' means the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended.
                                             
 III. "Housing bond'' means a qualified mortgage bond as defined in
section 143(a)(1) of the code or an exempt facility bond for a qualified
residential rental project as those terms are defined in sections
142(a)(7) and 142(d)(1) of the code, respectively.
                                             
 IV. "Housing finance authority'' means the New Hampshire housing
finance authority established by RSA 204-C:2.
                                             
 V. "Business finance authority'' means the business finance
authority of the state of New Hampshire established by RSA 162-A:3.
                                             
 VI. "Issuer'' means any state or local governmental unit, agency,
authority or instrumentality, or any nonprofit or public corporation,
authorized to issue private activity bonds or bonds which would be
private activity bonds unless an allocation of state ceiling under
section 146 of the code is made to such bonds.
                                             
 VII. "Private activity bond'' shall have the meaning given to it in
section 141(a) of the code. The use of such term in this chapter is for
reference purposes only and shall not imply that the state has
determined that any obligation issued as a private activity bond under
the code will not serve a public use or provide a public benefit.

**Source.** 1987, 120:1. 1992, 262:13, eff. May 15, 1992.

### Section 162-M:2

 **162-M:2 Allocation Formula. –** Pursuant to section 146 of the
code, the state hereby establishes for calendar year 1988 and each
calendar year thereafter its formula for allocating the state ceiling
among issuers as follows:
                                             
 I. All of the state ceiling on private activity bonds which may be
issued in any calendar year is hereby allocated to the state.
                                             
 II. The housing finance authority may from time to time assign up to
1/2 of the state ceiling in any calendar year to and among issuers,
including itself, for the purpose of (a) allocating such state ceiling
to housing bonds or (b) electing under section 25(c)(2)(A)(ii) of the
code not to issue a specified amount of qualified mortgage bonds in
order to issue, or reserve the right to issue, mortgage credit
certificates pursuant to section 25 of the code. The housing finance
authority may also from time to time transfer any portion of the state
ceiling within its control pursuant to this section to the business
finance authority, which may assign any state ceiling so transferred in
addition to and as if it were state ceiling described in RSA 162-M:2,
III.
                                             
 III. The business finance authority may from time to time assign up
to 1/2 of the state ceiling in any calendar year to and among issuers,
including itself, for the purpose of allocating such state ceiling to
(a) private activity bonds other than housing bonds and (b) bonds which
would be private activity bonds unless an allocation of state ceiling is
made to them. The business finance authority may also from time to time
transfer any portion of the state ceiling within its control pursuant to
this section to the housing finance authority, which may assign any
state ceiling so transferred in addition to and as if it were state
ceiling described in RSA 162-M:2, II.
                                             
 III-a. The housing finance authority and the business finance
authority prior to assigning the state ceiling in any calendar year,
shall consider the relative needs and priorities of the agencies and, by
mutual consent, may set aside the proportionate allocation specified in
paragraphs II and III.
                                             
 IV. Pursuant to section 146(f) of the code, each of the housing
finance authority and the business finance authority may carry forward
any unused portion of the state ceiling within its control pursuant to
this section for any carryforward purpose. Any state ceiling so carried
forward shall be assigned or transferred by the authority making the
carryforward election in addition to and as if it were state ceiling
under the control of such authority pursuant to RSA 162-M:2, II or III,
as the case may be.
                                             
 V. Each assignment of state ceiling made by the housing finance
authority or the business finance authority shall be in writing, shall
be made for a specific bond issue, and shall specify the date on or
before which the bonds must be issued in order for the assignment to be
effective. No assignment of state ceiling shall become final until the
bonds for which the assignment was made are issued, and the amount of
final assignment shall be limited to the aggregate face amount of the
bonds issued. Transfers of state ceiling between the housing finance
authority and the business finance authority shall be in writing, but
need not be for a specific bond issue. An election to carry forward
state ceiling need not be for a specific bond issue.
                                             
 VI. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, in the
event the code no longer authorizes the issuance thereunder of mortgage
credit certificates or of any one or more particular types of bonds
requiring state ceiling under section 146 of the code as in effect on
January 1, 1987, or in the event the code as in effect on such date is
amended to permit the issuance of additional types of bonds or other
obligations or certificates requiring state ceiling, the governor may by
executive order adjust the distribution of state ceiling between the
housing finance authority and the business finance authority as set
forth in RSA 162-M:2, II and III, provided that no such adjustment shall
affect any assignment, allocation, transfer or carryforward made by
either such authority prior to the date of such executive order.

**Source.** 1987, 120:1. 1991, 378:2, 3. 1992, 262:13, eff. May 15,
1992.

### Section 162-M:3

 **162-M:3 Policy. –** In making assignments of state ceiling under
this chapter, the housing finance authority and the business finance
authority shall seek to distribute state ceiling as fairly as
practicable among state and local issuers and shall take into
consideration state and local development plans and policies.

**Source.** 1987, 120:1. 1992, 262:13, eff. May 15, 1992.

### Section 162-M:4

 **162-M:4 Cooperation. –** The housing finance authority and the
business finance authority shall cooperate to carry out the purposes of
this chapter and to ensure that the state ceiling is utilized to the
fullest extent possible.

**Source.** 1987, 120:1. 1992, 262:13, eff. May 15, 1992.

### Section 162-M:5

 **162-M:5 Reports by Issuers. –** Each issuer shall notify the
office of investment and debt management and the authority from which it
received an assignment of state ceiling of each issuance of bonds that
required an allocation of state ceiling by filing a copy of the
information reporting statement required by section 149(e) of the code
as promptly as possible after the issuance of the bonds. Failure to give
such notice shall not affect the validity of the allocation of state
ceiling or of the bonds.

**Source.** 1987, 120:1, eff. May 7, 1987.

### Section 162-M:6

 **162-M:6 Certification by State Official. –** Any member or officer
of an issuer expressly designated from time to time for the purpose is
authorized to make the certification required by section 149(e)(2)(F) of
the code.

**Source.** 1987, 120:1, eff. May 7, 1987.
