---
title: 'CHAPTER 162-N ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION ZONE TAX CREDITS'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 162-N
                                             
ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION ZONE TAX CREDITS
----------------------------------------

### Section 162-N:1


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-N:1 repealed by 2007, 263:123, I, effective July 1, 2020.
                                             ]

 **162-N:1 Definitions. –**
                                             
 In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Economic revitalization zone'' means a zone designated by the
commissioner of resources and economic development as an economic
revitalization zone in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 II. "Full-time job'' means a job that is at least 35 hours per week
and is a permanent, year-round position.

**Source.** 2003, 301:2. 2007, 263:120, eff. July 1, 2007. 2015, 265:8,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 162-N:2


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-N:2 repealed by 2007, 263:123, I, effective July 1, 2020.
                                             ]

 **162-N:2 Designation of Economic Revitalization Zone. –**
                                             
 I. "Economic revitalization zone'' means a zone with a single
continuous boundary, designated in accordance with the rules adopted
under RSA 162-N:8, and having at least one of the following
characteristics:
                                             
 (a) Unused or underutilized industrial parks; or
                                             
 (b) Vacant land or structures previously used for industrial,
commercial, or retail purposes but currently not so used due to
demolition, age, obsolescence, deterioration, brownfields, relocation of
the former occupant's operations, or cessation of operation resulting
from unfavorable economic conditions either generally or in a specific
economic sector.
                                             
 II. Economic revitalization zones shall be designated by the
commissioner of resources and economic development only upon petition by
the local governing body, as defined by RSA 672:6, or the town council.
The commissioner of resources and economic development shall certify
that the economic revitalization zone meets the criteria required in
paragraph I.

**Source.** 2003, 301:2. 2007, 263:120. 2010, 311:2, eff. July 13, 2010.
2015, 265:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 162-N:2-a


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-N:2-a repealed by 2015, 265:7, effective July 1, 2020.
                                             ]

 **162-N:2-a Reevaluation of Economic Revitalization Zone. –**
                                             
 Each economic revitalization zone shall be evaluated every 5 years
to determine if it meets the criteria required in RSA 162-N:2. If an
economic revitalization zone fails to meet the criteria in RSA 162-N:2,
its designation as an economic revitalization zone shall be removed.

**Source.** 2015, 265:2, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 162-N:3


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-N:3 repealed by 2007, 263:123, I, effective July 1, 2020.
                                             ]

 **162-N:3 Eligibility Requirements for Business Tax Credits. –**
                                             
 No economic revitalization zone tax credits shall be allowed to any
taxpayer unless the taxpayer's project receives written certification in
accordance with RSA 162-N:4, I from the commissioner of resources and
economic development that it will expand the commercial or industrial
base in a designated economic revitalization zone and will create new
jobs in the state.

**Source.** 2003, 301:2. 2007, 263:120, eff. July 1, 2007. 2015, 265:3,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 162-N:4


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-N:4 repealed by 2007, 263:123, I, effective July 1, 2020.
                                             ]

 **162-N:4 Economic Revitalization Zone Tax Credit Agreement. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of resources and economic development shall
enter into a written economic revitalization zone tax credit agreement
with each taxpayer; such agreement to be certified by the commissioner
of resources and economic development under this section. The agreement
shall contain such provisions as the commissioner of resources and
economic development determines to be in the public interest, which
shall include, but not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) Quality and quantity of full-time jobs to be created.
                                             
 (b) Duration of the taxpayer's commitments with respect to the
economic revitalization zone.
                                             
 (c) The amount of the taxpayer's investment in the project.
                                             
 (d) A precise definition of the location of the facility eligible
for the credit.
                                             
 (e) The maximum amount of the economic revitalization zone tax
credit that will be allowed to the business under this agreement for
jobs created and for construction or reconstruction expenses.
                                             
 II. The agreement shall contain a determination of the final amount
of the credit awarded and shall be provided to the commissioner of
revenue administration and the taxpayer claiming the credit no later
than March 10 of each year.

**Source.** 2003, 301:2. 2007, 263:120. 2010, 311:3, eff. July 13, 2010.
2015, 265:4, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 162-N:5


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-N:5 repealed by 2007, 263:123, I, effective July 1, 2020.
                                             ]

 **162-N:5 Limit on Total Economic Revitalization Zone Credits. –**
                                             
 The aggregate of tax credits issued by the commissioner of resources
and economic development to all taxpayers claiming the credit shall not
exceed 
                                             $825,000 for any calendar year, except that any amount of the
credit less than 
                                             $825,000 that is not claimed in the calendar year may
be issued in the next calendar year and in following years. Amounts
carried forward pursuant to RSA 162-N:7 shall not be counted against
this limit in any year in which they are applied. Notwithstanding RSA
162-N:6, the maximum credit which may be utilized by a taxpayer in any
calendar year shall not exceed 
                                             $40,000. In the case in which the
aggregate credits requested during the calendar year exceed the amount
available, each taxpayer shall receive a credit for the proportional
share of the maximum aggregate credit amount.

**Source.** 2003, 301:2. 2007, 263:120. 2008, 58:1. 2010, 311:4, eff.
July 13, 2010. 2014, 139:2, eff. Aug. 15, 2014.

### Section 162-N:6


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-N:6 repealed by 2007, 263:123, I, effective July 1, 2020.
                                             ]

 **162-N:6 Determination of Economic Revitalization Zone Tax Credits
Eligible Amount. –**
                                             
 For the purpose of determining the economic revitalization zone tax
credit that the taxpayer is eligible to receive, the amount of the
credit to be taken shall be the lesser of the following:
                                             
 I. The maximum amount of the economic revitalization zone tax credit
as stated in the agreement as specified by RSA 162-N:4, I(e); or
                                             
 II. The sum of the following:
                                             
 (a) 4 percent of the salary for each new full-time job created in
the calendar year with a wage less than or equal to 1.75 times the then
current state minimum wage.
                                             
 (b) 5 percent of the salary for each new full-time job created in
the calendar year with a wage greater than 1.75 times the then current
state minimum wage and less than or equal to 2.5 times the then current
state minimum wage.
                                             
 (c) 6 percent of the salary for each new full-time job created in
the calendar year with a wage greater than 2.5 times the then current
state minimum wage.
                                             
 (d) 4 percent of the lesser of the following:
                                             
 (1) The actual cost incurred in the calendar year of creating
a new facility or renovating an existing facility, and expenditures for
machinery, equipment, or other materials, except inventory.
                                             
 (2) 
                                             $20,000 for each new full-time job created in the
calendar year.

**Source.** 2003, 301:2. 2007, 263:120. 2010, 311:5, eff. July 13, 2010.
2015, 265:5, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 162-N:7


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-N:7 repealed by 2007, 263:123, I, effective July 1, 2020.
                                             ]

 **162-N:7 Application of Economic Revitalization Zone Tax Credit.
–**
                                             
 The economic revitalization zone tax credit shall be applied against
the business profits tax under RSA 77-A, and any unused portion thereof
may be applied against the business enterprise tax under RSA 77-E. Any
unused portion of the credit allowed under this chapter or any eligible
credit in excess of 
                                             $40,000 allowed under this chapter, may be carried
forward and allowed against taxes due under RSA 77-A or RSA 77-E for 5
taxable periods from the taxable period in which the tax was paid. For
the purpose of the credit allowed under RSA 77-A:5, X, the economic
revitalization zone credit shall be considered taxes paid under RSA
77-E.

**Source.** 2003, 301:2. 2007, 263:120. 2008, 58:2, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 162-N:8


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-N:8 repealed by 2007, 263:123, I, effective July 1, 2020.
                                             ]

 **162-N:8 Rules. –**
                                             
 The commissioner of revenue administration shall adopt rules, under
RSA 541-A, relative to documentation of the credits claimed under this
chapter. The commissioner of resources and economic development shall,
in consultation with the executive director of the community development
finance authority, adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to the
administration and implementation of this chapter. The rules adopted by
the commissioner of resources and economic development shall include
provisions relative to:
                                             
 I. Establishment and certification of economic revitalization
zones.
                                             
 II. Criteria for and approval of projects in economic revitalization
zones, including jobs per dollar thresholds.
                                             
 III. Fees which the commissioner of resources and economic
development may charge to each applicant to cover the reasonable costs
of the state's administration of the applicant's participation in the
economic revitalization zone tax credit program.
                                             
 IV. Criteria for evaluation of the effectiveness of the tax credit
program and whether existing economic revitalization zones continue to
meet the criteria of RSA 162-N:2.

**Source.** 2003, 301:2. 2007, 263:120, eff. July 1, 2007. 2015, 265:6,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 162-N:9


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-N:9 repealed by 2007, 263:123, I, effective July 1, 2020.
                                             ]

 **162-N:9 Reports. –**
                                             
 The commissioner of resources and economic development shall file an
annual report 60 days after the close of each fiscal year with the
governor, the senate president, the speaker of the house of
representatives, and the fiscal committee of the general court. The
report shall describe the results of the economic revitalization zone
tax credit program and shall include any recommendations for further
legislation regarding the economic revitalization zone tax credit
program.

**Source.** 2003, 301:2. 2007, 263:120. 2012, 247:19, eff. Aug. 17,
2012.
