---
title: 'CHAPTER 162-O STATE JOBS GRANT FUND'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 162-O
                                             
STATE JOBS GRANT FUND
---------------------

### Section 162-O:1

 **162-O:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of resources and economic
development.
                                             
 II. "Qualifying zone'' means a town or city in Coos or Sullivan
county which has a median household income of less than 
                                             $40,500
according to the most recent federal decennial census.

**Source.** 2003, 319:46, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 162-O:2

 **162-O:2 State Jobs Grant Fund. –** There is established within the
office of the state treasurer a state jobs grant fund. The state jobs
grant fund shall be administered by the commissioner and shall be used
for the sole purpose of providing grants in accordance with RSA 162-O:3.

**Source.** 2003, 319:46, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 162-O:3

 **162-O:3 State Jobs Grants. –**
                                             
 I. Any business creating new jobs in a qualifying zone may apply to
the commissioner, on an application developed by the commissioner, for
state jobs grants.
                                             
 II. The amount of the grant shall be determined by the commissioner
on a per job basis as follows:
                                             
 (a) Up to 
                                             $1,000 per job created at a wage which is at least 1
3/4 times but less than 2 times above the 2003 minimum wage.
                                             
 (b) At least 
                                             $1,000 and up to 
                                             $3,000 per job created at a wage
which is at least 2 times but less than 2 1/4 times above the 2003
minimum wage.
                                             
 (c) At least 
                                             $3,000 and up to 
                                             $5,000 per job created at a wage
which is at least 2 1/4 times but less than 2 1/2 times above the 2003
minimum wage.
                                             
 (d) At least 
                                             $5,000 and up to 
                                             $10,000 per job created at a wage
which is at least 2 1/2 times but less than 3 times above the 2003
minimum wage.
                                             
 (e) At least 
                                             $10,000 and up to 
                                             $15,000 per job created at a
wage which is at least 3 times but less than 3 1/2 times above the 2003
minimum wage.
                                             
 (f) At least 
                                             $15,000 and up to 
                                             $20,000 per job created at a
wage which is 3 1/2 times or more above the 2003 minimum wage.
                                             
 III. Grants shall be made by the commissioner only after approval by
the governor and council.
                                             
 IV. Any business receiving a grant under this section shall
guarantee that the job for which the grant is made shall exist for at
least a 5-year period or shall remit the grant moneys to the state jobs
grant fund on a pro-rated share basis for the amount of the 5-year
period when the job does not exist.
                                             
 V. Any qualifying zone, by action of the local legislative body, may
abate all or a portion of the local property tax for a period of 10
years for a business creating jobs and receiving grants under this
section. Abatements granted under this paragraph shall expire if the job
or jobs for which grants were made cease to exist.

**Source.** 2003, 319:46, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 162-O:4

 **162-O:4 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules, under
RSA 541-A, relative to the administration and implementation of this
chapter.

**Source.** 2003, 319:46, eff. July 1, 2003.
