---
title: 'CHAPTER 162-F DECOMMISSIONING OF NUCLEAR ELECTRIC GENERATING FACILITIES'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 162-F
                                             
DECOMMISSIONING OF NUCLEAR ELECTRIC GENERATING FACILITIES
---------------------------------------------------------

### Section 162-F:1

 **162-F:1 Decommissioning Responsibility. –** The legislature
recognizes that in order to ensure the health, safety, and well-being of
the public and of current and future generations, a costly and
comprehensive decommissioning procedure is necessary at the end of the
useful or serviceable life of nuclear electric generating facilities.
Because the costs are substantial and because these costs are the direct
and predictable result of operating such a facility and should not have
to be borne by the state, it is found to be in the public interest to
require that adequate fiscal responsibility be established to ensure
proper and safe decommissioning, and also to ensure subsequent
surveillance of a nuclear reactor site to the extent necessary to
prevent such sites from constituting a hazard to current or future
generations. The legislature, therefore, hereby establishes a procedure
that will provide assurance of adequate funding by each owner of a
facility for decommissioning.

**Source.** 1971, 357:1. 1981, 109:1. 1991, 295:2. 2001, 193:3, eff.
Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 162-F:1-a

 **162-F:1-a. Oil Refineries. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1974, 39:2, eff. April
5, 1974.
                                             ]

### Section 162-F:2-13

 **162-F:2 to 162-F:13 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1991, 295:3, eff.
Jan. 1, 1992.
                                             ]

### Section 162-F:14

 **162-F:14 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Committee'' means a nuclear decommissioning financing committee
established pursuant to RSA 162-F:15.
                                             
 II. "Decommissioning '' means, but is not limited to, any or all of
the following, as may be required by any federal or state agency with
jurisdiction, when any radioactive portion of the facility is
permanently removed from service:
                                             
 (a) Safe removal of the land, facility, or site from service,
including, but not limited to, decontamination, stabilization, removal,
relocation, shipment, containment, demolition, dismantling, or storage,
or a combination thereof, of any buildings, structures, systems,
components, materials, or debris containing activation products or
radioactive contamination. This includes reduction of residual
radioactivity to a level that permits release by the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission of the property including land and structures for
unrestricted use, and termination of the license issued by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission. Included is the removal of nuclear fuel, removal
of the reactor containment building, and the dismantling of
non-contaminated components required to obtain access to contaminated
components.
                                             
 (b) Restoration and rehabilitation of any site, including the
physical and aesthetic appearance of the site, that is subject to the
requirements of subparagraph II(a) to permit non-nuclear commercial,
industrial, or other similar use, consistent with the orderly
development of the region with due consideration having been given to
the views of municipal and regional planning commissions and municipal
governing bodies.
                                             
 (c) Perpetual, continual control or surveillance of land and
structures that the Nuclear Regulatory Commission has not released for
unrestricted use.
                                             
 III. "Electric utility'' means any entity that generates or
distributes electricity and which recovers the cost of this electricity,
either directly or indirectly, through rates established by the entity
itself or by a separate regulatory authority. Investor-owned utilities,
including generation or distribution subsidiaries, public utility
districts, municipalities, rural electric cooperatives, and state and
federal agencies, including associations of any of the foregoing, are
included within the meaning of "electric utility.''
                                             
 IV. "Facility'' means any nuclear electric generating facility
subject to decommissioning pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 V. "Fund'' means a nuclear decommissioning financing fund
established pursuant to RSA 162-F:19.
                                             
 VI. "Funding assurance'' means any prepayment, external sinking
funds, parental or self-guarantee, insurance, bonds, letters of credit,
form of surety, long-term power sales contract, or other method, or
combination of methods approved by the committee, that, in the
aggregate, meets or exceeds the decommissioning funding requirements
established by the committee.
                                             
 VII. "Funding date'' means the date established by the committee at
which time the fund shall have sufficient moneys to complete
decommissioning.
                                             
 VIII. "Non-utility'' means any entity owning or proposing to own an
interest in a nuclear electric generating facility, other than an
electric utility.
                                             
 IX. "Projected cost of decommissioning'' means the amount, as
determined by the committee, that is required to fully fund the cost of
decommissioning a facility.

**Source.** 1981, 109:2. 1985, 141:1. 2001, 193:4, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 162-F:15

 **162-F:15 Committee Established. –**
                                             
 I. A nuclear decommissioning financing committee shall be
established for each facility. The committee shall have jurisdiction to
determine the projected cost of decommissioning the facility and the
schedule of payments for each owner. The committee shall have
jurisdiction to determine what decommissioning is required. The
radiological standards of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission shall apply
for purposes of releasing the site for unrestricted use.
                                             
 II. Each committee shall consist of one person who is a resident of
the town or city in which the facility is located and who shall be
appointed by the selectmen of the town or the mayor and council of the
city, the chairman of the public utilities commission, one senator, to
be appointed by the senate president, one house member, to be appointed
by the speaker of the house of representatives, the state treasurer or
designee, the commissioner of the department of health and human
services or designee, the commissioner of the department of safety or
designee, and the director of the governor's office of energy and
community services or designee.
                                             
 III. The person appointed by the selectmen of the town or the mayor
and council of the city shall serve a 3-year term and any vacancy shall
be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original
appointment. In the event that more than one facility is licensed to be
built in the state, the committee as designated in RSA 162-F:15, II
shall serve in the same capacity, except that the appointed member who
is a resident of the city or town shall be selected in the manner
prescribed by this section.

**Source.** 1981, 109:2. 1983, 291:1, I. 1994, 386:6. 1998, 164:1;
262:3. 2001, 193:5, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 162-F:15-a

 **162-F:15-a Rulemaking. –** The committee shall adopt rules under
RSA 541-A relative to the conduct of hearings under RSA 162-F:21.

**Source.** 1993, 330:5. 2012, 171:11, eff. Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 162-F:16

 **162-F:16 Overlapping Jurisdictions. –** If a facility is located
in more than one city or town, for the purpose of selecting a nuclear
decommissioning financing committee, it shall be deemed to be located in
the city or town in which the largest part of the main nuclear reactor
building is located.

**Source.** 1981, 109:2, eff. May 4, 1981.

### Section 162-F:17

 **162-F:17 Organization of Committees. –**
                                             
 I. The temporary chairman of each committee formed, who shall be the
chairman of the public utilities commission, shall call an
organizational meeting within 90 days of formation. At the
organizational meeting, the committee shall select a chairman to serve
for a 3-year term, elect such other officers as the members shall
determine, and establish a schedule of meetings for determining the
requirements of the decommissioning fund.
                                             
 II. Each committee may hire such temporary help, including
consultants, as it deems necessary to carry out its duties under this
chapter. The committee shall establish an amount to be paid to the
resident member of the committee for each day actually engaged in the
duties of the committee.

**Source.** 1981, 109:2. 1994, 386:7. 2001, 193:6, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 162-F:18

 **162-F:18 Expenses of Committee. –** The reasonable expenses of
each committee and the office of the attorney general, including the
services of consultants, and clerical and technical assistance, shall be
a direct charge against the owner or owners of the facility.

**Source.** 1981, 109:2. 1994, 386:8. 2001, 193:7, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 162-F:19

 **162-F:19 Fund; Schedule of Payment Established. –**
                                             
 I. A separate nuclear decommissioning financing fund, with a
separate account for each owner, shall be established in the office of
the state treasurer for each facility in the state. The committee shall
determine the projected cost of decommissioning, the funding date, and
the schedule of payments sufficient to ensure that the full cost of
decommissioning shall be met by the funding date. The moneys in such
fund shall not be subject to any state taxes and shall not be subject to
any federal taxes to the extent allowed by applicable federal law.
                                             
 II. Each owner shall be separately liable for its proportional
share, based on its ownership interest, of the cost of decommissioning
the facility. The state shall have no financial responsibility for
decommissioning, or the demolition and removal of facilities constructed
as part of any uncompleted facility.
                                             
 III. The committee shall establish a schedule for payments of moneys
into the fund for each owner of the facility that shall not be less than
necessary to reach the projected cost of decommissioning, as determined
by the committee. The schedule of payments shall be based upon the
funding date established by the committee and the owner's individual
funding requirement.
                                             
 IV. When the committee determines that the owner has provided
funding assurance sufficient to ensure payment of the owner's
proportionate share of the full decommissioning cost of the facility,
including full funding for decommissioning in the event of a premature
permanent cessation of operation, the committee may then establish a
schedule of payments for that owner, which shall be collected over a
period of time not to exceed the remaining license life of the facility.
Any such schedule of payments shall be in lieu of a schedule of payments
based on the funding date.

**Source.** 1981, 109:2. 2001, 193:8, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 162-F:20

 **162-F:20 Administration of Fund. –**
                                             
 I. The state treasurer shall administer each fund established under
this chapter. The treasurer and the committee shall take every
reasonable precaution to preserve the integrity of each non-taxable
fund. Interest, dividends and other earnings of the fund shall, after
deducting the expenses of administering the fund, be added to the fund
and shall be considered payments to the fund until the specified amount
is reached.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1981, 109:2. 2001, 193:16, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 162-F:21

 **162-F:21 Funding Amount Established; Report; Public Hearing. –**
                                             
 I. Each committee shall hold at least one public hearing to receive
information on funding requirements for each fund. The committee shall
have the authority to subpoena witnesses and administer oaths and to
compel by subpoena duces tecum the production of any accounts, books,
contracts, records, documents, memoranda, and papers in order to
determine the amount needed for the fund.
                                             
 II. The amount of the fund shall be sufficient to cover all costs of
decommissioning the facility to standards set by any state agency with
jurisdiction over decommissioning that are not less stringent than those
standards set by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
                                             
 III. Each committee shall rely on all available data and experience
in determining the amount of such fund including, but not limited to,
information from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; the public utilities
commission; the owner or owners of the facility; municipal and regional
planning commissions and municipal governing bodies; and relevant
construction cost indices. The committee shall publish a transcript of
all proceedings during which information was presented or offered into
testimony, and a detailed analysis of the facts and figures used in
determining the amount of the fund.
                                             
 IV. Following the committee's deliberation and prior to final
hearing, the plan for scheduled payments into the fund and relevant
evidence, including the transcripts and analysis published pursuant to
RSA 162-F:21, III, shall be available for public review in the clerk's
office of the city or town where the facility is located and in the
office of the public utilities commission at least 30 days prior to the
one or more public hearings on the committee's proposed plan. At least
one hearing shall be held in the city or town where the facility is
located. A notice of the time and place of each hearing shall be posted
in 2 appropriate public places in the city or town where the facility is
located and shall be printed at least twice in a newspaper of general
circulation for that city or town and in a newspaper of state-wide
circulation 2 weeks prior to each hearing. Testimony presented at the
hearings held pursuant to this paragraph shall be taken into
consideration by the committee when it formalizes the payment schedule
plan. All testimony shall be transcribed and made a permanent record.

**Source.** 1981, 109:2. 2001, 193:9, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 162-F:21-a

 **162-F:21-a Changes in Ownership. –**
                                             
 I. At the time a non-utility acquires an ownership interest in a
facility, sufficient moneys shall have been paid into the fund, so that
the balance of the fund for that ownership interest shall equal or
exceed the minimum decommissioning funding requirements of the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission for that ownership interest by the funding date.
                                             
 II. Prior to acquiring an ownership interest in a facility, an
electric utility or non-utility shall demonstrate its ability to provide
the funding assurance required by the committee, as provided in RSA
162-F:21-c.
                                             
 III. The funding assurance:
                                             
 (a) Method or methods, level, and adequacy must be approved by a
final order of the committee prior to such electric utility or
non-utility acquiring an ownership interest in a facility.
                                             
 (b) Shall be in effect from the date the electric utility or
non-utility acquires an ownership interest in the facility, until the
date of license termination by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and
completion of decommissioning required by the committee and, upon the
request of the committee, shall be payable directly into the fund.

**Source.** 2001, 193:10, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 162-F:21-b

 **162-F:21-b Customer Nuclear Decommissioning Charge. –**
                                             
 I. The public utilities commission shall permit an electric utility
with a franchise territory in the state to charge its customers on a per
kilowatt hour basis the amount it pays directly into the fund, as
required by the committee pursuant to a schedule of payments established
under this chapter. The amount of the per kilowatt hour charges to
utility customers shall be reviewed and approved by the public utilities
commission. The charge, as approved by the public utilities commission,
shall be designated a nuclear decommissioning charge and shall be
separately stated on the customer's billing statement. Customer
financial responsibility for decommissioning is limited solely to moneys
paid into the fund pursuant to a nuclear decommissioning charge approved
by the public utilities commission under this section.
                                             
 II. (a) Any nuclear decommissioning charge included on utility
customers' billing statements shall be discontinued within 30 days if:
                                             
 (1) The permanent cessation of a facility's operations
occurs;
                                             
 (2) The owner or owners voluntarily cease to generate
electricity for more than 6 months, other than for scheduled or
unscheduled repairs;
                                             
 (3) The public utilities commission finds that the facility is
no longer generating electric energy, and that decommissioning of the
facility should be commenced; or
                                             
 (4) The electric utility transfers its ownership interest.
                                             
 (b) If the customer nuclear decommissioning charge for an
electric utility is discontinued, the committee may institute a revised
schedule for funding requirements to cover the costs of decommissioning.
The revised funding schedule may include payments made by the owner or
owners separate from customer charges. The committee shall hold at least
one public hearing relative to establishing the revised funding
schedule, consistent with the public hearing requirements established in
RSA 162-F:21. All testimony shall be transcribed and made a permanent
record.
                                             
 (c) Upon the discontinuation of a customer nuclear
decommissioning charge due to the transfer by a utility of an ownership
interest occurring after January 1, 2001, the committee shall determine
the portion of the fund contributed by New Hampshire customers of the
electric utility, including interest and earnings as of the date of
ownership transfer, and designate that portion of the fund as the
customer contribution. If decommissioning is completed for less than the
customer contribution, the excess shall be refunded to customers in a
manner determined by the public utilities commission.

**Source.** 2001, 193:10, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 162-F:21-c

 **162-F:21-c Funding Assurance. –** Funding assurances shall be
sufficient to fully fund the projected cost of decommissioning the
facility by the funding date, including in the event of a premature
permanent cessation of operation. The committee shall determine the
adequacy of the method or methods, and the level of each owner's funding
assurance. The amount available to the fund for each owner shall be
sufficient to cover that owner's share of the full cost of
decommissioning by the funding date.

**Source.** 2001, 193:10, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 162-F:22

 **162-F:22 Changes to the Fund; Payment Schedule; Funding Assurance.
–**
                                             
 I. Every 4 years the committee shall meet to review the fund and may
increase or decrease the projected cost of decommissioning the facility
and the schedule of payments into the fund. Reasons for increasing or
decreasing the projected cost of decommissioning and schedule of
payments include, but are not limited to, changes in owner or owners,
the financial condition of an owner or owners, need, safety,
reliability, technology, or other changes in circumstances.
                                             
 II. The committee shall meet at least once each calendar year to
review the cumulative fund performance and each funding assurance in
place pursuant to an order of the committee, and the committee may alter
the payment schedule, or require a change in any funding assurance to
ensure adequate funding by each owner of its decommissioning
obligation.
                                             
 III. At any time the committee may meet to determine whether the
amount of the fund, schedule of payments, or any funding assurance in
place pursuant to an order of the committee shall be increased,
decreased, or otherwise altered for reasons including changes in owner
or owners, the financial condition of an owner or owners, need, safety,
reliability, technology, or other changes in circumstances.
                                             
 IV. Prepayment of a funding obligation by an owner or owners, or the
payment of the minimum decommissioning funding requirements of the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission pursuant to RSA 162-F:21-a, shall not
require another owner to make such a payment.
                                             
 V. Prior to altering the projected cost of decommissioning the
facility, the committee shall hold at least one public hearing in the
city or town where the facility is located. All testimony shall be
transcribed and made a permanent record. Prior to changing the projected
cost of decommissioning or imposing a funding assurance requirement for
an ownership interest, the committee shall conduct an adjudicative
proceeding. Prior to the transfer of an ownership interest the committee
may, by a non-adjudicative proceeding, approve proposed funding
assurances and make any necessary associated changes to a schedule of
payments to reflect the approved funding assurances.

**Source.** 1981, 109:2. 2001, 193:11, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 162-F:23

 **162-F:23 Use of Fund. –**
                                             
 I. Expenditures from the fund shall be limited to decommissioning of
the facility for which the fund was established. The committee shall
review all expenditures from such fund during actual decommissioning to
confirm that utilization of the fund is in accordance with the
requirements of the committee and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and
that the state and federal tax status of the fund is maintained.
                                             
 II. Prior to withdrawal of moneys from the fund for decommissioning
activities, the committee shall be provided with, and must approve, a
summary of decommissioning actions to be taken, including the schedule
for taking such actions. Fund withdrawals other than those allowed by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission may be used only for expenses
associated with legitimate decommissioning activities, consistent with
the definition of decommissioning in RSA 162-F:14, II, and may not
inhibit the ability to complete funding of all required decommissioning
activities. There shall be no decommissioning activities performed that
foreclose release of the site for possible unrestricted use, result in
significant unreviewed environmental impacts, or result in there no
longer being reasonable assurance that adequate funds will be available
for decommissioning. If perpetual, continual control or surveillance of
a facility is necessary, the fund shall be maintained at a level
sufficient to yield income to maintain such control or surveillance.
                                             
 III. Any fund amount remaining after completion of decommissioning
as determined by the committee and after the date of license termination
by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, in excess of the customer
contribution as accounted for in RSA 162-F:21-b, II(c), shall be
returned to the owner or owners of the facility.

**Source.** 1981, 109:2. 2001, 193:11, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 162-F:24

 **162-F:24 Enforcement. –** The superior court may enjoin any act in
violation of a determination of a nuclear decommissioning financing
committee, or it may require the owner or owners to comply with any
determination or order of such committee. Failure by an owner to make
the payments or maintain the funding assurance required by this chapter
and established by order of the committee shall create a debt owing to
the state that may be collected or enforced by the attorney general in
an action at law. If any owner fails to pay any judgment ordered by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the attorney general may levy against
the property of such owner to satisfy such judgment.

**Source.** 1981, 109:2. 2001, 193:12, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 162-F:25

 **162-F:25 Penalty. –** Any person who willfully violates any order
or determination of a committee shall be guilty of a felony.

**Source.** 1981, 109:2. 2001, 193:12, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 162-F:26

 **162-F:26 Appeal. –** Any person who is aggrieved by an order or a
decision of a nuclear decommissioning financing committee may appeal
under RSA 541.

**Source.** 1981, 109:2, eff. May 4, 1981.

### Section 162-F:27

 **162-F:27 Prior Approvals. –** Nothing in this chapter shall limit
the recovery of any decommissioning costs allowed in a stranded cost
recovery charge approved pursuant to RSA 374-F by the public utilities
commission in an electric restructuring agreement or compliance filing,
including charges from a wholesale contract termination stipulation and
agreement approved by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission prior to
the effective date of this section.

**Source.** 2001, 193:13, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.
