---
title: 'CHAPTER 162-C COUNCIL ON RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 162-C
                                             
COUNCIL ON RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
------------------------------------

### Section 162-C:1

 **162-C:1 Council Established. –** There is established a council on
resources and development which shall include the following members:
                                             
 I. The director or assistant director of the office of energy and
planning who shall serve as chairperson of the council.
                                             
 II. The commissioner or appropriate division director, department of
resources and economic development, or designee.
                                             
 III. The commissioner or assistant commissioner, department of
environmental services, or designee.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner or appropriate division director, department of
agriculture, markets, and food, or designee.
                                             
 V. The executive director or appropriate division director, fish and
game department, or designee.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner or assistant commissioner, department of
safety, or designee.
                                             
 VII. The commissioner of the department of health and human services
or a member of the senior management team, or designee.
                                             
 VIII. The commissioner or assistant commissioner, department of
education, or designee.
                                             
 IX. The commissioner or assistant commissioner, department of
transportation, or designee.
                                             
 X. The commissioner or appropriate division director, department of
cultural resources, or designee.
                                             
 XI. The commissioner or appropriate division director, department of
administrative services, or designee.
                                             
 XII. The executive director or chairman of the New Hampshire housing
finance authority, or designee.

**Source.** 1963, 301:1. 1965, 212:1. 1986, 176:3; 202:6, I(c), (f).
1987, 283:5. 1995, 130:4; 310:182. 1999, 59:1. 2001, 249:2. 2003,
319:9,127. 2004, 171:19; 257:44. 2008, 150:1, eff. June 6, 2008.

### Section 162-C:2

 **162-C:2 Responsibilities. –** The council shall:
                                             
 I. Consult upon common problems in the fields of environmental
protection, natural resources, and growth management including the
encouragement of smart growth;
                                             
 II. Consult with, negotiate with, and obtain information from, any
federal or state agency concerned with any of the council's problems,
reports, recommendations or studies;
                                             
 III. Make biennial reports and recommendations, as may be desirable,
to the governor and council;
                                             
 IV. Make studies and recommendations concerning changes to
effectively coordinate the work of the agencies which have membership in
the council;
                                             
 V. Resolve differences or conflicts concerning development, resource
management, or the encouragement of smart growth which result from the
work of any agency represented on the council in developing policies,
plans, or programs. The council shall investigate; if possible, resolve
the problem; and if appropriate, submit its recommendations to the
governor and council or to the general court. If investigation by the
council shows that the laws and rules of an agency represented on the
council are in conflict with those of another agency, the council shall
submit a report with recommendations to the governor and council or to
the general court;
                                             
 VI. Resolve differences and conflicts among the agencies and
departments of the state in the implementation of the tourism policy
under RSA 12-A:23;
                                             
 VII. Review the disposal of state owned real property pursuant to
RSA 4:40;
                                             
 VIII. Provide oversight relative to the statewide public boat access
program, work with the public water access advisory board and provide
recommendations to the governor and executive council regarding public
access;
                                             
 IX. Complete the smart growth report required under RSA 9-B:6;
                                             
 X. Review and coordinate the distribution of funds by state agencies
to local and regional entities to encourage consistency with and provide
support for New Hampshire's smart growth policies under RSA 9-B:4;
                                             
 XI. Review the following actions by state agencies and ensure, in
consultation with the long range capital planning and utilization
committee established by RSA 17-M:1-3, that these actions are taken into
consideration in the long range capital improvement program that is
updated every 2 years in conjunction with the capital budget process,
and provide recommendations to the governor regarding whether the
actions are consistent with New Hampshire's smart growth policies under
RSA 9-B:5:
                                             
 (a) Capital budget requests;
                                             
 (b) Building operation and maintenance plans; and
                                             
 (c) Facility location and planning; and
                                             
 XII. Facilitate coordination of state agencies to support local,
regional, and state planning efforts consistent with RSA 9-A:1-4.

**Source.** 1963, 301:2. 1965, 212:2. 1973, 140:7. 1981, 364:1. 1986,
165:3; 224:5. 1987, 283:6, 7. 1992, 265:6. 2000, 292:7. 2001, 249:3.
2006, 307:2. 2008, 150:2, eff. June 6, 2008.

### Section 162-C:3

 **162-C:3 Tenure of Members. –** Members shall serve without
compensation, and any member's term of office shall terminate when he
ceases to be a member of the state agency he represents.

**Source.** 1963, 301:3. 1965, 212:3, eff. July 1, 1965.

### Section 162-C:4

 **162-C:4 Meetings. –** The council shall meet at least once every 3
months, but may meet more often as it shall determine. The chairman
shall prepare and deliver an agenda to all members at least 7 days in
advance of each meeting. The council shall provide a copy of the minutes
from each meeting to the senate president, the speaker of the house of
representatives, the long range capital planning and utilization
committee, and the governor and council.

**Source.** 1963, 301:4. 1965, 212:4. 1987, 283:8. 2006, 307:3, eff.
July 1, 2006.

### Section 162-C:5

 **162-C:5 Staff. –** The council may employ staff needed to carry
out its responsibilities.

**Source.** 1981, 364:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

Land Conservation Investment Program
------------------------------------

### Section 162-C:6

 **162-C:6 Purpose; Management. –**
                                             
 I. The general court recognizes that in order to maintain New
Hampshire's distinctive quality of life, strong economic growth must be
balanced with responsible conservation initiatives, and that the history
of conservation in New Hampshire has been marked by cooperation among
government, business, individuals, and conservation organizations. The
general court further recognizes the strong traditions of both public
and private land ownership and use, and the need to respect investments
in the conservation of natural resource lands in the state for the
perpetual use of the people of New Hampshire. In addition, the general
court recognizes that the land conservation investment program was
undertaken, in part, with significant donations of cash and land value
by citizens of the state who intended that the conservation value of
these lands be protected in perpetuity.
                                             
 II. In addition to its other responsibilities, the council shall
manage and administer the lands acquired and funds established under the
land conservation investment program under the former RSA 221-A,
according to the provisions of this subdivision and consistent with
agreements entered into with persons with ownership interests in such
lands.
                                             
 III. The council shall manage the lands acquired under the former
RSA 221-A so as to preserve the natural beauty, landscape, rural
character, natural resources, and high quality of life in New Hampshire.
The council shall maintain and protect benefits derived from such lands
and maintain public access to such lands, where appropriate. On
state-owned lands, whenever the council shall deem it in the best
interest of conservation and protection of the values outlined in this
section, it may, with the consent of the governor, authorize the
exchange of any interest in the property when the conservation values of
the property would be degraded if no action were taken. Prior to
submitting a request to the governor to exchange any interest in the
property, the council shall provide at least 30 calendar days advance
notice to the local governing body and conservation commission. Such
exchanges shall be reviewed and approved by the council, shall involve
lands contiguous to the original acquisition which have equal or greater
conservation value, and shall convey only those interests necessary to
compensate for the potential degradation.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding paragraphs I-III, the council shall recognize
that the interest of public safety and welfare may, from time to time,
require minor expansion, minor modification, or minor alteration of
existing roads within the state highway system. After review and
approval by the council, and notwithstanding RSA 162-C:10, the
department of transportation may obtain interests in lands acquired
under the former RSA 221-A adjacent to state highways. Permissible
expansion, modification, or alterations under this section shall include
drainage easements, slope easements, lane widening, the addition of a
passing, climbing, or turning lane, or similar adjustments, but shall
not include construction of a new highway or portion thereof,
construction of a bypass for an existing highway, or similar major
alterations. Approval shall not be granted if reasonable and prudent
alternatives exist nor if individual or cumulative approvals are likely
to materially impair the conservation purposes for which the parcel was
originally protected. Projects determined by the council to be outside
of the scope permitted by this subdivision shall require approval from
the general court.
                                             
 V. The review and approval process required by paragraph IV shall
give full consideration to the management provisions contained in
paragraphs I-III. The department of transportation shall submit a
written request to the council with plans and supporting documentation
to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A quorum
of the council, consisting of at least 6 members, shall hold a public
hearing within 90 days of receipt of a complete request to release land
conservation investment program interests. The council shall provide at
least 10 calendar days notice in advance of such hearing. Notification
shall be made, at the expense of the department, to the landowner, local
governing body and conservation commission, abutters, the Society for
the Protection of New Hampshire Forests, The Nature Conservancy, the
Audubon Society of New Hampshire, the New Hampshire Wildlife Federation,
and the county conservation district, or their successors. Notification
of the public hearing shall be published, by the department, in a paper
of general circulation in the municipality and shall be posted, by the
department, in at least 2 public places. At the hearing or within 15
days after the hearing, a majority of the council members attending the
hearing shall vote to approve or deny the application, unless a time
extension is requested by the department. Aggrieved parties, which
include all parties who must be notified under this paragraph, may
appeal the council's decision to the superior court in the same manner
as planning board decisions are appealed under RSA 677:15.
                                             
 VI. Compensation for any interest in land obtained by the state
department of transportation under this section shall be at the
appraised full fair market value of those property interests at the time
of the department's acquisition. Alternative forms of compensation such
as replacement land with comparable conservation value, or a combination
of monetary compensation and replacement land may be considered in
appropriate circumstances provided all parties owning an interest in the
property agree to such terms.
                                             
 VII. Compensation due to the state under this section shall be
deposited in the trust fund of the New Hampshire land and community
heritage investment program established under RSA 227-M and used for the
purposes of that program. Compensation due to municipalities shall be
dedicated to the acquisition or monitoring of protected lands consistent
with the purposes of this chapter. Compensation due to landowners of
conservation easement lands shall be as specified in the conservation
easement, deed, or as otherwise negotiated. Any party aggrieved by the
amount of compensation may file a petition with the superior court in
the same manner as damage appeals are filed from the board of tax and
land appeals under RSA 498-A:27.

**Source.** 1995, 10:4. 1998, 364:1. 2000, 245:2, eff. June 8, 2000.

### Section 162-C:7

 **162-C:7 Powers and Duties. –** The council shall oversee, direct,
and expend funds in the monitoring endowment of the former New Hampshire
land conservation investment program in accordance with the purposes of
this subdivision and RSA 227-M:12. This includes, but is not limited to,
the authority to draw upon funds for the administrative costs of the
endowment.

**Source.** 1995, 10:4. 2000, 245:3, eff. June 8, 2000.

### Section 162-C:8

 **162-C:8 Monitoring Endowment. –**
                                             
 I. The monitoring endowment established by the board of directors
pursuant to former RSA 221-A:5, III shall be maintained in perpetuity
and shall be utilized by the council only for the purposes of monitoring
and enforcing the property rights of persons with ownership interests in
property acquired through the former land conservation investment
program. Additional contributions to the endowment pursuant to RSA
227-M:12, I shall be accounted for separately and shall be utilized only
for the purposes of RSA 227-M:12, II. Additional gifts, donations, and
grants to the endowment may be utilized for monitoring and enforcing
other land conservation interests that may be acquired by the state of
New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. The principal of the endowment shall be managed by the state
treasurer for the sole purpose of providing a perpetual source of
income, as defined by the state treasurer, for the purposes set forth in
this subdivision and RSA 227-M:12.
                                             
 III. Any income earned on the endowment principal which is not used
for the purposes set forth in this subdivision and RSA 227-M:12 within
the fiscal year in which it is earned shall be nonlapsing. The state
treasurer is authorized to accept gifts, donations, and grants,
including federal gifts, donations, and grants, for the purposes set
forth in this chapter, and such gifts, donations and grants shall be
added to the principal amount.
                                             
 IV. The council shall, pursuant to the monitoring endowment
established under former RSA 221-A:5, III, and the provisions of RSA
162-C:8, I, prepare an annual report to be presented no later than
December 1 of each year to the speaker of the house, the president of
the senate, the governor, the house clerk, the senate clerk, and the
state library. The report shall include a listing of all lands and
interests in lands subject to the monitoring provisions of RSA 162-C:7,
I and a complete financial accounting of the funds in the monitoring
endowment including expenditures for the most recent full fiscal year.
The report shall also summarize monitoring activities and findings for
each property, as conducted in the most recent full fiscal year.

**Source.** 1995, 10:4. 2000, 245:4. 2002, 86:2. 2004, 257:47. 2007,
151:1, eff. Aug. 17, 2007.

### Section 162-C:9

 **162-C:9 Management. –**
                                             
 I. Each assignment of land under this subdivision to a state agency
or a municipality shall be subject to review and reassignment if the
council deems it advisable.
                                             
 II. No lands purchased in fee for permanent state ownership under
the former RSA 221-A shall be posted to prohibit hunting or fishing,
unless the council, by a majority vote of the voting members, deems such
posting to be necessary to protect the interests of the state and the
safety of its citizens, or upon recommendation of the fish and game
commission or the division of forests and lands.

**Source.** 1995, 10:4. 2006, 307:4, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 162-C:10

 **162-C:10 Public Trust. –** The lands and interests in lands
acquired under the former RSA 221-A through the use of the trust fund
for the program shall be held in public trust and used and applied for
the purposes of this subdivision. Notwithstanding any other provision of
law relating to the disposal of publicly-owned real estate, no deviation
in the uses of any land or interest in land so acquired to uses or
purposes not consistent with the purposes of this subdivision shall be
permitted. The sale, transfer, conveyance, or release of any such land
or interest in land from public trust is prohibited.

**Source.** 1995, 10:4, eff. April 12, 1995.

### Section 162-C:11

 **162-C:11 Public Access; Liability. –** No person, or the person's
successor in title, who has granted or sold rights of public access by
virtue of an easement, right-of-way, development right, or other means
in accordance with the purposes of this subdivision shall be liable to a
user of that right of access for injuries suffered on that portion of
the access way unless those injuries are caused by the willful or wanton
misconduct of the grantor or successor in title.

**Source.** 1995, 10:4, eff. April 12, 1995.

Commission to Develop a Land Conservation Plan
----------------------------------------------

### Section 162-C:12


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-C:12 repealed by 2015, 174:2, effective December 31, 2016.
                                             ]

 **162-C:12 Commission Established. –**
                                             
 I. The general court finds that adequate protection of New
Hampshire's natural assets is essential to maintaining and safeguarding
the state's economy and character for today's population and for future
generations. Continued and increased state investment in land and
natural resource protection is not a luxury item in the state budget but
is essential to our state's continued prosperity. To further this
objective, there is established a commission to develop a long-term New
Hampshire state conservation plan. The members of the commission shall
be as follows:
                                             
 (a) One member of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (b) One member of the resources, recreation and development
committee of the house of representatives, appointed by the speaker of
the house of representatives.
                                             
 (c) One member from the New Hampshire Association of Conservation
Commissions to represent municipal conservation interests, appointed by
that association.
                                             
 (d) Three representatives of statewide or regional conservation
organizations, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (e) One person representing business and industry, appointed by
the Business and Industry Association.
                                             
 (f) One person representing hunting, fishing, and other outdoor
recreation, appointed by the fish and game commission.
                                             
 (g) One person representing real estate interests, appointed by
the New Hampshire Association of Realtors.
                                             
 (h) One member of the New Hampshire Farm Bureau Federation,
appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (i) One person representing the forest products industry,
appointed by the New Hampshire Timberland Owners Association.
                                             
 II. Legislative members of the commission shall receive mileage at
the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the commission.
                                             
 III. The commission shall develop an implementation plan based in
part on the findings and future next steps contained in the SB 388
(2014, 148) report. In developing this plan, the commission shall:
                                             
 (a) Review the final report of the SB 388 (2014, 148) study
committee, and any additional reports and studies it deems appropriate
on the status of voluntary land conservation and the protection of New
Hampshire's natural resources.
                                             
 (b) Solicit input from state agencies, including but not limited
to, the department of resources and economic development, the department
of environmental services, the fish and game department, the department
of agriculture, markets, and foods, and the department of revenue
administration.
                                             
 (c) Solicit input from the public, nonprofit organizations, the
land and community heritage investment program, regional planning
commissions, the university of New Hampshire cooperative extension
service, businesses and other stakeholders, and from representatives of
land conservation initiatives in other states.
                                             
 IV. The commission's final report shall identify specific natural
resource protection priorities requiring further state investment over
the next 5 years, a process for reviewing and revising priorities on a
periodic basis, and a strategy for collaboration and funding among
federal, state, regional, municipal, and nongovernmental partners to
achieve the commission's stated conservation goals. In developing these
priorities, the commission shall ensure:
                                             
 (a) Adequate quality and quantity of current and future water
supplies for domestic, industrial, and recreational uses;
                                             
 (b) Protection of adequate areas of productive soils to support
current and future agricultural activities;
                                             
 (c) The maintenance of an adequate forest land base to enable
sustainable production of forest products for present and future
generations;
                                             
 (d) The protection of adequate core habitat and linkage areas to
maintain the state's diverse native plant and animal populations.
                                             
 (e) The maintenance of an adequate land base to support motorized
and non-motorized recreational activities;
                                             
 (f) The protection of scenic vistas and land with unique physical
features that support the state's quality of life and a strong tourism
economy; and
                                             
 (g) Any other conservation benefits that the commission deems
appropriate.
                                             
 V. The chairperson shall be the senate member. The first meeting of
the commission shall be called by the chairperson and shall be held
within 60 days of the effective date of this section. Appropriate
legislative research entities shall provide assistance and support to
the commission as necessary. Eight members of the commission shall
constitute a quorum.
                                             
 VI. The commission may accept financial support and other resources
in the development of its work and reports.
                                             
 VII. The commission may form subcommittees or appoint technical
committees composed of commission members and nonmembers to advance the
goals of this section.
                                             
 VIII. The commission shall report its findings and any
recommendations for proposed legislation to the speaker of the house of
representatives, the president of the senate, the house clerk, the
senate clerk, the governor, the chairperson of the house resources,
recreation and development committee, the chairperson of the house
finance committee, the chairperson of the senate energy and natural
resources committee, the chairperson of the senate finance committee,
and the state library on or before September 15, 2016.

**Source.** 2015, 174:1, eff. June 26, 2015.
