---
title: 'CHAPTER 162-R ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT AND CORRIDORS'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 162-R
                                             
ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT AND CORRIDORS
-----------------------------------------------

### Section 162-R:1


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-R:1 effective as provided by 2016, 218:4.
                                             ]

 **162-R:1 Definitions. –**
                                             
 In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Energy infrastructure'' includes high voltage DC or AC electric
transmission facilities of 115 kV or greater, natural gas transmission
lines, carbon dioxide pipelines, petroleum pipelines, and other energy
transport pipelines or conduits.
                                             
 II. "Energy infrastructure corridor'' means an existing state-owned
transportation right-of-way within which energy infrastructure could
potentially be sited underground.
                                             
 III. "Developer'' means a person or legal entity that can
demonstrate to the state the financial, technical, and managerial
capability to engage in the development and construction of energy
infrastructure.
                                             
 IV. "Project'' means the development or construction of energy
infrastructure subject to site evaluation committee jurisdiction under
RSA 162-H within an energy infrastructure corridor.
                                             
 V. "Site evaluation committee'' means the site evaluation committee
established in RSA 162-H:3.
                                             
 VI. "State-owned transportation right-of-way'' means a highway or
railroad right-of-way on land owned in fee by the state or a state
agency or state authority.
                                             
 VII. "Sufferance'' means that the owner of energy infrastructure has
no real property interest in the right-of-way, but merely occupies and
uses the public right-of-way subject to terms and conditions established
by the New Hampshire department of transportation.

**Source.** 2016, 218:2, eff. as provided by 2016, 218:4.

### Section 162-R:2


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-R:2 effective as provided by 2016, 218:4.
                                             ]

 **162-R:2 Energy Infrastructure Corridors Designated. –**
                                             
 I. In accordance with RSA 236:18, the state has the exclusive
rights, insofar as they do not conflict with any federal statute, rule,
or regulation, to build, lease, or utilize for any public purpose the
space adjacent to (excluding the median) and below the toll highways and
the interstate system highways within the state.
                                             
 II. The following areas, owned by the state, are designated as
energy infrastructure corridors:
                                             
 (a) I-89 (between the intersection of I-93 and the Vermont
border).
                                             
 (b) I-93 (between the Massachusetts border and the Vermont
border, excepting approximately 1.7 miles located in the White Mountain
National Forest north of Franconia Notch state park).
                                             
 (c) I-95 (between the Massachusetts border and the Maine
border).
                                             
 (d) N.H. Route 101 (between the intersection of I-93 and the
intersection of I-95).
                                             
 III. Nothing in this chapter shall require a developer of energy
infrastructure to site or propose to site energy infrastructure, or any
part thereof, within an energy infrastructure corridor designated under
this chapter.

**Source.** 2016, 218:2, eff. as provided by 2016, 218:4.

### Section 162-R:3


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-R:3 effective as provided by 2016, 218:4.
                                             ]

 **162-R:3 Energy Infrastructure Proposal Application Process. –**
                                             
 I. (a) To initiate the application process, a developer may file
with the department of transportation, a request for a preliminary
conceptual feasibility study, including such project-specific
information as the department may specify in accordance with the
department's utility accommodation manual.
                                             
 (b) Within 30 days after such study request is filed, the
department shall provide written notice to the developer, with a copy to
the site evaluation committee, either accepting such study request as
sufficiently complete to allow the department to evaluate the conceptual
feasibility of the proposal and submit its recommendation to the
committee, or specifying the additional information needed to complete
its evaluation.
                                             
 (c) Upon notice to the developer that the study request is deemed
sufficiently complete for its purposes under subparagraph (a), the
department shall have 60 days to determine whether and to what extent
the proposed project route would be conceptually feasible within the
applicable state-owned transportation right-of-way or rights-of-way,
based on department standards and regulations.
                                             
 (d) Within 60 days after notice to the developer that its
submission has been deemed complete, the department shall submit its
report on the conceptual feasibility of the project to the developer and
the site evaluation committee, specifying any concerns or issues it
believes the committee should consider in its review of the
application.
                                             
 II. The site evaluation committee shall determine whether the
application is complete, and shall proceed to review a completed
application under RSA 162-H.

**Source.** 2016, 218:2, eff. as provided by 2016, 218:4.

### Section 162-R:4


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-R:4 effective as provided by 2016, 218:4.
                                             ]

 **162-R:4 Energy Infrastructure Proposal; Decision Criteria. –**
                                             
 I. The site evaluation committee shall evaluate and render a
decision on an energy infrastructure proposal which chooses to use one
or more designated energy infrastructure corridors pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 II. The site evaluation committee may approve an energy
infrastructure proposal for a project to be sited in whole or in part
within one or more energy infrastructure corridors only if it finds that
the project meets the criteria set forth in RSA 162-H.

**Source.** 2016, 218:2, eff. as provided by 2016, 218:4.

### Section 162-R:5


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-R:5 effective as provided by 2016, 218:4.
                                             ]

 **162-R:5 Use of Energy Infrastructure Corridors; Requirements. –**
                                             
 Development and construction of energy infrastructure within an
energy infrastructure corridor are governed by this section. No person
shall engage in development or construction of energy infrastructure
within an energy infrastructure corridor, unless such person is in
compliance with applicable state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations. Any development, construction, maintenance, or use of
energy infrastructure within an energy infrastructure corridor shall be
at the sufferance of the department of transportation. All costs
associated with installation, alteration, relocation (whether or not
required by the department), and/or protection of energy infrastructure
within an energy infrastructure corridor shall be the responsibility of
the energy infrastructure developer or owner.

**Source.** 2016, 218:2, eff. as provided by 2016, 218:4.

### Section 162-R:6


                                             


                                             [RSA 162-R:6 effective as provided by 2016, 218:4.
                                             ]

 **162-R:6 Revenues. –**
                                             
 I. The department of transportation, right-of-way (ROW) appraisal
bureau section, shall identify an initial estimate of the range of value
for the use of state-owned land or assets within a designated energy
infrastructure corridor and negotiate a value for such use with the
developer. The actual and final value shall be subject to approval by
the long range capital planning and utilization committee.
                                             
 II. All revenues generated from the use of state-owned land or
assets within energy infrastructure corridors designated under this
chapter shall be deposited in the highway fund for use solely in state
transportation programs funded in whole or in part by the Federal
Highway Administration or other federal agencies and included in the
state's 10-year transportation plan. Nothing in this section shall be
deemed to affect the responsibility of a developer to pay separately to
the site evaluation committee the fees required under RSA 162-H.

**Source.** 2016, 218:2, eff. as provided by 2016, 218:4.
