---
title: 'CHAPTER 163-B LITTER CONTROL LAW'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 163-B
                                             
LITTER CONTROL LAW
------------------

### Section 163-B:1

 **163-B:1 Declaration of Intent. –** It is the intention of the
legislature by this chapter to provide for uniform prohibition
throughout the state of any and all littering on public or private
property and to curb thereby the desecration of the beauty of the state
and harm to the health, welfare and safety of its citizens caused by
individuals who litter.

**Source.** 1971, 144:1, eff. July 25, 1971.

### Section 163-B:2

 **163-B:2 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter, unless the
context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall
have the following meanings:
                                             
 I. The word "litter'' means all rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash,
debris, dead animals or other discarded materials of every kind and
description.

**Source.** 1971, 144:1, eff. July 25, 1971.

### Section 163-B:3

 **163-B:3 Unlawful Activities. –** It shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave, or to cause or
permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter
on any public or private property in this state, or in or on ice or in
any waters in this state, unless:
                                             
 I. Such property is designated by the state or by any of its
agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and
such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such
property;
                                             
 II. Such litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container
installed on such property;
                                             
 III. Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such
property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful
possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of
said owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public
welfare.

**Source.** 1971, 144:1, eff. July 25, 1971.

### Section 163-B:4

 **163-B:4 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person violating the provisions of RSA 163-B:3, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, or, in lieu thereof, in the sound discretion of
any court in which conviction is obtained, any such person may be
directed by the judge of such court to pick up and remove from any
public street or highway or public or private right-of-way, or public
beach or public park, or with prior permission of the legal owner or
tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon
which it has been established by competent evidence that he has
deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior
to the date of execution of sentence.
                                             
 II. The court is hereby directed to publish the names of persons
convicted of violating the provisions of RSA 163-B:3.

**Source.** 1971, 144:1. 1973, 90:1; 528:90, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59
p.m.

### Section 163-B:5

 **163-B:5 Prima Facie Evidence. –** Evidence that litter is thrown,
deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or
other conveyance in violation of RSA 163-B:3, shall be prima facie
evidence that the operator of said conveyance shall have violated this
chapter and the license to operate such a conveyance issued to any
person convicted hereunder may be suspended for a period not to exceed 7
days together with, or in lieu of, penalties provided in RSA 163-B:4.

**Source.** 1971, 144:1, eff. July 25, 1971.

### Section 163-B:6

 **163-B:6 Enforcement. –** All law enforcement agencies and officers
and officials of said agencies of this state or any political
subdivision thereof are hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to
enforce compliance with this chapter.

**Source.** 1971, 144:1, eff. July 25, 1971.
