---
title: 'CHAPTER 163-A NEW ENGLAND INTERSTATE PLANNING COMPACT'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 163-A
                                             
NEW ENGLAND INTERSTATE PLANNING COMPACT
---------------------------------------

### Section 163-A:1

 **163-A:1 Compact Authorized. –** The New England Interstate
Planning Compact is hereby enacted into law and entered into with any
other state or states legally joining therein in the form substantially
as follows:

**NEW ENGLAND INTERSTATE PLANNING COMPACT**

**ARTICLE I**

**Findings**


                                             
 New England is by virtue of geographic location and other
characteristics a great population, cultural, economic, and resource
area which, with more intense use of physical, social, and economic
resources, increasingly requires coordinated planning as a basic
ingredient of effective and orderly growth of the region. To this end,
it is the intent of this compact to establish and provide for the
operation of an interstate planning agency for New England.

**ARTICLE II**

**Purpose**


                                             
 It is the purpose of this compact to provide, in the New England
region, improved facilities and procedures for the coordination of the
policies, programs, and activities of interstate significance in the New
England region in the field of physical, social, and economic resources,
and to study, investigate, and plan appropriate governmental activities
with respect to the conservation, development and use of the same; to
provide means by which interstate conflicts may be resolved; and to
provide procedures for interstate coordination of the interests of all
public and private agencies, persons and entities in the fields covered
by this compact, and to provide an organization for cooperation in such
coordination.

**ARTICLE III**

**Creation of Commission**


                                             
 There is hereby created the New England Interstate Planning
Commission, hereinafter called the commission.

**ARTICLE IV**

**Membership**


                                             
 The commission shall consist of one member from each party state to
be appointed and to serve, in accordance with and subject to the laws of
the State which he represents. Any member of the commission may be
represented by an alternate with power to act in his place and stead, if
the laws of his state so provide and if notice of the designation of
such alternate is given to the commission in such manner as its bylaws
may provide.

**ARTICLE V**

**Functions**


                                             
 To carry out the purpose of the compact it shall be the
responsibility of the commission to prepare studies and plans, and to
recommend procedures for implementing coordination of the policies and
programs and activities of interstate significance in the field of
physical, social, and economic conservation and development in the New
England region which may include the following:
                                             
 (1) Collection and interpretation of basic data.
                                             
 (2) Investigation, planning, and programming (including
scheduling) of projects of interstate or regional significance.
                                             
 (3) Planning and scheduling of governmental services and programs
which would be of assistance to the orderly growth and prosperity of the
region, and to the well-being of its population.
                                             
 (4) Encouraging of the referral of plans or proposals for
projects and programs of interstate or regional significance to the
commission.
                                             
 (5) Studying and recommending means for the most effective
utilization of such federal assistance as may be available on a regional
basis or as may have an interstate or regional impact.
                                             
 (6) Assisting the party states, or any of them, in cooperative
planning undertakings with the federal government or any agencies
thereof.
                                             
 To avoid duplication of effort and in the interests of economy, the
commission shall make use of existing studies, surveys, plans, data, and
other materials in the possession of the governmental agencies of the
party states and their respective subdivisions or in the possession of
other interstate agencies. Each such agency, within available
appropriations and if not expressly prevented or limited by law, is
hereby authorized to make such materials available to the commission and
to otherwise assist it in the performance of its functions. At the
request of the commission each such agency is further authorized to
provide the commission with information regarding plans and programs
affecting the New England region so that the commission may have
available to it current information with respect thereto.
                                             
 The commission shall use qualified public and private agencies to
make investigations and conduct research, but if it is unable to secure
the undertaking of such investigations or original research by a
qualified public or private agency, it shall have the power to make its
own investigations and conduct its own research. The commission may make
contracts with any public or private agencies or private persons or
entities for the undertaking of such investigations or original research
within its purview.
                                             
 The officers and personnel of agencies of the party states, and of
any other government or agency whatever, or private citizens, or
representatives of private organizations, may serve at the request of
the commission upon such advisory committees as the commission may
determine to create; and such officers and personnel of any such
government or agency may serve upon such committees without forfeiture
of office or employment and with no loss or diminution in the status,
rights and privileges which they otherwise enjoy.

**ARTICLE VI**

**Cooperation With the Federal Government and Other Governmental
Entities**


                                             
 Each party state is hereby authorized to participate in cooperative
or joint planning undertakings with the federal government, any
appropriate agency or agencies thereof, or with any interstate agency or
agencies. Such participation shall be at the instance of the governor or
in such other manner as state laws may provide or authorize. The
commission shall facilitate the work of state representatives in any
joint interstate or cooperative federal-state undertaking authorized by
this Article, and each such state shall keep the commission advised of
its activities in respect of such undertakings, to the extent that they
have interstate or regional significance.

**ARTICLE VII**

**Meetings and Voting**


                                             
 The commission shall hold at least 4 regular meetings a year. No
action of the commission shall be binding unless taken at a meeting at
which a majority of the commission members are present and a majority of
the total number of votes on the commission are cast in favor thereof;
provided that any action not binding by reason of failure to meet this
requirement may be ratified within 30 days by the concurrence in writing
of a majority of the commission members.

**ARTICLE VIII**

**Finances**


                                             
 A. The commission shall submit to the governor or designated officer
of each party state a budget including a statement of all funds expected
to be available to the commission and their sources and a request for an
appropriation to cover that state's share of expenditures for such
period as may be required by the laws of that jurisdiction for
presentation to the legislature thereof.
                                             
 B. With due regard for such monies and other assistance as may be
made available to it, the commission shall be provided with such funds
by each of the several states participating therein to provide the means
of establishing and maintaining facilities, a staff of personnel, and
such activities as may be necessary to fulfill the powers and duties
imposed upon and entrusted to the commission.
                                             
 With due allowance for monies otherwise available, each budget of
the commission shall be the responsibility of the party states, to be
apportioned among them as follows: 50% on an equal basis; 30% on the
basis of population; 20% on the basis of area within incorporated
places, such population to be determined in accordance with the last
official United States Census of Population.
                                             
 C. The commission shall not pledge the credit of any jurisdiction.
The commission may meet any of its obligations in whole or in part with
funds available to it under Article IX(E) of this compact, provided that
the commission takes specific action setting aside such funds prior to
the incurring of any obligation to be met in whole or in part in such
manner.
                                             
 D. The members of the commission shall be paid by the commission
their actual expenses incurred and incidental to the performance of
their duties, subject to the approval of the commission.
                                             
 E. The commission shall keep accurate accounts of all receipts and
disbursements. The receipts and disbursements of the commission shall be
subject to the audit and accounting procedures established under its
bylaws. However, all receipts and disbursements of funds handled by the
commission shall be audited by a qualified public accountant and the
report of the audit shall be included in and become a part of the annual
report of the commission.
                                             
 F. The accounts of the commission shall be open at any reasonable
time for inspection by such agency, representatives, or representatives
of the jurisdictions which appropriate funds to the commission.

**ARTICLE IX**

**Administration and Management**


                                             
 A. The commission may sue and be sued and shall have a seal.
                                             
 B. The commission shall elect annually, from among its members, a
chairman, vice-chairman and treasurer. The commission shall appoint an
executive director who shall also act as secretary, and together with
the treasurer, shall be bonded in such amounts as the commission may
require.
                                             
 C. The commission shall appoint and remove or discharge such
personnel as may be necessary for the performance of its functions
irrespective of any civil service laws which might otherwise apply. The
commission shall establish and maintain, independently by contract or
agreement, or in conjunction with any one or more of the party states,
suitable retirement programs for its employees. Employees of the
commission shall be eligible for social security coverage in respect to
old age and survivors insurance provided that the commission takes such
steps as may be necessary pursuant to federal law to participate in such
program of insurance as a governmental agency or unit. The commission
may establish and maintain or participate in such additional programs of
employee benefits as may be appropriate to afford employees of the
commission terms and conditions of employment similar to those enjoyed
by employees of the party states generally.
                                             
 D. The commission may borrow, accept or contract for the services of
personnel from any state or the United States or any subdivision or
agency thereof, from any intergovernmental agency, or from any
institution, person, firm or corporation.
                                             
 E. The commission may accept for any of its purposes and functions
under this compact any and all appropriations, donations, and grants of
money, equipment, supplies, materials and services, conditional or
otherwise, from any state or the United States or any subdivision or
agency thereof, or intergovernmental agency, or any institution, person,
firm or corporation, and may receive, utilize and dispose of the same.
                                             
 F. The commission may establish and maintain such facilities as may
be necessary for the transacting of its business. The commission may
acquire, hold and convey real and personal property and any interest
therein.
                                             
 G. The commission may adopt, amend, and rescind bylaws, rules, and
regulations for the conduct of its business.
                                             
 H. The commission shall make and transmit annually, to the
legislature and governor of each party state, a report covering the
activities of the commission for the preceding year, and embodying such
recommendations as may have been adopted by the commission. The
commission may issue such additional reports as it may deem desirable.

**ARTICLE X**

**Other Compacts and Activities**


                                             
 Nothing in this compact shall be construed to impair, or otherwise
affect the jurisdiction of any interstate agency in which any party
state participates nor to abridge, impair, or otherwise affect the
provisions of any compact to which any one or more of the party states
may be a party, nor to supersede, diminish, or otherwise affect any
obligation assumed under any such compact; nor shall anything in this
compact be construed to discourage additional interstate compacts among
some or all of the party states or the establishment of
intergovernmental agencies in sub-areas of the region. Nothing in this
compact shall be construed to limit the jurisdiction or activities of
any participating government, agency, or officer thereof, or any private
person or agency.

**ARTICLE XI**

**Enactment**


                                             
 This compact shall become effective when entered into and enacted
into law by any 3 of the states of Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts,
New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Vermont. Thereafter it shall become
effective with respect to any other aforementioned state upon its
enacting this compact into law.

**ARTICLE XII**

**Withdrawal**


                                             
 This compact shall continue in force and remain binding upon each
party state until renounced by it. Renunciation of this compact must be
preceded by sending 3 years' notice in writing of intention to withdraw
from the compact to the governor of each of the other states party
hereto.

**ARTICLE XIII**

**Construction and Severability**


                                             
 The provisions of this compact shall be severable and if any phrase,
clause, sentence, or provision of this compact is declared to be
unconstitutional or the applicability thereof to any state, agency,
person, or circumstance is held invalid, the constitutionality of the
remainder of this compact and the applicability thereof to any other
state, agency, person, or circumstance shall not be affected thereby. It
is the legislative intent that the provisions of this compact be
reasonably and liberally construed.

**Source.** 1965, 369:1, eff. July 1, 1965.

### Section 163-A:2

 **163-A:2 Member of Commission. –** The member of the New England
Interstate Planning Commission who represents this state thereon shall
be appointed by the governor and shall serve at his pleasure. If the
member representing this state on said commission is otherwise a regular
officer or employee of this state, he may designate an alternate who may
act in his place and stead as contemplated by Article IV of the compact.
If such member is not otherwise a regular officer or employee of this
state, the governor may designate an alternate. The alternate shall not
act, except in the absence of the member, and in no event shall the
alternate cast a written vote pursuant to the 30 days provision of
Article VII of the compact.

**Source.** 1965, 369:1, eff. July 1, 1965.

### Section 163-A:3

 **163-A:3 Commission Employees. –** The employees of the New England
Interstate Planning Commission may, upon the concluding of an agreement
for coverage with the state employees retirement system, be eligible for
and covered by such system. Any such agreement shall provide, as nearly
as may be, for the same ratio of employee contribution to total
contribution as pertains for members of the state employees retirement
system generally. No such agreement shall be concluded if the New
England Interstate Planning Commission has already entered into
arrangements for the coverage of its employees in a public employees
retirement system of any other state.

**Source.** 1965, 369:1, eff. July 1, 1965.

### Section 163-A:4

 **163-A:4 Repeal of Compact. –** Renunciation, within the meaning of
Article XII of the compact, shall be accomplished by act of the
legislature repealing the compact and by notice in accordance with said
Article. In the event of such an act of repeal, the governor shall send
the necessary notice to all other party states.

**Source.** 1965, 369:1, eff. July 1, 1965.
