---
title: CHAPTER 165 AID TO ASSISTED PERSONS
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 165
                                             
AID TO ASSISTED PERSONS
-----------------------

### Section 165:1

 **165:1 Who Entitled; Local Responsibility. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever a person in any town is poor and unable to support
himself, he shall be relieved and maintained by the overseers of public
welfare of such town, whether or not he has residence there. For the
purposes of this chapter the term "residence'' shall have the same
definition as in RSA 21:6-a.
                                             
 II. The local governing body, as defined in RSA 672:6, of every town
and city in the state shall adopt written guidelines relative to general
assistance. The guidelines shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
                                             
 (a) The process for application for general assistance.
                                             
 (b) The criteria for determining eligibility.
                                             
 (c) The process for appealing a decision relative to the granting
of general assistance.
                                             
 (d) The process for the application of rents under RSA 165:4-b,
if the municipality uses the offset provisions of RSA 165:4-a.
                                             
 (e) A statement that qualified state assistance reductions under
RSA 167:82, VIII may be deemed as income, if the local governing body
has permitted the welfare administrator to treat a qualified state
assistance reduction as deemed income under RSA 165:1-e.
                                             
 III. Whenever a town provides assistance under this section, no such
assistance shall be provided directly to a person or household in the
form of cash payments.

**Source.** RS 66:1. CS 70:1. GS 74:1. GL 82:1. PS 84:1. PL 106:1. RL
124:1. RSA 165:1. 1979, 243:1; 351:2. 1985, 380:2. 1986, 5:2. 1991,
355:56. 1992, 184:1. 1996, 175:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 165:1-a

 **165:1-a Assisted Person Defined; Local Responsibility. –** Any
person in a town or city who is poor and unable to support himself shall
be known as a town or city assisted person, and shall be relieved and
maintained at the expense of the town or city of residence.

**Source.** 1977, 336:1. 1985, 380:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 165:1-b

 **165:1-b Disqualification for Noncompliance With Guidelines. –**
                                             
 I. Any person otherwise eligible for assistance under this chapter
shall become ineligible to receive such assistance if he willfully fails
to comply with written guidelines adopted by the governing body of the
town or city relating to:
                                             
 (a) Disclosure of income, resources, or other material financial
data;
                                             
 (b) Participation in a work program authorized under this
chapter;
                                             
 (c) Reasonable work search; or
                                             
 (d) Application with other public assistance agencies.
                                             
 II. No person shall be found ineligible for assistance or suspended
from assistance pursuant to paragraph I until he has been given:
                                             
 (a) A written notice stating those specific actions he must take
in order to comply; and
                                             
 (b) A 7-day period within which to comply after receiving such
notice.
                                             
 III. If a person does not comply within the 7 days, the town or city
may issue to the person a written notice that the person is ineligible
for assistance or suspended from assistance. The written notice shall
include a list of the guidelines with which the person is not in
compliance, those actions necessary for compliance, and written notice
of the opportunity to request a hearing within 5 days.
                                             
 IV. If such person requests a hearing, the town or city shall give
him an opportunity to continue to receive assistance, pending the
outcome of the hearing, in accordance with any prior eligibility
determination.
                                             
 V. The period of ineligibility or suspension pursuant to this
section shall be 7 days; provided, however, that any such suspension
within 6 months after the end of any prior suspension period shall be
for 14 days; and provided further that if upon the expiration of the
7-day or 14-day disqualification period the person continues to fail to
carry out the specific actions set forth in the notice required in
paragraph III, the disqualification shall continue until the person
complies.
                                             
 VI. The overseers of public welfare shall not be required to accept
an application for general assistance from a person who is subject to
disqualification or suspension under this section; provided, however,
that in the event such disqualification or suspension continues beyond
the 7 or 14-day period due to continued noncompliance pursuant to
paragraph IV, and there is a dispute over a contention by such person
that he has satisfactorily complied with the requirements set forth in
the notice required by paragraph III, such person shall be given an
opportunity to request a hearing to determine that issue, but paragraph
IV shall not apply to such a hearing.

**Source.** 1985, 106:1. 1986, 142:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 165:1-c

 **165:1-c Nonresidents. –** Any person, poor and unable to support
himself, who is temporarily in a town or city which is not his
residence, and who does not intend to make it his residence, shall be
provided such temporary assistance as is reasonable and necessary by
such town or city. Such town or city may, if requested, cause such
person to be returned to his residence.

**Source.** 1985, 380:4, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 165:1-d

 **165:1-d Disqualification for Voluntary Termination of Employment.
–**
                                             
 I. Any person eligible for assistance under this chapter, who
voluntarily terminated employment within the 60-day period before filing
an application for assistance, shall be ineligible to receive assistance
for 90 days from the date of employment termination, provided the
following conditions are met:
                                             
 (a) The person received general assistance within the last 365
days and was given notice that voluntary termination of employment
without good cause could lead to disqualification from receiving general
assistance in the future.
                                             
 (b) There are no minor or dependent children in the person's
household which the person is legally responsible for supporting.
                                             
 (c) At the time of termination of employment, the person did not
have a mental or physical impairment which caused such person to be
unable to work.
                                             
 (d) The employment that the person voluntarily terminated
consisted of at least 20 hours of work per week, and the person has not
become reemployed for at least 2 weeks at a level consisting of at least
20 hours of work per week.
                                             
 (e) The person did not have good cause for terminating the
employment, as defined in paragraph II.
                                             
 II. Good cause for terminating employment shall include any of the
following:
                                             
 (a) Discrimination by an employer based on age, race, sex,
physical or mental disability, religion, or national origin.
                                             
 (b) Work demands or conditions that render continued employment
unreasonable.
                                             
 (c) Retirement by a person 62 years of age or over or resignation
by a person under 62 years of age which is recognized by the employer as
retirement.
                                             
 (d) Employment which becomes unsuitable following the applicant's
acceptance of such employment.
                                             
 (e) Leaving a job in order to accept a bonafide job offer which,
because of circumstances beyond the control of the applicant,
subsequently either does not materialize or results in employment of
fewer than 20 hours per week or weekly earnings of less than the state
or federal hourly minimum wage multiplied by 20 hours.
                                             
 (f) Leaving a job in connection with patterns of employment in
which workers frequently move from one employer to another, such as
migrant farm labor or construction work, even though employment at the
new site has not actually begun.
                                             
 (g) Leaving a job because of circumstances, such as lack of
transportation or a household emergency, which are beyond the control of
the applicant to remedy as determined by the overseer of public welfare
and which make continued employment impracticable.
                                             
 (h) Termination of employment for other good cause.
                                             
 III. The applicant shall be responsible for demonstrating good
cause. The welfare officer may offer assistance in obtaining necessary
information.
                                             
 IV. An applicant shall be considered to have voluntarily terminated
employment if the applicant fails to report for work without good cause,
as defined in paragraph II, resulting in the termination of the
applicant's employment. An applicant who is fired or resigns from a job
at the request of the employer due to the applicant's inability to
maintain the employer's normal work productivity standard shall not be
considered to have voluntarily terminated employment.
                                             
 V. No person shall be found ineligible for assistance due to a
voluntary employment termination unless the applicant has been given a
written application for assistance and a written notice stating the
reason for the denial of assistance and the specific actions which must
be taken in order to reinstate eligibility, along with a written notice
of the opportunity to request a hearing within 5 days.
                                             
 VI. Notwithstanding a voluntary termination without good cause,
assistance under this chapter may be given if the welfare officer
determines that denial of assistance will put that person or members of
the person's household at substantial risk of injury to health or other
serious harm, which cannot be avoided or mitigated by other public or
private resources.
                                             
 VII. The provisions of RSA 165:1-b, II-VI shall not apply to persons
found ineligible for assistance because of voluntary termination of
employment without good cause. However, if at any time during the
disqualification period, there is a dispute whether a person has
satisfactorily complied with the requirements set forth in the written
notice provided for by paragraph V, the person shall be given an
opportunity to request a hearing to determine that issue only.

**Source.** 1995, 221:1, eff. Aug. 11, 1995.

### Section 165:1-e

 **165:1-e Option to Treat a Qualified State Assistance Reduction as
Deemed Income. –** The local governing body of a town or city may permit
the welfare administrator to deem as income all or any portion of any
qualified state assistance reduction pursuant to RSA 167:82, VIII. The
following criteria shall apply to any action to deem income under this
section:
                                             
 I. The authority to deem income under this section shall terminate
when the qualified state assistance reduction no longer is in effect.
                                             
 II. Applicants for general assistance may be required to cooperate
in obtaining information from the department of health and human
services as to the existence and amount of any qualified state
assistance reduction. No applicant for general assistance may be
considered to be subject to a qualified state assistance reduction
unless the existence and amount of the reduction has been confirmed by
the department of health and human services.
                                             
 III. The welfare administrator shall provide the applicant with a
written decision which sets forth the amount of any deemed income used
to determine eligibility for general assistance.
                                             
 IV. Whenever necessary to prevent an immediate threat to the health
and safety of children in the household, the welfare administrator shall
waive that portion, if any, of the qualified state assistance reduction
as is necessary.

**Source.** 1996, 175:3, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 165:2

 **165:2 Administration of General Assistance. –** The administrator
of town or city welfare in each town or city shall administer general
assistance to all persons who are eligible for such assistance as
provided under RSA 165:1-a and RSA 165:1-c.

**Source.** 1875, 7:3. GL 269:20. PS 84:7. PL 106:7. RL 124:2. RSA
165:2. 1985, 380:5. 1988, 180:1, eff. June 25, 1988.

### Section 165:2-a

 **165:2-a Expense of General Assistance. –** The financial
responsibility for general assistance for assisted persons shall be the
responsibility of the town or city in which the person making
application resides, except as otherwise provided in RSA 165:1-c and
165:20-c.

**Source.** 1985, 380:6. 1988, 180:1. 1993, 229:2, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 165:2-b

 **165:2-b Disqualification for Certain Property Transfers. –** No
person who is otherwise eligible for assistance under this chapter shall
receive such assistance if he has made an assignment, transfer or
conveyance of property for the purpose of rendering himself eligible for
such assistance within 3 years immediately preceding his application for
such assistance.

**Source.** 1985, 380:6, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 165:2-c

 **165:2-c Withholding Names of Recipients of Aid. –**
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no town,
city or county official shall publish or disclose or allow to be
published or disclosed in the annual report of the town, city or county,
or in any other document or letter, except as is necessary for and
connected with the administration of this chapter, the name, address or
any other identifying information of any recipient who is receiving
assistance or aid; provided, however, that any taxpayer shall be allowed
to see the itemized account of such aid furnished. Any person violating
any provision of this section shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1985, 380:6, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 165:3

 **165:3 Burial or Cremation. –**
                                             
 I. If an assisted person shall die in any town or city the overseers
of public welfare shall cause such person to be decently buried or
cremated at the expense of the town or city.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any provision of paragraph I to the contrary, if
an assisted person dies in a county nursing home, the overseers of
public welfare shall cause such person to be decently buried or cremated
at the expense of the town or city in which the assisted person was a
resident, as that term is defined in RSA 21:6, on the date on which the
assisted person entered the county nursing home.

**Source.** RS 66:7. CS 70:7. GS 74:7. GL 82:7. PS 84:8. PL 106:8. RL
124:3. RSA 165:3. 1985, 380:45, 47. 1993, 308:3. 2000, 202:1, eff. Jan.
1, 2001.

### Section 165:4

 **165:4 Information Regarding Bank Deposits. –** A cashier of a
national bank and a treasurer of a savings bank and a trust company may,
when requested by an overseer of public welfare of a town or city in the
state, furnish to said overseer any information asked relative to the
deposit of a person receiving or applying for public support.

**Source.** 1933, 116:1. RL 124:4. RSA 165:4. 1985, 380:45, eff. Jan. 1,
1986.

### Section 165:4-a

 **165:4-a Application of Rents Paid by the Municipality. –**
Whenever the owner of property rented to a person receiving assistance
under this chapter is in arrears in sewer, water, electricity, or tax
payments to the municipality, the municipality may apply, upon approval
of the governing body, the assistance which the property owner would
have received in payment of rent on behalf of such assisted person to
the property owner's delinquent balances, regardless of whether such
delinquent balances are in respect of property occupied by the assisted
person. For purposes of this section, a payment shall be considered "in
arrears'' if more than 30 days have elapsed since the mailing of the
bill, or in the case of real estate taxes, if interest has begun to
accrue pursuant to RSA 76:13.

**Source.** 1992, 184:2, eff. July 11, 1992.

### Section 165:4-b

 **165:4-b Process for Application of Rents Paid by the Municipality.
–** Prior to utilizing the optional offset provisions of RSA 165:4-a,
the governing body shall adopt, as part of the guidelines required under
RSA 165:1, II, rules governing the process, including a policy which
specifically sets out which bill shall be offset first and any further
priority of such offset payments and a procedure for notifying the
landlord.

**Source.** 1992, 184:2, eff. July 11, 1992.

Veterans' Relief
----------------

### Section 165:5

 **165:5 Who Entitled. –** Whenever any person, resident in this
state, who served in the armed forces of the United States, in any war,
insurrection, campaign, or expedition, in which the United States was
engaged, and who received an honorable discharge, not being under
guardianship or legal restraint, shall become poor and unable to provide
maintenance for himself and his dependent family, such person, his wife,
widow, or minor children, shall be supported at the public expense in
the town or city of their abode, at their own home or such place, other
than a town or county almshouse, as the overseers of public welfare or
the county commissioners shall deem proper.

**Source.** 1885, 41:1, 2. 1887, 45:1. 1889, 81:1. 1891, 38:2. PS 84:9.
1901, 116:1. 1921, 104:1. PL 106:9. 1933, 78:1. RL 124:5. RSA 165:5.
1959, 98:1, eff. July 13, 1959.

### Section 165:6

 **165:6 Limitations. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 380:51, II, eff. Jan. 1,
1986.
                                             ]

### Section 165:7-11

 **165:7 to 165:11 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988, 180:5, eff. June
25, 1988.
                                             ]

### Section 165:12

 **165:12 Withholding Names of Certain Recipients of Aid. –**

                                             [Repealed 1985, 380:51, III, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 165:13

 **165:13 Inspection of Account. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 380:51, IV,
eff. Jan. 1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 165:14

 **165:14 Penalty. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988, 180:5, eff. June 25, 1988.
                                             ]

### Section 165:15

 **165:15 Admission to Home. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 380:51, V, eff.
Jan. 1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 165:16

 **165:16 Burial Expenses. –** Whenever any person, a resident in
this state, who served in the armed forces of the United States in any
of the wars or conflicts defined in RSA 165:17 for a total of 90 days,
unless sooner released from such service by reason of disability
incurred in service, and whose services were terminated under conditions
other than dishonorable, dies and did not leave sufficient estate to pay
the expenses of his funeral, or was an assisted person, the overseers of
public welfare shall cause him to be decently buried at the expense of
the municipality in which he died. Funds received from the Department of
Veterans Affairs towards burial expenses shall be retained by the
municipality. The municipality shall make a request to the Department of
Veterans Affairs to provide a suitable monument.

**Source.** 1909, 130:1. 1911, 31:1. 1919, 135:1. 1921, 63:1. 1925,
93:1. PL 106:20. 1929, 28:1. RL 24:16. 1943, 102:1. 1945, 88:1. 1947,
214:1. 1949, 28:1; 167:4. RSA 165:16. 1959, 77:1. 1965, 87:1. 1967,
171:1. 1988, 180:3, eff. June 25, 1988.

### Section 165:17

 **165:17 Definition of Terms. –** The following shall constitute
wars or conflicts for purposes of RSA 165:16:
                                             
 I. Any war or armed conflict that occurred between July 3, 1921 and
December 6, 1941 and in which the resident earned an armed forces
expeditionary medal or theater of operations service medal.
                                             
 II. "World War II'' between December 7, 1941 and December 31, 1946.
                                             
 III. "Korean Conflict'' between June 25, 1950 and January 31, 1955.
                                             
 IV. "Vietnam Conflict'' between July 1, 1958 and December 22, 1961,
if the resident earned the Vietnam service medal or an armed forces
expeditionary medal.
                                             
 V. "Vietnam Conflict'' between August 5, 1964 and May 7, 1975.
                                             
 VI. Any war or armed conflict that has occurred between May 8, 1975
and August 1, 1990 and in which the resident earned an armed forces
expeditionary medal or theater of operations service medal.
                                             
 VII. "Persian Gulf War'' between August 2, 1990 and the date
thereafter prescribed by Presidential proclamation or by law.

**Source.** 1949, 167:5. 1951, 176:1. RSA 165:17. 1965, 69:1. 1967,
171:2. 1988, 180:4. 2010, 79:1, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 165:18

 **165:18 Limitation. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988, 180:5, eff. June 25,
1988.
                                             ]

Liability for Support, and Recovery Over
----------------------------------------

### Section 165:19

 **165:19 Liability for Support. –** The relation of any poor person
in the line of father, mother, stepfather, stepmother, son, daughter,
husband, or wife shall assist or maintain such person when in need of
relief. Said relation shall be deemed able to assist such person if his
weekly income is more than sufficient to provide a reasonable
subsistence compatible with decency and health. Should a relation refuse
to render such aid when requested to do so by a county commissioner,
selectman, or overseer of public welfare, such person or persons shall
upon complaint of one of these officials be summoned to appear in court.
If, after hearing, it is found that the alleged poor person is in need
of assistance, and that the relation is able to render such assistance,
the court shall enter a decree accordingly and shall fix the amount and
character of the assistance which the relation shall furnish. If the
relation neglects or refuses to comply with the court order without good
cause, as determined by the court at a hearing, or by refusing to work
or otherwise voluntarily places himself in a position where he is unable
to comply, he shall be deemed to be in contempt of court and shall be
imprisoned not more than 90 nor fewer than 60 days. If a poor person has
no relation of sufficient ability, the town or city in which he resides
shall be liable for his support.

**Source.** RS 66:8. CS 70:8. GS 74:8. GL 82:8. PS 84:12. 1925, 112:1.
PL 106:22. 1933, 65:1. RL 124:18. RSA 165:19. 1973, 115:1. 1985, 380:11,
eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 165:20

 **165:20 Recovery of Expense. –** If a town, city, or county acting
as agent for a town under RSA 165:34 spends any sum for the support,
return to his home, or burial of an assisted person having a residence
in another town or city, or for an assisted person having relations able
to support him under RSA 165:19, such sum may be recovered from the
town, city or relation so chargeable or from a county acting as agent
for the town under RSA 165:34. In any civil action brought under this
section to recover such sum, the court shall award costs to the
prevailing party.

**Source.** RS 66:9. CS 70:9. GS 74:9. 1875, 7:4. GL 82:10; 269:21. PS
84:13. PL 106:23. RL 124:19. RSA 165:20. 1967, 192:3. 1977, 152:2;
367:1. 1985, 380:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 165:20-a

 **165:20-a Settlement of Disputes. –**
                                             
 I. In any case where a town, city, county or the state seeks to
recover a sum spent on assistance to a person and there is a dispute
between a town, city, county or the state as to the liability for such
assistance, the voluntary arbitration system established by this section
shall be available.
                                             
 II. The department of health and human services shall maintain a
roster of the selectmen and welfare administrators of the cities, towns,
and counties of the state. If a town, city, county or the state decides
to avail itself of the voluntary arbitration system, the commissioner of
the department of health and human services or his designee shall
randomly select a panel of 3 persons from the roster to arbitrate the
dispute. No selectman or welfare administrator shall serve on any panel
resolving a dispute concerning his own city, town or county.
                                             
 III. Any such voluntary arbitration session shall be held at a time
and place to be determined by the commissioner of health and human
services.
                                             
 IV. The costs of such voluntary arbitration shall be equally divided
between the town, city, county or the state involved in the dispute.
                                             
 V. Any town, city, county or the state choosing the forum of the
voluntary arbitration system shall lose the right to litigate the issue,
and the decision of the panel of arbitrators shall be final.

**Source.** 1977, 373:1. 1979, 228:1. 1983, 291:1. 1985, 380:13. 1995,
310:176, 181, 182, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 165:20-b

 **165:20-b Recovery From Recipients. –** Any town or city furnishing
assistance to any person who is returned to an income status after
receiving the assistance which enables him to reimburse the town or city
without financial hardship may recover from such person the amount of
assistance provided.

**Source.** 1981, 503:8. 1985, 380:45, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 165:20-c

 **165:20-c Reimbursement From the State of New Hampshire. –**
                                             
 I. If any person receiving general assistance from a town or city
under the provisions of this chapter is deemed to be eligible for
assistance under the provisions of RSA 167, the commissioner of health
and human services shall reimburse such town or city the amount of
assistance provided by the town or city as a result of the commissioner
of health and human services' delays in processing within the federally
mandated time periods.
                                             
 II. Any claims for reimbursement under this section shall be held
until the end of the fiscal year. If the total of all claims for
reimbursement does not exceed 
                                             $100,000, all validated claims shall be
paid in full. If such total exceeds 
                                             $100,000, claims shall be
reimbursed on a prorated basis so that the total paid out for claims
shall not exceed 
                                             $100,000.

**Source.** 1993, 229:1. 1995, 310:179, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 165:21-24

 **165:21 to 165:24 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1967, 192:10, eff. Jan.
1, 1968.
                                             ]

### Section 165:25

 **165:25 Limitation of Action. –** Actions by towns and cities to
recover the expense of support, return to his home, or burial of a poor
person may be brought within 6 years after the cause of action accrued
and not afterward.

**Source.** RS 66:14. CS 70:14. GS 74:14. GL 82:15. PS 84:18. PL 106:28.
RL 124:24. RSA 165:25. 1967, 192:4. 1981, 503:4. 1985, 380:14, eff. Jan.
1, 1986.

### Section 165:26

 **165:26 Transfer of Action. –** Whenever a county in which an
action for the support of an assisted person is pending may eventually
be liable for such support, the court, on motion, shall transfer the
action to an adjoining county for adjudication.

**Source.** RS 66:15. CS 70:15. GS 74:15. GL 82:16. PS 84:19. PL 106:29.
RL 124:25. RSA 165:26. 1985, 380:47, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 165:27

 **165:27 Recovery From Estates. –** Towns and cities may recover
from the estates of persons assisted in like manner as counties under
RSA 166:19.

**Source.** 1903, 42:1. PL 106:30. RL 124:26. RSA 165:27. 1985, 380:15,
eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 165:27-a

 **165:27-a Assignment for Funeral and Burial or Cremation Expenses.
–**
                                             
 I. Except when a town or city assisted person has made arrangements
for a prepaid funeral, if the total of his liquid assets at death are
less than 
                                             $1,000, there shall be an automatic assignment to the funeral
director or the person who paid for the funeral and burial or cremation
of the deceased to the extent of funeral and burial or cremation
expenses up to 
                                             $1,000.
                                             
 II. The funeral director or the person who paid for the funeral and
burial or cremation expenses may submit a notarized statement to the
effect that he has paid the expenses, together with an itemized list of
the expenses, to the entity holding the assets. Upon submission of the
statement and the list, the person shall receive payment to the extent
of the expenses authorized under this section.
                                             
 III. The entity making the payment shall provide a receipt and shall
send a copy of the receipt to the town selectmen or city council of the
appropriate town or city.
                                             
 IV. If no assets remain after a payment is made under this section,
the entity making the payment shall so notify the probate court having
jurisdiction over the estate.

**Source.** 1981, 253:2. 1985, 380:16. 2000, 202:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 165:28

 **165:28 Liens on Real Property. –** The amount of money spent by a
town or city to support an assisted person under this chapter shall,
except for just cause, be made a lien on any real estate owned by the
assisted person. The liens are effective until enforced as provided in
this chapter, or until released by the selectmen or city council;
provided that there shall be no enforcement of the lien so long as the
real estate is occupied as the sole residence of the assisted person,
his surviving spouse, or his surviving children who are under age 18 or
blind or permanently and totally disabled. Interest at the rate of 6
percent per year shall be charged on the amount of money constituting
such lien commencing one year after the date of the filing of the lien
unless a majority of the selectmen in the town or the councilmen in the
city vote to waive such interest. The selectmen or council may file a
notice of the lien or an acknowledgment of satisfaction of the lien with
the register of deeds of the county in which the assisted person owns
real property. A notice of lien which contains the owner's name and a
description of the real property sufficient to identify it is a valid
lien on the property. The register of deeds shall keep a suitable record
of such notices without charging any fee therefor, and he shall enter an
acknowledgment of satisfaction of the lien upon written request of the
selectmen or the council without fee.

**Source.** 1965, 42:1. 1975, 303:1. 1985, 380:17. 1988, 180:2, eff.
June 25, 1988.

### Section 165:28-a

 **165:28-a Liens on Civil Judgments. –**
                                             
 I. A town or city shall be entitled to a lien upon property passing
under the terms of a will or by intestate succession, a property
settlement, or a civil judgment for personal injuries awarded any person
granted assistance by the town or city under RSA 165 for the amount of
assistance granted by the town or city.
                                             
 II. The town or city shall be entitled to the lien only if the
assistance was granted no more than 6 years before the receipt of the
inheritance or the award of the property settlement or civil judgment,
provided that this section shall not apply to inheritances, property
settlements, or civil judgments awarded before August 28, 1981.
                                             
 III. This lien shall take precedence over all other claims.

**Source.** 1981, 503:1. 1985, 380:45, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 165:29

 **165:29 Enforcement of Liens. –** Liens arising under RSA 165:28 or
RSA 165:28-a may be enforced by a bill in equity.

**Source.** 1965, 42:1. 1981, 503:3, eff. Aug. 28, 1981.

### Section 165:30

 **165:30 Relative Priority. –** Any lien arising under RSA 165:28
shall be subordinate to mortgages and other valid liens, recorded with
the register of deeds prior to the recording of the notice of the lien
referred to in RSA 165:28.

**Source.** 1965, 42:1. 1981, 503:5, eff. Aug. 28, 1981.

### Section 165:31

 **165:31 Work Program Requirements for Assisted Persons. –**
                                             
 I. The overseer of public welfare may require any person who is
receiving support under this chapter and who is physically able to work,
to participate in the municipality's work program as a condition of
continued eligibility for assistance. The overseer of public welfare of
the town or city may require the person receiving aid to work for the
town or city at any job which it has available that is within the
capacity of the person receiving support. Such persons shall receive aid
in return for such required work at a rate of exchange equivalent to the
prevailing wage for the kind of work they are required to perform in the
community from which they receive support, as determined by the
municipality's pay schedules prevailing at the time of application for
assistance. The amount an assisted person may be required to reimburse
the town or city for aid received shall be reduced by the credits
received from participation in the municipal work program.
                                             
 II. The overseer of public welfare of the town or city may require
the person receiving aid to perform services for a nonprofit
organization if that organization has agreed to participate as a
municipal work program, and has been approved by the overseer of public
welfare, provided the person is credited according to the prevailing
wage scale of that institution.
                                             
 III. In no case shall participation in a work program be required of
the following persons as a condition of receiving assistance:
                                             
 (a) Single parents with children under the age of 5 years; and
                                             
 (b) Persons with mental or physical disabilities, as determined
by the overseer of public welfare.

**Source.** 1965, 321:1. 1977, 59:1. 1985, 380:18. 1987, 261:1. 1996,
213:2, eff. Aug. 9, 1996.

### Section 165:32

 **165:32 Employment of Relatives. –** No person who is otherwise
eligible for support under this chapter shall receive such support
unless and until all able-bodied adults under the age of 65 years,
except those regularly attending school, who are related to such person,
regularly residing in the same household as such person, legally liable
to contribute to the support of such person and not prevented from
maintaining employment and contributing to the support of such person by
reason of physical or mental disability or other substantial or other
justifiable cause, are employed on a full-time basis. The amount or
amounts earned by the persons obligated to maintain employment under
this section shall be taken into consideration in determining the level
of need for town or city support. Nothing in this section shall be so
construed to deny to any minor dependent child any needed support to
which he would otherwise be entitled. Unrelated adults living in the
same household in loco parentis as to any such person seeking town or
city support shall be obligated to contribute to the poor person's
support to the same extent as the parent of such person, and in default
thereof, shall be subject to the same penalties as the parent of such
person would be in such case.

**Source.** 1969, 451:2. 1985, 380:19, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 165:33

 **165:33 City or Town Districts. –** Any city or town may contract
with one or more cities or towns to form districts. Such districts shall
administer general assistance for which the respective city or town is
responsible. The districts are authorized to establish the rate which
will be paid to the districts by the respective city or town and to
establish written guidelines under which general assistance shall be
administered.

**Source.** 1985, 380:20, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 165:34

 **165:34 City or Town may Contract With County. –** Any city or town
may contract with its respective county to permit the county to act as
its agent in administering general assistance for which the city or town
is responsible. The city or town and the county are further authorized
to establish the rate which will be paid by the cities or towns to the
counties and to establish written guidelines under which general
assistance shall be administered.

**Source.** 1985, 380:20, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 165:35

 **165:35 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of health and human
services shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Establishing forms for claims under RSA 165:20-c.
                                             
 II. Processing and validating claims under RSA 165:20-c.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1993, 229:3. 2012, 171:26, IX, eff. Aug. 10, 2012.
