---
title: 'CHAPTER 167-D SERVICE ANIMALS AND SEARCH AND RESCUE DOGS'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 167-D
                                             
SERVICE ANIMALS AND SEARCH AND RESCUE DOGS
------------------------------------------

### Section 167-D:1

 **167-D:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Housing accommodation'' means any publicly assisted housing
accommodation or any real property, or portion thereof, which is used or
occupied, or is intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied,
as the home, residence, or sleeping place of one or more persons, but
shall not include any single family residence the occupants of which
rent, lease, or furnish for compensation not more than one room
therein.
                                             
 II. "Public facility'' means any place of public accommodation and
any street, highway, sidewalk, walkway, public building, and any other
place or structure to which the general public is regularly, normally,
or customarily permitted or invited.
                                             
 III. A "place of public accommodation'' shall mean, but shall not be
limited to, any tavern roadhouse, hotel, motel, or trailer camp, whether
for entertainment of transient guests or accommodation of those seeking
health, recreation, or rest; any producer, manufacturer, wholesaler,
distributor, retail shop, store establishment, or concession dealing
with goods or services of any kind; any restaurant, eating house, or
place where food is sold for consumption on the premises; any place
maintained for the sale of ice cream, ice, and fruit preparations or
their derivatives, soda water or confections, or where any beverages of
any kind are retailed for consumption on the premises; any garage; any
public conveyance operated on land or water, or in the air, or any
stations and terminals thereof; any bathhouse, boardwalk, or seashore
accommodation; any auditorium, meeting place, or hall; any theatre,
motion picture house, music hall, roof garden, skating rink, swimming
pool, amusement and recreation park, fair, bowling alley, gymnasium,
shooting gallery, billiard and pool parlor, or any other place of
amusement; any comfort station; any dispensary, clinic, or hospital; any
public library; any kindergarten, primary and secondary school, trade or
business school, high school, academy, college and university, or any
educational institution under the supervision of the state board of
education, or the commissioner of education of the state of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 IV. "Service animal'' means any dog individually trained to do work
or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability,
including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other
mental disability. Other species of animals, whether wild or domestic,
trained or untrained, are not service animals for purposes of this
definition.
                                             
 V. "Service animal trainer'' means any person who is employed to
train dogs for or is volunteering to raise dogs for a provider of
service animals for persons with disabilities or an individual trainer
who helps a person with disabilities to train his or her own service
animal or an individual trainer who tests an animal to verify its
eligibility for the New Hampshire service animal tag.
                                             
 VI. "Search and rescue dog'' means any dog which has been trained to
perform typical search and rescue operations and is certified by a
competent authority or holds a title from a competent authority or
organization recognized by the office of the governor, the department of
safety, the department of fish and game, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or its successor agency.

**Source.** 2011, 170:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2012. 2014, 66:3, eff. Jan. 1,
2015.

### Section 167-D:2

 **167-D:2 Service Animal Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The work or tasks performed by a service animal shall be directly
related to the handler's disability. Work and tasks may include, but is
not limited to:
                                             
 (a) Assisting individuals who are blind or have low vision with
navigation and other tasks.
                                             
 (b) Alerting individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing to the
presence of people or sounds.
                                             
 (c) Providing nonviolent protection or rescue work.
                                             
 (d) Pulling a wheelchair.
                                             
 (e) Assisting an individual during a seizure.
                                             
 (f) Alerting individuals to the presence of allergens.
                                             
 (g) Retrieving items such as medicine or a telephone.
                                             
 (h) Providing physical support and assistance with balance and
stability to individuals with mobility disabilities.
                                             
 (i) Helping persons with psychiatric and neurological disability
by preventing or interrupting impulsive or destructive behaviors.
                                             
 II. The crime determent effect of an animal's presence and the
provision of emotional support, well-being, comfort, or companionship
does not constitute work or tasks for the purposes of this chapter.

**Source.** 2011, 170:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 167-D:3

 **167-D:3 Private Clubs, Etc. –** Nothing herein contained shall be
construed to include or apply to any institution, bona fide club, or
place of accommodation, which is in its nature distinctly private; nor
shall anything herein contained apply to any educational facility
operated or maintained by a bona fide religious or sectarian
institution; and the right of a natural parent or one in loco parentis
to direct the education and upbringing of a child under his or her
control is hereby affirmed; nor shall anything herein contained be
construed to bar any private secondary or postsecondary school from
using good faith criteria other than race, creed, color, national
origin, ancestry, or disability in admission of students.

**Source.** 2011, 170:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 167-D:4

 **167-D:4 Service Animals May Accompany. –** It is lawful for any
service animal to accompany his or her handler or trainer into any
public facility, housing accommodation, or place of public accommodation
to which the general public is invited, subject only to the conditions
and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all persons.

**Source.** 2011, 170:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 167-D:5

 **167-D:5 Application of RSA 167-D:4 to Search and Rescue Dogs. –**
The provisions of RSA 167-D:4 shall also apply to dogs involved in
search and rescue missions at the request of a government agency when
such dogs are in the course of, or traveling to or from the scene of,
their official duties.

**Source.** 2011, 170:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 167-D:6

 **167-D:6 Service Animal Trainer. –** A service animal trainer,
while engaged in the actual training process and activities of such
animals, shall have the same rights and privileges with respect to
access to public facilities, and the same responsibilities as are
applicable to persons with disabilities using a service animal.

**Source.** 2011, 170:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 167-D:7

 **167-D:7 Licensing. –** Service animals shall be licensed as
provided in RSA 466.

**Source.** 2011, 170:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 167-D:8

 **167-D:8 Prohibited Acts. –**
                                             
 I. It is unlawful for a person, directly or indirectly, either to
prohibit, hinder, or interfere with a service animal's handler or
trainer who otherwise complies with the limitations applicable to
persons without disabilities.
                                             
 II. It is unlawful for any person to fit an animal with a collar,
leash, vest, sign, or harness of the type which represents that the
animal is a service animal, or service animal tag issued under RSA 466:8
or to request a service animal tag issued under RSA 466:8 if in fact
said animal is not a service animal.
                                             
 III. It is unlawful for any person to willfully interfere or attempt
to interfere with a service animal.
                                             
 IV. It is unlawful for any person to represent that such person has
a disability or is a service animal trainer for the purpose of acquiring
a service animal unless said person has a disability or is a service
animal trainer and to impersonate, by word or action, a person with a
disability for the purpose of receiving service dog accommodations or
service animal accessories such as a collar, leash, vest, sign, harness,
or service animal tag, which represents that the animal is a service
animal or to acquire a service animal tag issued under RSA 466:8.

**Source.** 2011, 170:2. 2012, 211:2, eff. Aug. 12, 2012. 2014, 66:1,
eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 167-D:9

 **167-D:9 Nonuse of Service Animal. –** A person with a disability
not using a service animal in any of the places, accommodations, or
conveyances listed in RSA 167-D shall have all of the rights and
privileges conferred by law upon other persons; and the failure of a
person with a disability to use a service animal in those places,
accommodations, or conveyances shall not be held to constitute nor be
evidence of contributory negligence.

**Source.** 2011, 170:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 167-D:10

 **167-D:10 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to enhanced penalties in paragraphs
II and III.
                                             
 II. It is a misdemeanor if a person willfully causes physical injury
to a service animal or willfully allows his or her animal to cause
physical injury to a service animal. If the physical injury to a service
animal is severe enough that a veterinarian or service animal trainer
determines that the service animal is incapable of returning to service,
that person shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor.
                                             
 III. In any case where a person is convicted of harming a service
animal as described in paragraph II, he or she may be ordered by the
court to make restitution to the person or agency owning the animal for
any bills for veterinary care, the replacement cost of the animal if it
is incapable of returning to service, and the salary of the service
animal handler or trainer for the period of time his or her services are
lost to the agency or self employment.

**Source.** 2011, 170:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2012. 2014, 66:4, eff. Jan. 1,
2015.
