---
title: 'CHAPTER 167-B MARRIAGE COUNSELING REFERRAL SERVICE'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 167-B
                                             
MARRIAGE COUNSELING REFERRAL SERVICE
------------------------------------

### Section 167-B:1

 **167-B:1 Service Established; Court Referrals. –** Whenever a
petition for divorce or petition for legal separation has been filed
with the superior court the presiding justice or his or her authorized
representative, subject to rules to be established by the superior
court, pending a hearing upon the merits, shall exercise his or her
discretion to determine if the matter before the court shall be referred
for marriage counseling to an approved family service agency within the
jurisdiction of the court. If the parties are insured, the referral
shall be made with due consideration to identifying a counselor who
accepts direct payment from the parties' health insurance carrier. Any
such referral shall be binding upon the petitioner and upon any
petitionee who enters an appearance or otherwise submits himself or
herself to the court's jurisdiction.

**Source.** 1961, 276:1. 2004, 114:2. 2011, 106:2, eff. July 30, 2011.

### Section 167-B:2

 **167-B:2 Voluntary Applications. –** Any person desiring marriage
counseling may apply directly to an approved family service agency or
may be referred thereto by an authorized representative of the
commissioner of health and human services, but all such counseling shall
be subject to the approval of the commissioner who may promulgate such
rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for the administration of
the provisions hereof.

**Source.** 1961, 276:1. 1963, 211:1, eff. July 2, 1963.

### Section 167-B:3

 **167-B:3 Approved Agencies. –** An approved family service agency
within the meaning of this chapter shall be those agencies approved by
the commissioner of health and human services and which are located
within the jurisdiction of the superior court making the referral or
located within the county in which the applicant for counseling resides.

**Source.** 1961, 276:1. 1963, 211:2, eff. July 2, 1963.

### Section 167-B:4

 **167-B:4 Supervision and Administration. –** The duties of the
department of health and human services with respect to this chapter
shall be:
                                             
 (a) To inspect periodically case files of all referrals to any
family service agency to determine the value and quality of the service
rendered.
                                             
 (b) To maintain records of all referrals and requests, of action
taken and services provided, in sufficient detail so that the
effectiveness of the program can be evaluated and recommendations made
to the legislature.
                                             
 (c) To pay, in accordance with the terms of this chapter, all
invoices presented by participating family service agencies for
referrals, but only if such invoices have been submitted in accordance
with procedures established by the administering agency.

**Source.** 1961, 276:1. 1963, 211:3. 1983, 291:1. 1995, 310:181, eff.
Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 167-B:5

 **167-B:5 Reimbursement to Referral Agencies. –** Participating
family service agencies shall be reimbursed as follows:
                                             
 (a) 
                                             $10 for the first consultation;
                                             
 (b) 
                                             $5 each for the next 3 consultations actually held;
                                             
 (c) No reimbursement shall be made unless the person consulting a
referral agency was referred by the court or approved by the
commissioner, as provided herein, and no reimbursement shall be made
after 4 consultations.

**Source.** 1961, 276:1. 1963, 211:4, eff. July 2, 1963.
