---
title: 'CHAPTER 167-C WHITE CANE LAW'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 167-C
                                             
WHITE CANE LAW
--------------

### Section 167-C:1

 **167-C:1 Policy. –** It is the policy of the state of New Hampshire
to encourage and enable the blind, the visually disabled, and the
otherwise physically disabled to participate fully in the social and
economic life of the state and to engage in remunerative employment.

**Source.** 1971, 351:1. 1990, 140:2, X, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 167-C:2

 **167-C:2 Access to Public Facilities. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 170:6,
eff. Jan. 1, 2012.
                                             ]

### Section 167-C:3

 **167-C:3 Penalty. –** Any person or persons, firm or corporation,
or the agent of any person or persons, firm or corporation who denies or
interferes with the admittance to or enjoyment of the public facilities
enumerated in RSA 167-D or otherwise interferes with the rights of a
totally or partially blind or otherwise disabled person as provided in
RSA 167-C or RSA 167-D shall be fined not more than 
                                             $25.

**Source.** 1971, 351:1. 1983, 275:6, eff. Aug. 17, 1983.

### Section 167-C:4

 **167-C:4 White Cane Safety Day. –** Each year, the governor shall
take suitable public notice of October 15 as White Cane Safety Day. He
shall issue a proclamation in which he:
                                             
 I. Comments upon the significance of the white cane;
                                             
 II. Calls upon the citizens of the state to observe the provisions
of the white cane law and to take precautions necessary to the safety of
the disabled;
                                             
 III. Reminds the citizens of the state of the policies with respect
to the disabled herein declared and urges the citizens to cooperate in
giving effect to them;
                                             
 IV. Emphasizes the need of the citizens to be aware of the presence
of disabled persons in the community and to keep safe and functional for
the disabled the streets, highways, sidewalks, walkways, public
buildings, public facilities, or other public places, places of public
accommodation, amusement and resort, and other places to which the
public is invited, and to offer assistance to disabled persons upon
appropriate occasions.

**Source.** 1971, 351:1, eff. Aug. 24, 1971.

### Section 167-C:5

 **167-C:5 Employment of Blind Persons. –** It is the policy of this
state that the blind, the visually disabled, and the otherwise
physically disabled shall be employed in the state service, the service
of the political subdivisions of the state, in the public schools, and
in all other employment supported in whole or in part by public funds on
the same terms and conditions as the able-bodied, unless it is shown
that the particular disability prevents the performance of the work
involved.

**Source.** 1971, 351:1. 1990, 140:2, X, eff. June 18, 1990.
