---
title: 'CHAPTER 168-B SURROGACY'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 168-B
                                             
SURROGACY
--------------

### Section 168-B:1

 **168-B:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Artificial insemination'' means the introduction of semen into a
women's vagina, cervical canal, or uterus through extracorporeal or
noncoital means.
                                             
 II. "Assisted reproduction'' means a method of causing pregnancy
other than sexual intercourse. The term includes, but is not limited
to:
                                             
 (a) Artificial insemination.
                                             
 (b) Donation of eggs.
                                             
 (c) Donation of embryos.
                                             
 (d) In-vitro fertilization and transfer of embryos.
                                             
 (e) Intracytoplasmic sperm injection.
                                             
 III. "Compensation'' means payment of any reasonable, valuable
consideration to the gestational carrier.
                                             
 IV. "Court,'' unless otherwise indicated in this chapter, means the
probate division of the circuit court in the county where the
gestational carrier resides, where the intended parent or parents
reside, or where the resulting child is born or is expected to be born.
                                             
 V. "Donor'' means an individual who contributes a gamete or gametes
or an embryo or embryos for the purpose of assisted reproduction with no
claim or claims to present or future parental rights and obligations to
any resulting child.
                                             
 VI. "Embryo'' means the fertilized egg.
                                             
 VII. "Embryo transfer'' means all medical and laboratory procedures
that are necessary to effectuate the transfer of an embryo into the
uterine cavity.
                                             
 VIII. "Gamete'' means either the ovum (egg) or the spermatozoa
(sperm).
                                             
 IX. "Gestational carrier'' means a woman who is neither an intended
parent nor a donor, who agrees to become pregnant with a child, to whom
she is not genetically related, by assisted reproduction and pursuant to
a gestational carrier arrangement.
                                             
 X. "Gestational carrier agreement'' means a written contract between
the gestational carrier, her spouse or partner, if any, and the intended
parent or parents, that sets forth the obligations, rights, and duties
of the parties to a gestational carrier arrangement.
                                             
 XI. "Gestational carrier arrangement'' means the process by which a
gestational carrier attempts to become pregnant with a child through
assisted reproduction using the gamete or gametes provided by the
intended parent or parents and/or donor or donors, which may or may not
be genetically related to the intended parent or parents, and to which
the gestational carrier has made no genetic contribution, and carry and
give birth to such a child with the intention that the child will be
solely the legal child of the intended parent or parents.
                                             
 XII. "Health care provider'' means a person who is duly licensed,
certified, authorized, or registered under the laws of the state to
provide health care, and includes all medical, psychological,
counseling, and social work professionals.
                                             
 XIII. "Intended parent'' means a person who intends to become a
parent of any child that results from a gestational carrier agreement.
This term shall include intended mothers, intended fathers, or a
combination of both. In the case of a married couple, any reference to
an intended parent shall include both spouses for all purposes of this
chapter.
                                             
 XIV. "In vitro fertilization'' means all medical and laboratory
procedures that are necessary to effectuate the extracorporeal combining
of egg and sperm and the resulting fertilization of the egg.
                                             
 XV. "Mental health consultation'' means an in-person meeting with a
licensed mental health professional for the purposes of educating the
participants about the effects and potential consequences of their
participation in a gestational carrier arrangement, and of evaluating
any potential psychological issues and risks posed by a party to a
gestational carrier arrangement, including, but not limited to, the
intended parent or parents or the gestational carrier's mental health,
external and environmental factors, ability to manage relationships,
potential attachment issues, and ability to carry out his or her
obligations, rights, and duties under a gestational carrier
arrangement.
                                             
 XVI. "Mental health professional'' means an individual who:
                                             
 (a) Holds a masters or doctoral degree in the field of
psychiatry, psychology, counseling, social work, psychiatric nursing, or
marriage and family therapy; and
                                             
 (b) Is duly licensed, certified, authorized, or registered under
the laws of a state to practice in the mental health field.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014. 2015, 17:1, eff. July 4,
2015.

### Section 168-B:2

 **168-B:2 Parent-Child Relationship. –**
                                             
 I. A person is the parent of a child to whom she has given birth,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter and if the pregnancy was
established pursuant to a gestational carrier arrangement.
                                             
 II. A person is the parent of a child conceived via assisted
reproduction if the person, except when acting in the capacity of a
donor, consents to the performance of assisted reproduction or provides
a gamete or gametes or an embryo or embryos for use in the assisted
reproduction.
                                             
 III. A donor is not a parent of a child conceived through assisted
reproduction.
                                             
 IV. If a child is conceived via assisted reproduction after the
death of the person referenced in paragraph II, consent to assisted
reproduction shall be deemed valid only if the person had consented in
writing prior to death that if assisted reproduction were to occur after
death, the deceased individual would be a parent of the child.
                                             
 V. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person is presumed
to be the parent of a child if:
                                             
 (a) The child is born to a person's spouse during the marriage,
or within 300 days after the marriage is terminated for any reason, or
after a decree of separation is entered by the court.
                                             
 (b) Before the child's birth, the person and the child's other
parent have attempted to marry each other by a marriage solemnized in
apparent compliance with the law, although the attempted marriage is or
could be declared void, voidable, or otherwise invalid; and
                                             
 (1) If the attempted marriage could be declared invalid only
by a court, the child is born during the attempted marriage, or within
300 days after its termination for any reason; or
                                             
 (2) If the attempted marriage is invalid without a court
order, the child is born within 300 days after the termination of
cohabitation.
                                             
 (c) After the child's birth, the person and the child's other
parent have married, or attempted to marry each other by a marriage
solemnized in apparent compliance with the law, although the attempted
marriage is or could be declared void, voidable, or otherwise invalid;
and
                                             
 (1) The person has acknowledged parentage of the child in a
writing filed with the appropriate court or state agency;
                                             
 (2) With the person's consent, the person is named as the
child's parent on the birth certificate; or
                                             
 (3) The person is obligated to support the child under a
written voluntary promise or by court order.
                                             
 (d) While the child is under the age of majority, the person
receives the child into the person's home and openly holds out the child
as that person's child.
                                             
 VI. A presumption under paragraph V may be rebutted in an
appropriate action only by clear and convincing evidence. The existence
of the parent-child relationship presumed under paragraph V shall not,
however, be rebutted by evidence that the child was conceived by means
of assisted reproduction, so long as the presumptive parent complies
with the requirements of paragraph II. In the absence of such
compliance, a presumptive parent's consent shall be conclusively
presumed by such parent's failure to object to the parent-child
relationship by filing an action to dispute parentage within 30 days
after the child's birth. If 2 or more presumptions of parentage arise
that conflict with each other, the presumption that on the facts is
founded on the weightier considerations of policy and logic controls.
The presumption shall be rebutted by a court decree establishing
parentage of the child with another person.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:3

 **168-B:3 Legitimacy. –** If, under the provisions of this chapter,
a parent-child relationship is created between 2 persons, the child
shall be considered, for all purposes of law, the legitimate child of
the parent.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:4

 **168-B:4 Effect of Noncompliance. –** Noncompliance with the
requirements of this chapter shall not affect the determination of
parenthood under this chapter.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:5

 **168-B:5 Parental Status of a Gestational Carrier and Her Spouse or
Partner, If Any. –** Neither a gestational carrier nor her spouse or
partner, if any, shall be a parent of a child conceived as a result of
assisted reproduction and a gestational carrier arrangement.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:6

 **168-B:6 Parental Status of a Donor. –** A donor shall not be a
parent of a child conceived as a result of assisted reproduction and a
gestational carrier arrangement.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:7

 **168-B:7 Parental Status of the Intended Parent. –** A child
conceived as a result of assisted reproduction and a gestational carrier
arrangement shall be the child solely of the intended parent or parents.
The parental rights of physical custody shall vest with the intended
parent or parents immediately upon the birth of the child.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:8

 **168-B:8 Rights and Responsibilities of Intended Parent. –** An
intended parent of any child resulting from assisted reproduction and a
gestational carrier arrangement shall meet each of the following
requirements prior to any medical procedures to impregnate the
gestational carrier:
                                             
 I. He, she, or they have completed a mental health consultation.
                                             
 II. He, she, or they have undergone legal consultation with
independent legal counsel regarding the terms of the gestational carrier
agreement and have been advised of the potential legal consequences of
the gestational carrier agreement.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:9

 **168-B:9 Eligibility of a Gestational Carrier. –** Prior to any
medical procedures to impregnate the gestational carrier, a woman,
intending to be a gestational carrier, shall meet all of the following
requirements:
                                             
 I. She is at least 21 years of age.
                                             
 II. She has given birth to at least one child.
                                             
 III. She has completed a physical medical evaluation, in substantial
conformance with the guidelines set forth by the American Society for
Reproductive Medicine, relating to the anticipated pregnancy.
                                             
 IV. She has completed a mental health consultation.
                                             
 V. She, and her spouse or partner, if any, have undergone legal
consultation with independent legal counsel regarding the terms of the
gestational carrier agreement and have been advised of the potential
legal consequences of the gestational carrier agreement.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:10

 **168-B:10 Enforceability of Gestational Carrier Agreement. –** To
best protect all parties entering into a gestational carrier
arrangement, a gestational carrier agreement shall meet the minimum
requirements under RSA 168-B:11. A gestational carrier agreement that
conforms to these requirements is a legal contract that is presumed to
be valid and enforceable and is legally enforceable by the court. The
parties to a gestational carrier agreement may petition the court for an
order affirming the status of a gestational carrier agreement. The court
shall issue such an order upon a finding that the agreement meets the
minimum requirements under RSA 168-B:11.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:11

 **168-B:11 Requirements for a Gestational Carrier Agreement. –** A
gestational carrier agreement shall meet all of the following minimum
requirements:
                                             
 I. It shall be in writing.
                                             
 II. It shall be executed prior to the commencement of any medical
procedures to impregnate the gestational carrier.
                                             
 III. All parties shall be represented by legal counsel regarding the
gestational carrier agreement and the gestational carrier and her spouse
or partner, if any, shall have legal counsel that is separate and
independent from the legal counsel for the intended parents.
                                             
 IV. It shall expressly provide for the following:
                                             
 (a) The express written agreement of the gestational carrier to:
                                             
 (1) Undergo embryo transfer, become pregnant by means of
assisted reproduction, and attempt to carry and give birth to the
resulting child;
                                             
 (2) Relinquish all rights, obligations, and duties as a parent
of the resulting child; and
                                             
 (3) Surrender physical custody of the resulting child to the
intended parent or parents immediately upon birth of the child.
                                             
 (b) The express written agreement of the gestational carrier's
spouse or partner, if any, if such spouse or partner is a party to the
agreement, to abide by the obligations imposed on the spouse or partner
pursuant to the terms of the gestational carrier agreement, including,
but not limited to, the relinquishment of all rights, obligations, and
duties as a parent of the resulting child.
                                             
 (c) The express written agreement of the intended parent or
parents to:
                                             
 (1) Accept sole rights, obligations, and duties as parent or
parents of the resulting child;
                                             
 (2) Accept sole physical custody of the resulting child
immediately upon birth, regardless of number, gender, and/or physical or
mental condition; and
                                             
 (3) Assume sole responsibility for the support of the
resulting child immediately upon birth.
                                             
 (d) The express written agreement of all parties as to how
reasonable compensation, if any, shall be paid to the gestational
carrier, including, but not limited to, payment of the gestational
carrier's reasonable medical, counseling, legal, and/or other expenses
related to the gestational carrier arrangement.
                                             
 (e) The express written agreement of all parties as to how, if
the gestational carrier breaches a provision of this chapter or of the
gestational carrier agreement, and such a breach causes harm to the
resulting child, the gestational carrier will cover her potential
liability for such harm, pursuant to RSA 168-B:18.
                                             
 (f) The express written agreement of all parties as to how
decisions regarding termination of the pregnancy shall be made.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:12

 **168-B:12 Parentage Orders. –**
                                             
 I. Any of the parties to a gestational carrier agreement may
petition the court for a parentage order declaring that the intended
parent or parents are the sole parents of a child resulting from
assisted reproduction and a gestational carrier arrangement, and that
the gestational carrier and her spouse or partner, if any, are not the
parent or parents of such a child. Such a petition may be brought in the
court in the county where the gestational carrier resides, where the
intended parent or parents reside, or where the resulting child is born
or is expected to be born. Such a petition may be brought either before,
during, or subsequent to the pregnancy. The court shall, within 30 days,
grant the petition upon a finding that the parties have substantially
complied with the requirements of this chapter pertaining to the
execution of a gestational carrier agreement. Sworn affidavits
demonstrating substantial compliance shall be sufficient to permit such
a finding and a hearing shall not be required unless the court requires
additional information which cannot reasonably be ascertained without a
hearing. In the absence of such substantial compliance, the court may in
its discretion issue such parentage order upon a finding that the
parties intended to enter into a gestational carrier arrangement and the
best interests of the child would be met by permitting parentage to be
established in this manner. Such parentage orders issued under this
section shall conclusively establish or affirm, where applicable, the
parent-child relationship.
                                             
 II. Upon the request of any party, such parentage order shall direct
that the certificate of birth name the intended parent or parents as the
sole parent or parents of the resulting child and that such a
certificate of birth shall not name the gestational carrier or her
spouse or partner, if any, as the parent or parents of the resulting
child.
                                             
 III. All proceedings pursuant to this section shall be closed to the
public, and papers and records pertaining to such proceedings shall be
subject to inspection only upon consent of all the parties or upon a
showing of good cause supported by a court order.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014. 2015, 17:2, eff. July 4,
2015.

### Section 168-B:13

 **168-B:13 Marriage or Partnership of a Gestational Carrier During
the Gestational Carrier Arrangement. –** The marriage or partnership of
a gestational carrier after she executes a gestational carrier agreement
does not affect the validity or the terms of the gestational carrier
agreement, and her spouse or partner shall not be a parent of the
resulting child.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:14

 **168-B:14 Intestate and Testate Succession. –** Subject to the
provisions of RSA 168-B:15, a child shall be considered a child only of
his or her parent or parents and the parent or parents shall be
considered the parent or parents of the child, as determined for the
purposes of:
                                             
 I. Intestate succession.
                                             
 II. Taking against the will of any person.
                                             
 III. Taking under the will of any person, unless such will provides
otherwise.
                                             
 IV. Being entitled to any support or similar allowance during the
administration of a parent's estate.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:15

 **168-B:15 Death of the Intended Parent or Parents. –**
                                             
 I. Prior to any embryo transfer pursuant to the gestational carrier
arrangement, the intended parent or parents shall make guardianship
provisions for the prospective child by amending their existing estate
planning documents, or by executing estate planning documents containing
such provisions if they have no existing estate planning documents.
                                             
 II. In the event that the intended parent or parents predecease the
birth of the resulting child, the terms and conditions of the
gestational carrier agreement shall remain in full force and effect, and
the resulting child shall be delivered into the sole care and custody of
the guardian nominated in the estate planning documents of the intended
parent or parents, or of the guardian designated by a court of
appropriate jurisdiction, if both parents are deceased, or into the sole
care and custody of the surviving intended parent if only one of the 2
intended parents is deceased.
                                             
 III. Any child conceived by assisted reproduction and pursuant to
the terms of the gestational carrier agreement shall have all
testamentary and inheritance rights from the intended parent or parents,
and shall have no testamentary or inheritance rights from the
gestational carrier and her spouse or partner, if any. The intended
parent or parents shall have testamentary and inheritance rights from
the resulting child as parents.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:16

 **168-B:16 Noncompliance. –** Noncompliance by the gestational
carrier, the gestational carrier's spouse or partner, if any, or by the
intended parent or parents occurs when that party breaches a provision
of this chapter and/or a provision of the gestational carrier agreement.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:17

 **168-B:17 Effect of Noncompliance. –** Except as otherwise provided
in this chapter, in the event of a party's noncompliance with the
requirements of this chapter and/or with a provision of the gestational
carrier agreement, the court shall determine the respective rights and
obligations of the parties, unless the gestational carrier agreement
provides otherwise.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:18

 **168-B:18 Remedies. –**
                                             
 I. Except as expressly provided in the gestational carrier
agreement, the intended parent or parents shall be entitled to all
remedies available at law or equity.
                                             
 II. Except as expressly provided in the gestational carrier
agreement, the gestational carrier shall be entitled to all remedies
available at law or equity.
                                             
 III. A breach of a provision of this chapter and/or of the
gestational carrier agreement by the intended parent or parents, after
the gestational carrier is impregnated, shall not relieve such intended
parent or parents of the intended parent's or parents' obligations
imposed by this chapter.
                                             
 IV. In the event of a breach of a provision of this chapter and/or
of the gestational carrier agreement by the intended parent or parents,
after the gestational carrier is impregnated, the gestational carrier
shall be entitled to receive all compensation and other moneys due to
the gestational carrier under the gestational carrier agreement.
                                             
 V. A breach of a provision of this chapter and/or of the gestational
carrier agreement by the gestational carrier, after the gestational
carrier is impregnated, shall not relieve the gestational carrier of her
obligations imposed by this chapter.
                                             
 VI. If the gestational carrier breaches a provision of this chapter
and/or of the gestational carrier agreement, and such a breach causes
harm to the resulting child, the gestational carrier may be liable for
payment of the resulting child's medical expenses not otherwise covered
by the intended parent's or parents' insurance.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:19

 **168-B:19 Irrevocability. –** No action to invalidate a gestational
carrier agreement meeting the requirements of this chapter or to
challenge the rights of parentage established pursuant to this chapter
for a gestational carrier arrangement shall commence once the pregnancy
is established.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:20

 **168-B:20 Rulemaking. –** The department of health and human
services shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, to carry out its
duties under this chapter. Until such time as the department of health
and human services adopts rules pursuant to this section, medical
evaluations, mental health consultations, and other procedures required
under this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the relevant
sections of guidelines published by the American Society for
Reproductive Medicine (ASRM), the Society for Assisted Reproductive
Technologies (SART), and the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (ACOG).

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:21

 **168-B:21 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the
chapter, which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or
applications, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.

**Source.** 2014, 248:2, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 168-B:22

 **168-B:22 Jurisdiction. –** The probate division of the circuit
court shall have exclusive jurisdiction over all actions instituted
pursuant to this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 17:3, eff. July 4, 2015.
