---
title: 'CHAPTER 168-A UNIFORM ACT ON PATERNITY'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 168-A
                                             
UNIFORM ACT ON PATERNITY
------------------------

### Section 168-A:1

 **168-A:1 Obligations of the Father. –** The father of a child which
is or may be born of unwed parents is liable to the same extent as the
father of a child born in wedlock, whether or not the child is born
alive, for the reasonable expense of the mother's pregnancy and
confinement and for the education and necessary support of the child. A
child born of unwed parents includes a child born to a married woman by
a man other than her husband.

**Source.** 1971, 530:1. 1973, 145:4, eff. July 21, 1973.

### Section 168-A:2

 **168-A:2 Establishment of Paternity; Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. Paternity shall be established upon the filing of:
                                             
 (a) A petition to the superior court by the mother, putative
father, child, or public authority chargeable by law with the support of
the child and the granting of such petition by the court; or
                                             
 (b) An affidavit of paternity with the clerk of the town where
the birth of the child occurred pursuant to RSA 5-C:24. The affidavit of
paternity shall have the legal effect of establishing paternity without
requiring further action pursuant to this chapter, unless rescinded
pursuant to RSA 5-C:28.
                                             
 II. The courts of this state shall give full faith and credit to a
determination of paternity made by another state, whether established by
court or administrative order, through voluntary acknowledgment of
paternity, or by operation of another state's law.
                                             
 III. If paternity has been established pursuant to paragraph I or
II, the liabilities of the father may be enforced in the same or other
proceedings by:
                                             
 (a) The mother, child, or the public authority which has
furnished or may furnish the reasonable expenses of pregnancy,
confinement, education or necessary support; or
                                             
 (b) Other persons, including private agencies, to the extent that
they have furnished the reasonable expenses of pregnancy, confinement,
education or necessary support.
                                             
 IV. If a presumption of paternity arises pursuant to RSA 522:4,
I(d), the court shall issue a temporary order of support for the child
pursuant to RSA 458-C pending final order on the issue of paternity.
                                             
 V. Upon determining paternity, the court shall provide a copy of the
order to the department of state, division of vital records
administration, except that the office of child support enforcement
services shall provide the copy to the department of state, division of
vital records administration in cases initiated by the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 VI. Copies of bills for pregnancy, childbirth, and genetic paternity
testing shall be admissible as evidence without requiring third-party
foundation testimony, and shall constitute prima facie evidence of costs
incurred for such services or for genetic paternity testing.

**Source.** 1971, 530:1. 1990, 250:4. 1994, 260:4. 1995, 310:182. 1997,
263:19, 20. 2003, 319:57, 58. 2005, 268:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 168-A:3

 **168-A:3 Limitations on Recovery From Father's Estate. –** The
obligation of the estate of the father for liabilities under this
chapter is limited to amounts accrued prior to his death and such sums
as may be payable for dependence under other laws.

**Source.** 1971, 530:1, eff. Sept. 5, 1971.

### Section 168-A:3-a

 **168-A:3-a Limitation on Retroactive Support Award. –** If the
child is 3 months old or older, the father's liability for past
education and support under RSA 168-A:1 is limited to amounts accrued
from the date of service of the petition on the father or, if the court
finds that the father is willfully avoiding service, from such date as
the court determines is just and equitable. There is no limitation on
retroactive support if the child is less than 3 months old.

**Source.** 2003, 197:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 168-A:4

 **168-A:4 Remedies. –**
                                             
 I. The superior court has jurisdiction of a proceeding under this
chapter and all remedies for the enforcement of judgments for expenses
of pregnancy and confinement for a mother or for education or necessary
support of children apply including, but not limited to, the provisions
of RSA 161-B, 161-C, and 458.
                                             
 II. In any proceeding concerning the support of children:
                                             
 (a) The parties shall certify in the initial pleading filed with
the court whether or not public assistance is or was paid for the
benefit of the children pursuant to RSA 167 and whether or not medical
assistance is being provided for the benefit of the children pursuant to
RSA 167. If public assistance is or was being provided or if medical
assistance is being provided, the initiating party shall provide the
department of health and human services, office of child support
enforcement services, with copies of any and all pleadings related to
medical and child support.
                                             
 (b) If, during the pendency of the action, the children become
the beneficiaries of public or medical assistance, both parties shall
notify the court of the public or medical assistance status of the
children and shall provide the department of health and human services
with copies of all pleadings related to medical and child support.
                                             
 (c) When notified that public or medical assistance is being
provided for the benefit of the children, the court shall provide the
office of child support with a copy of any hearing notice pertaining to
any medical or child support proceeding.
                                             
 (d) The department shall be granted leave to reopen any case to
modify, clarify, or vacate any order that was entered against its
interest when an assignment of rights pursuant to RSA 161 or RSA 167 is
or was in effect and the department was not given notice of the
proceeding.
                                             
 III. Upon the prayer of the petitioner the court shall schedule an
immediate hearing, as in the cases of prayers for temporary relief in
divorce and legal separation proceedings, on the issue of whether, and
how much, the alleged father of the child in question shall be required
to post in advance as security for the payment of maternity and other
expenses for which he may ultimately be held liable under this chapter.
The court has continuing jurisdiction to modify or revoke a judgment for
future education and necessary support. All remedies under the Uniform
Interstate Family Support Act and all remedies included but not limited
to the provisions contained in RSA 161-B, 161-C and 458 are available
for enforcement of duties of support under this chapter.

**Source.** 1971, 530:1. 1994, 398:7. 1995, 310:175, 181. 1996, 297:11.
1997, 263:21, 22, eff. Aug. 18, 1997.

### Section 168-A:5

 **168-A:5 Time of Trial; No Right to Jury Trial. –**
                                             
 I. If the issue of paternity is raised in a proceeding commenced
during the pregnancy of the mother, the trial shall not, without the
consent of the alleged father, be held until after the birth or
miscarriage but during such delay testimony may be perpetuated according
to the laws of this state.
                                             
 II. No right to a jury trial exists in a proceeding to establish
paternity.

**Source.** 1971, 530:1. 1997, 263:23, eff. Aug. 18, 1997.

### Section 168-A:6

 **168-A:6 Judgment. –** Judgments under this chapter may be for
periodic payments which may vary in amount. The court may order payments
to be made to the mother or to some person, corporation, or agency
designated to administer them under the supervision of the court.

**Source.** 1971, 530:1, eff. Sept. 5, 1971.

### Section 168-A:7

 **168-A:7 Security. –** The court may require the alleged father to
give bond or other security for the payment of the judgment.

**Source.** 1971, 530:1, eff. Sept. 5, 1971.

### Section 168-A:8

 **168-A:8 Settlement Agreements. –** An agreement of settlement with
the alleged father is binding only when approved by the court.

**Source.** 1971, 530:1, eff. Sept. 5, 1971.

### Section 168-A:9

 **168-A:9 Venue. –** A proceeding under this chapter may be brought
in the county where the alleged father is present or has property or in
the county where the mother resides.

**Source.** 1971, 530:1, eff. Sept. 5, 1971.

### Section 168-A:10

 **168-A:10 Uniformity of Interpretation. –** This chapter shall be
so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to
make uniform the law of those states which enact it.

**Source.** 1971, 530:1, eff. Sept. 5, 1971.

### Section 168-A:11

 **168-A:11 Short Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the Uniform
Act on Paternity.

**Source.** 1971, 530:1, eff. Sept. 5, 1971.

### Section 168-A:12

 **168-A:12 Statute of Limitations. –** No proceeding under this
chapter shall be maintained unless commenced within 18 years of the date
of birth of the child in question.

**Source.** 1971, 530:1. 1977, 387:1. 1985, 331:3, eff. Oct. 1, 1985.

### Section 168-A:13

 **168-A:13 Social Security Numbers. –** At the conclusion of a
paternity action filed pursuant to this chapter in which paternity is
established, the court shall also order the mother and father to supply
their social security numbers to the registrar of vital records, in
accordance with RSA 5-C:25, and to the department of health and human
services.

**Source.** 1990, 250:5. 1995, 310:181. 2003, 319:59. 2005, 268:4, eff.
Jan. 1, 2006.
