---
title: 'CHAPTER 169-D CHILDREN IN NEED OF SERVICES'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 169-D
                                             
CHILDREN IN NEED OF SERVICES
----------------------------

### Section 169-D:1

 **169-D:1 Applicability of Chapter; Purpose. –** This chapter shall
apply to children in need of services as hereinafter defined and shall
be construed and administered in accordance with the following purposes
and policies:
                                             
 I. To recognize that certain behaviors occurring within a family or
school environment indicate that a child is experiencing serious
difficulties and is in need of services and corrective action in order
to protect the child from the irreversibility of certain choices, and to
protect the integrity of the family and the authority it must maintain
in order to fulfill its responsibilities to raise the next generation.
To further provide the child with the treatment, care, guidance,
counseling, discipline, supervision, and rehabilitation necessary to
assist him in becoming a responsible and productive member of society;
                                             
 II. To recognize that we must no longer bring the weight of family
problems down on the child alone but that parents must be made aware of
their contribution to the problem and must account for their role in the
solution of the problem, and must accept the responsibility to
participate in any program of care ordered by the court in order to
assure that the outcome may have a good probability of success while, at
the same time, supporting families in their mission to teach values to
youth and to exercise reasonable control of their children;
                                             
 III. To keep a child, whenever possible, in contact with his home
community and in a family environment by preserving and strengthening
the unity of the family and separating the child from his parents only
when it is clearly necessary for his welfare or the interests of public
safety, and when it can be clearly shown that a change in custody and
control will benefit the child;
                                             
 IV. To protect the integrity of the family by authorizing
adjudication and the imposition of dispositional judgment requiring
participation in a plan of services or by offering appropriate voluntary
alternatives; and
                                             
 V. To provide effective judicial procedures through which family
service plans are executed and enforced, and which assure the parties
fair hearings at which their constitutional and other rights as citizens
are recognized and protected.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1990, 201:6. 1999, 266:1, 2. 2013, 249:1, eff.
Sept. 1, 2013.

### Section 169-D:2

 **169-D:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Child'' means a person who is under the age of 18 on the date
the petition is filed pursuant to RSA 169-D:5.
                                             
 II. "Child in need of services'' means a child under the age of 18:
                                             
 (a) Who is subject to compulsory school attendance, and who is
habitually, willfully, and without good and sufficient cause truant from
school;
                                             
 (b) Who habitually runs away from home, or who repeatedly
disregards the reasonable and lawful commands of his or her parents,
guardian, or custodian and places himself or herself or others in unsafe
circumstances;
                                             
 (c) Who has exhibited willful repeated or habitual conduct
constituting offenses which would be violations under the criminal code
of this state if committed by an adult or, if committed by a person 16
years of age or older, would be violations under the motor vehicle code
of this state; or
                                             
 (d) With a diagnosis of severe emotional, cognitive, or other
mental health issues who engages in aggressive, fire setting, or
sexualized behaviors that pose a danger to the child or others and who
is otherwise unable or ineligible to receive services under RSA 169-B or
RSA 169-C; and
                                             
 (e) Is expressly found to be in need of care, guidance,
counseling, discipline, supervision, treatment, or rehabilitation.
                                             
 III. "Conditional release'' means a legal status created by a court
order following an adjudication that a child is a child in need of
services and shall be permitted to remain in the community, including
his or her home, subject to:
                                             
 (a) The conditions and limitations of his or her conduct
prescribed by the court.
                                             
 (b) Such counseling and treatment as are deemed necessary,
pursuant to methods and counseling prescribed by the court, for the
minor and his or her family.
                                             
 (c) The supervision of juvenile probation and parole officers as
authorized by RSA 170-G:16.
                                             
 (d) Return to the court for violation of the conditions of the
release and change of the disposition at any time during the term of the
conditional release.
                                             
 IV. "Court'' means the district court, unless otherwise indicated.
                                             
 V. "Custody'' means a legal status created by court order wherein
the department of health and human services has placement and care
responsibility for the child.
                                             
 VI. "Diversion'' means a decision made by a person with authority
which results in providing an individually designed program for delivery
of services for the child by a specific provider, or a plan to assist
the child in finding a remedy for his or her inappropriate behavior. The
goal of diversion is to prevent further involvement of the child in the
formal legal system. Diversion of a child may take place either at
pre-filing as an alternative to the filing of a petition or at any time
after the filing of the petition.
                                             
 VII. "Home detention'' means court-ordered confinement of a minor
with his or her parents or other specified home for 24 hours a day
unless otherwise prescribed by written court order, under which the
minor is permitted out of the residence only at such hours and in the
company of persons specified in the court order establishing the home
detention.
                                             
 VIII. "Restitution'' means moneys, compensation, work, or service
which is reimbursed by the offender to the victim who suffered personal
injury or economic loss.
                                             
 IX. "Services'' means care, guidance, counseling, discipline,
supervision, treatment and rehabilitation or any combination thereof.
                                             
 X. "Concurrent plan'' means an alternate permanency plan in the
event that a minor cannot be safely reunified with his or her parents.
                                             
 XI. "Out-of-home placement'' means when a minor, as the result of a
delinquent petition, is removed from a biological parent, adoptive
parent, or legal guardian of the minor and placed in substitute care
with someone other than a biological parent, adoptive parent, or legal
guardian. Such substitute care may include placement with a custodian,
guardian, relative, friend, group home, crisis home, shelter care, or a
foster home.
                                             
 XII. "Permanency hearing'' means a court hearing for a minor in an
out-of-home placement to review, modify, and/or implement the permanency
plan or adopt the concurrent plan.
                                             
 XIII. "Permanency plan'' means a plan for a minor in an out-of-home
placement that is adopted by the court and that provides for timely
reunification, termination of parental rights or parental surrender when
an adoption is contemplated, guardianship with a fit and willing
relative or another appropriate party, or another planned permanent
living arrangement.
                                             
 XIV. "Shelter care facility'' means a non-secure or staff-secure
facility for the temporary care of children no less than 11 nor more
than 17 years of age. Shelter care facilities may be utilized for
children prior to or following adjudication or disposition. A shelter
care facility may not be operated in the same building as a facility for
architecturally secure confinement of children or adults.
                                             
 XV. "Truant'' means a child between the ages of 6 and 18 years who
is either not attending school as required by law or who is not
participating in an alternative learning plan under RSA 193:1.
"Truancy'' shall have the same meaning as in RSA 189:35-a.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1987, 402:10. 1989, 285:5, 6. 1990, 201:7, 8.
1995, 308:74. 1999, 266:3. 2000, 294:10. 2007, 236:18; 325:11. 2011,
224:279. 2013, 249:2, 3, eff. Sept. 1, 2013; 249:18, eff. Sept. 22,
2013.

### Section 169-D:3

 **169-D:3 Jurisdiction. –**
                                             
 I. The court shall have exclusive original jurisdiction over all
proceedings alleging a child is in need of services.
                                             
 II. The court may, with the consent of the child, retain
jurisdiction over any child who, prior to his eighteenth birthday, was
found to be a child in need of services, and who is attending school for
the purpose of obtaining a high school diploma or general equivalency
diploma. The court shall make orders relative to the support and
maintenance of the child during the period after the child's eighteenth
birthday as justice may require.
                                             
 III. The court shall close the case when the child reaches age 18,
or if jurisdiction is retained, when the child ceases to be enrolled as
a full-time student during sessions of the school, or graduates from
such school, or upon reaching the age of 21, whichever shall first
occur.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1992, 11:2, eff. July 1, 1992.

### Section 169-D:4

 **169-D:4 Venue. –**
                                             
 I. Proceedings under this chapter may be originated in any judicial
district in which the child is found or resides.
                                             
 II. By the court, upon its own motion, or that of any party,
proceedings under this chapter may, upon notice and acceptance, be
transferred to another court as the interests of justice or convenience
of the parties require.
                                             
 III. When a child who is on conditional release moves from one
political subdivision to another, the court may transfer, upon notice
and acceptance, to the court with jurisdiction over the political
subdivision of the child's new residence, if such transfer is in the
best interest of the child.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1987, 402:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 169-D:4-a

 **169-D:4-a Filing Reports, Evaluations, and Other Records. –** All
reports, evaluations and other records from the department of health and
human services, counselors, and guardians ad litem in proceedings under
this chapter shall be filed with the court and all other parties at
least 5 days prior to any hearing. Once filed with the court and given
to all other parties, the report, evaluation or other record need not be
refiled during the proceeding. Failure to comply with the provisions of
this section shall not be grounds for dismissal of the petition.

**Source.** 1991, 57:3. 1994, 212:2. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 169-D:5

 **169-D:5 Petition. –**
                                             
 I. (a) A petition alleging that a child is in need of services under
RSA 169-D:2, II(a) may be filed by a truant officer or school official
from the school district where the child is attending school with a
judge or clerk of the court in the judicial district where the child is
found or resides. In accordance with RSA 189:36, II, a truant officer or
school official shall not file a petition alleging that a child is in
need of services under RSA 169-D:2, II(a) until all steps in the school
district's intervention process under RSA 189:34, II have been
followed.
                                             
 (b) A petition alleging that a child is in need of services under
RSA 169-D:2, II(b) or RSA 169-D:2, II(c) may be filed by a parent, legal
guardian or custodian, school official, or law enforcement officer with
a judge or clerk of the court in the judicial district in which the
child is found or resides.
                                             
 (c) A petition alleging that a child is in need of services under
RSA 169-D:2, II(d) may, with the consent of the department, be filed by
a parent, legal guardian or custodian, school official, or law
enforcement officer with a judge or clerk of the court in the judicial
district in which the child is found or resides.
                                             
 I-a. The petition shall be in writing and verified under oath. The
following notice shall be printed on the front of the petition in bold
in no smaller than 14 point font size: "See back for important
information and financial obligations.'' The back of the petition shall
include a notice of liability for parents and other individuals
chargeable by law for the child's support and necessities, which shall
state: "In accordance with RSA 169-D:29, parents and others chargeable
by law for the child's support and necessities are required to reimburse
the state for the cost of voluntary or court ordered services. The
amount that you will be required to reimburse the state will be based on
your ability to pay. You have a right, upon written request, to receive
a statement from the department of the cost of services incurred in the
case to date. Upon our receipt of notice of a proposed service or
placement, you must contact your insurance carrier within 48 hours to
see if coverage is available to pay for the proposed service or
placement and notify the department of the results. If insurance
coverage is available, you must cooperate with your insurance carrier
and comply with their requirements for direct payment to the
provider.''
                                             
 II. To be legally sufficient, the petition must set forth with
particularity, but not be limited to, the date, time, manner and place
of the conduct alleged and should state the statutory provision alleged
to have been violated.
                                             
 II-a. Any petition filed shall include language demonstrating
whether appropriate voluntary services have been attempted, the nature
of voluntary services attempted, and the reason court compulsion is
necessary. The petition also shall include information regarding the
department's determination as to whether voluntary services are
appropriate for the child or family under RSA 169-D:5-c. Refusal of the
child to participate in the development of a voluntary services plan may
constitute sufficient information that voluntary service and support
options have been unsuccessful.
                                             
 III. If the parents of a child are filing the petition, they shall
include information which shows that the child and family have sought to
resolve the expressed problem through available community alternatives,
that the problem still remains, and that court intervention is needed.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 V. Except as provided in paragraph VI, when a school official is
filing the petition, information shall be included which shows that the
legally liable school district has sought to resolve the expressed
problem through available educational approaches, that the school
district has sought to engage the parents or guardian in solving the
problem but they have been unwilling or unable to do so; that the
problem remains, and that court intervention is needed.
                                             
 VI. When a school official is filing a petition involving a child
with a disability pursuant to RSA 186-C, he or she shall include
information which demonstrates that the legally liable school district:
                                             
 (a) Has determined that the child has a disability; and
                                             
 (b) Has reviewed for appropriateness the child's current
individualized education program (IEP) and placement, and has made
modifications where appropriate.
                                             
 VII. Using local law enforcement personnel, the court shall serve
both parents, and any other individual chargeable by law for the child's
support, with a copy of any petition filed under this section. The court
shall request the appropriate contact information from the party filing
the petition.
                                             
 VIII. The department shall develop a brochure that describes the
liability and reimbursement process under RSA 169-D:29. The brochure
shall be available to the public and shall be distributed at the
earliest available opportunity to parents and others chargeable by law
for the minor's support who are requesting or receiving voluntary or
court ordered services. The brochure shall contain a description of the
liability and reimbursement process under RSA 169-D:29, examples of
typical services that may be provided through voluntary or court ordered
services, the cost or range of costs for these services, and a statement
that although the court may order reimbursement pursuant to RSA
169-D:29, any reimbursement order will be based on the person's ability
to pay. The department shall provide its juvenile probation and parole
officers with information and training on the liability and
reimbursement requirements of this chapter.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1989, 285:7. 1990, 201:9. 1995, 308:75. 1999,
266:4. 2006, 291:1, 2. 2008, 274:11. 2009, 302:2. 2011, 224:280. 2012,
110:1, II. 2013, 249:4, 5, eff. Sept. 1, 2013. 2014, 57:1, 3, eff. Jan.
1, 2015.

### Section 169-D:5-a

 **169-D:5-a Notice of Petition to Department of Health and Human
Services. –** Upon the filing of any petition under RSA 169-D:5, the
court shall serve the department of health and human services with a
copy of the petition and the department shall be a party to and shall
receive notice of all proceedings under this chapter from the court and
all other parties.

**Source.** 1995, 308:76; 310:175, 181. 2004, 31:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2005.

### Section 169-D:5-b

 **169-D:5-b Consent Order. –**
                                             
 I. At any time after the filing of the petition and prior to an
order of adjudication pursuant to RSA 169-D:14, the court may suspend
the proceedings upon its own motion or upon the motion of any party, and
continue the case under terms and conditions established by the parties
and approved by the court.
                                             
 II. A consent order shall not be approved unless the department
consents and the child and parents, guardian, or custodian are informed
of the consequences of the order by the court and the court determines
that the child and parents voluntarily and intelligently consent to the
terms and conditions of the order.

**Source.** 1995, 308:76; 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 169-D:5-c

 **169-D:5-c Voluntary Services. –** The department shall assess
whether to offer the child and family, on a voluntary basis, any
services permitted under RSA 169-D:17 except out-of-home placement of
the child. The department may decline to offer services to a child or
family if it concludes that the child does not meet the definition of
child in need of services in RSA 169-D:2, II, or if the department
otherwise determines that voluntary services are not appropriate for the
child or family. The department shall document the basis for its
decision. Notwithstanding RSA 541-A, the department's decision shall not
be subject to appeal, nor shall the fact that the department declined to
offer voluntary services preclude a person from filing a petition under
RSA 169-D:5, I. Voluntary services provided under this section shall not
exceed 9 months, unless the department determines that an extension for
an additional, specified period of time is appropriate.

**Source.** 2013, 249:6, eff. Sept. 1, 2013.

### Section 169-D:6

 **169-D:6 Issuance of Summons and Notice. –**
                                             
 I. (a) After a legally sufficient petition has been filed, unless
the case is referred to the department pursuant to RSA 169-D:5 or a
consent order is entered and approved, the court shall schedule an
initial appearance and issue a summons, including a copy of the
petition, to be served personally upon the person having custody or
control of the child or with whom the child may be, requiring that
person to appear with the child on the specified date and time.
                                             
 (b) If personal service is not possible, service shall occur at
the usual place of abode of the person having custody or control of the
child or with whom the child may be, requiring that person to appear
with the child at a specified place and time which time shall not be
less than 24 hours after service. If the person so notified is not the
parent or guardian of the child, then a parent or guardian shall be
notified, provided they and their residence are known.
                                             
 II. A copy of the petition shall be attached to each summons or
incorporated therein.
                                             
 III. The summons shall state as follows: "Pursuant to RSA 169-D:29,
parents and other individuals chargeable by law for the child's support
and necessities may be liable for expenses incurred in this proceeding
including the costs of certain evaluations and placements. RSA 186-C
regarding children with disabilities grants children and their parents
certain rights to services from school districts at public expense and
to appeal school district decisions regarding services to be provided.''

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1983, 458:9. 1990, 140:2, X. 1995, 308:77.
1999, 199:1; 266:5. 2006, 291:3. 2008, 274:31. 2013, 249:7, eff. Sept.
1, 2013.

### Section 169-D:7

 **169-D:7 Failure to Appear; Warrant. –**
                                             
 I. Any person summoned who, without reasonable cause, fails to
appear with the child, may be proceeded against as in case of contempt
of court.
                                             
 II. If a summons cannot be served or the party served fails to obey
the same, and in any case where it appears to the court that such
summons will be ineffectual, a warrant may be issued for the child's
appearance or for the appearance of anyone having custody or control of
the child or for both.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 169-D:8

 **169-D:8 Temporary Custody. –** A child may be taken into temporary
custody:
                                             
 I. Pursuant to a court order; or
                                             
 II. By a police officer or juvenile probation and parole officer
when there are reasonable grounds to believe that a child has run away
from his parents, guardian, or other custodian; or the circumstances are
such as to endanger the child's health or welfare unless immediate
action is taken.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1987, 402:12. 2000, 294:9, eff. July 1, 2000.

### Section 169-D:9

 **169-D:9 Pre-adjudicatory Procedure. –**
                                             
 I. Except in emergencies, the department, its agent, or any person
or agency it designates shall determine whether voluntary service
options are appropriate for the child and family. A referral for this
determination may be made by any person permitted to bring a petition
under RSA 169-D:5, I. To achieve this purpose, the department may
designate a multi-disciplinary team to consider the facts and
circumstances of the case, the needs of the child and family, and
available diversion programs, services, and resources. This conference
shall be attended by the child, if appropriate, his or her parents,
legal guardians or custodians, and representatives of any public
institution or agency having legal responsibility over the child, and
may be attended by parties invited by the family and representatives of
any public or private institutions or agencies having discretionary
ability to coordinate and/or supply services to the child or family. If
the child does not attend a multi-disciplinary conference, an
appropriate individual shall be designated to solicit the child's input
and help the child understand available service options and supports.
                                             
 II. If available, a multi-disciplinary conference may be held at any
time before or after a petition is filed but shall be held before the
child's initial appearance pursuant to RSA 169-D:11.
                                             
 III. At any time before or after a petition is filed, the child, his
or her caretakers, and the department may effect an individualized
voluntary family services plan, which shall include:
                                             
 (a) Identification of the circumstances which contributed to the
need for services.
                                             
 (b) A description of the services that are needed for the child,
the child's caretakers, or other family members, the availability of
such services within the community, and a plan for ensuring that any
such services that are available will be secured and provided.
                                             
 (c) The name of the person within each affected public service
agency who is directly responsible for assuring that specific services
identified in the plan are provided.
                                             
 (d) An estimate of the time anticipated to be necessary to
accomplish the goals set out in the plan.
                                             
 (e) Any other provisions deemed appropriate by the parties.
                                             
 (f) Designation of a responsible person or agency for oversight
of the plan.
                                             
 IV. A voluntary family services plan shall set forth in writing the
terms and conditions agreed to by the child, the child's caretaker, and
all parties responsible for implementation of the voluntary services
plan. A written copy of the plan shall be submitted to each party or
person responsible for implementation of the plan.
                                             
 V. A voluntary services plan may be amended by agreement of the
parties at any time. If a petition has been filed, the amended plan
shall be submitted to the court.
                                             
 VI. If a petition has been filed and the department determines
voluntary services are appropriate, a voluntary family services plan
shall be submitted to the court. The voluntary services plan shall stay
the proceedings for a period not to exceed 90 days from the date of
implementation, unless the parties agree, in writing, to an extension
for additional periods not to exceed 90 days.
                                             
 VII. When the petitioning person or agency, the court, the
department, or a member of the multi-disciplinary team suspects that a
child has a disability, an administrator at the responsible school
district shall be notified. If appropriate, the school district shall
refer the child for evaluation to determine if the child is in need of
special education and related services.
                                             
 VIII. A voluntary family services plan shall not be considered in an
adjudicatory hearing pursuant to RSA 169-B or 169-D, or a criminal
trial. Evidence of the existence of such agreement shall not be used
against the child over objection in any juvenile adjudicatory hearing or
criminal trial.
                                             
 IX. Any incriminating statement made by the child during discussions
or conferences incident to the voluntary family services plan shall not
be used against the child, over objection, in adjudicatory hearing
pursuant to RSA 169-B or 169-D, or a criminal trial. Any such statement
may be reported as the basis for a referral to the department pursuant
to RSA 169-C, if there is reasonable basis to believe that a child's
physical or mental health or welfare is endangered by abuse or neglect.
                                             
 X. A voluntary family services plan suspends the proceedings on the
petition. If the child satisfies the terms of the voluntary family
services plan, he or she shall be discharged from further services or
supervision, and the pending complaint or petition shall be dismissed
with prejudice.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1999, 266:6. 2000, 294:9. 2008, 274:12. 2010,
175:5. 2011, 151:2. 2013, 249:8, eff. Sept. 1, 2013. 2014, 271:2, eff.
July 28, 2014.

### Section 169-D:9-a

 **169-D:9-a Use of Alternative to Secure Detention. –** An officer
may, with court approval, release a child to an alternative to secure
detention as defined in RSA 169-B:2, pending the arrival of the parent,
guardian, or custodian. The alternative program may release the child to
the parent, guardian, or custodian upon their arrival. Any court,
police, or juvenile probation and parole officer, acting in good faith
pursuant to this section, shall have immunity from any liability, civil
or criminal, which might otherwise be incurred or imposed as a result of
release to an alternative to secure detention.

**Source.** 1988, 197:7. 2000, 294:9, eff. July 1, 2000.

### Section 169-D:9-b

 **169-D:9-b Prohibited Manner of Detention. –** Notwithstanding any
other provisions of law, no child detained under this chapter shall be
held for any period of time in a public or private facility, which
includes construction fixtures designed to physically restrict the
movements and activities of persons in custody, including but not
limited to locked rooms and buildings, fences, or other physical
structures. This section shall not be construed to prohibit detention in
facilities where physical restriction of movement or activity is
provided solely through facility staff.

**Source.** 1988, 197:7. 1992, 18:6, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 169-D:9-c

 **169-D:9-c Detention in Certain Facilities; CHINS and Juvenile
Delinquents. –**
                                             
 I. Facilities which are not physically restricted may receive for
placement minors who have been adjudicated as children in need of
services or minors who have been adjudicated as juvenile delinquents.
                                             
 II. Physically restricted facilities shall receive for commitment
and detention only those minors who have been adjudicated juvenile
delinquents pursuant to RSA 169-B or who are awaiting the court's
disposition regarding allegations of juvenile delinquency. Physically
restricted facilities which are primarily used for psychiatric treatment
or evaluation shall not be limited only to such minors.

**Source.** 1990, 201:10, eff. June 26, 1990.

### Section 169-D:10

 **169-D:10 Release Prior to Initial Appearance. –**
                                             
 I. An officer taking a child into custody pursuant to RSA 169-D:8
shall release the child to a parent, guardian or custodian pending
initial appearance; however, if a parent, guardian or custodian is not
available upon taking the child into custody, the court shall be
notified, thereupon the child's release shall be determined by the
court.
                                             
 II. Pending the initial appearance, the court shall release the
child to one of the following, which in the court's opinion is the least
restrictive and most appropriate:
                                             
 (a) A parent or guardian;
                                             
 (b) A relative or suitable adult;
                                             
 (c) Where there are reasonable grounds to believe that the child
is a runaway under RSA 169-D:2, II(b) or that the child is a child in
need of services under RSA 169-D:2, II(d), the custody of department of
health and human services for placement in a foster home, as defined in
RSA 169-C:3, XIII, a group home, a crisis home, or a shelter care
facility with expenses chargeable as provided in RSA 169-D:29; or
                                             
 (d) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (e) An alcohol crisis center certified to accept juveniles.
                                             
 III. Where there are reasonable grounds to believe that the child is
a runaway under RSA 169-D:2, II(b) or that the child is a child in need
of services under RSA 169-D:2, II(d) and there is no shelter
care/detention bed available, nor an appropriate parent, guardian, or
custodian as defined in paragraph II of this section available, the
court or the officer taking the child into temporary custody shall
notify the department. If the child cannot be referred to an alternative
to secure detention, the court shall make an order authorizing the
department to place the child. The department shall then promptly
arrange for placement of the child.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1982, 39:15. 1988, 197:13. 1989, 285:8. 1995,
310:175. 2001, 117:6. 2007, 325:12, 15, III. 2013, 249:9, eff. Sept. 1,
2013.

### Section 169-D:10-a

 **169-D:10-a Removal of Child From Home. –** No child subject to a
petition brought under this chapter shall be removed from his home
unless:
                                             
 I. Clear and convincing evidence is presented to the court to show
it is against the child's best interest to remain in the home under the
circumstances presented in such petition;
                                             
 II. A case plan for return of the child to the home has been
recommended by the department, which in its recommendation shall address
parent and child responsibility, and ordered by the court; provided,
however, that in cases brought by a parent, guardian or custodian, the
parent, guardian or custodian shall consent to the order.

**Source.** 1990, 201:11. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 169-D:10-b

 **169-D:10-b Child's Welfare; Findings Regarding Removal. –**
                                             
 I. The court shall, in its first court ruling that sanctions, even
temporarily, the removal of a minor from the home, determine whether
continuation in the home is contrary to the minor's welfare.
                                             
 II. The court shall, within 60 days of a minor's removal from the
home, determine and issue written findings as to whether reasonable
efforts were made or were not required to prevent the minor's removal.
In determining whether reasonable efforts were made to prevent the
minor's removal, the court shall consider whether services to the family
have been accessible, available, and appropriate.

**Source.** 2007, 236:19, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 169-D:11

 **169-D:11 Initial Appearance. –**
                                             
 I. An initial appearance shall be held not less than 24 hours nor
more than 7 days from the filing of a legally sufficient petition.
                                             
 II. At the initial appearance, the court shall:
                                             
 (a) Advise the child in writing and orally of any formal
charges;
                                             
 (b) Appoint counsel pursuant to RSA 169-D:12;
                                             
 (c) Establish any conditions for release;
                                             
 (d) Set a hearing date; and
                                             
 (e) Inquire of the child and a parent or guardian of the child if
the child has been:
                                             
 (1) Determined to have an intellectual disability;
                                             
 (2) Determined to have a mental illness, emotional or
behavioral disorder, or another disorder that may impede the child's
decision-making abilities; or
                                             
 (3) Identified as eligible for special education services.
                                             
 II-a. However, no plea shall be taken until the child has had the
opportunity to consult with counsel or until a waiver is filed pursuant
to RSA 169-D:12.
                                             
 III. After hearing, the court may, with the consent of the child,
dispose of the petition by ordering the child to participate in a court
approved diversion program or other intervention program.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 2010, 175:6. 2013, 249:10, eff. Sept. 1, 2013.
2014, 271:1, eff. July 28, 2014.

### Section 169-D:12

 **169-D:12 Appointment of Counsel; Waiver of Counsel. –**
                                             
 I. Absent a valid waiver, the court shall appoint counsel for the
child at the time of the initial appearance. If the court believes that
the minor has a cognitive, emotional, learning, or sensory disability,
the court shall require the minor to consult with counsel.
                                             
 II. The court may accept a waiver of counsel from a child alleged to
be in need of services only when:
                                             
 (a) The parent, guardian, or custodian did not file the
petition;
                                             
 (b) Both the child and parent, guardian, or custodian agree to
waive counsel; and
                                             
 (c) In the court's opinion, the waiver is made competently,
voluntarily, and with full understanding of the consequences.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1995, 308:78. 1996, 248:4. 2008, 274:13, eff.
July 1, 2008.

### Section 169-D:13

 **169-D:13 Release Pending Adjudicatory Hearing. –**
                                             
 I. Following the initial appearance, a child alleged to be in need
of services may be ordered by the court subject to such conditions as
the court may order, to be:
                                             
 (a) Retained in the custody of a parent, guardian, or custodian;
or
                                             
 (b) Released in the supervision and care of a relative; or
                                             
 (c) Where the petition alleges that the child is a habitual
runaway under RSA 169-D:2, II(b) or that the child is a child in need of
services under RSA 169-D:2, II(d), released to the custody of the
department of health and human services for placement in a foster home,
as defined in RSA 169-C:3, XIII, a group home, a crisis home, or a
shelter care facility with expenses chargeable as provided in RSA
169-D:29.
                                             
 (d) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 I-a. Where the petition alleges that the child is a habitual truant
under RSA 169-D:2, II(a), that the child repeatedly disregards the
reasonable and lawful commands of his or her parents, guardian, or
custodian under RSA 169-D:2, II(b), or that the child repeatedly or
habitually engages in conduct that constitutes violation level offenses
under RSA 169-D:2, II(c), the court shall not order the out-of-home
placement of the child.
                                             
 II. The adjudicatory hearing shall be held within 21 days of the
initial appearance.
                                             
 III. All orders issued pursuant to this section shall set forth the
findings as to the form of release or any conditions in writing and
shall state any custody provisions under paragraph I.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1982, 39:16. 2001, 117:7. 2007, 325:13, 15, IV.
2013, 249:11, eff. Sept. 1, 2013.

### Section 169-D:13-a

 **169-D:13-a Notification of Right to Request Records. –** The court
shall notify parties of their right to request in advance of any hearing
under this chapter that a record of such hearing shall be preserved and
made available to the parties.

**Source.** 1996, 248:5, eff. Jan. 2, 1997.

### Section 169-D:14

 **169-D:14 Adjudicatory Hearing. –**
                                             
 I. An adjudicatory hearing under this chapter shall be conducted by
the court, separate from the trial of criminal cases.
                                             
 I-a. A record of the adjudicatory hearing shall be preserved unless
expressly waived in writing by the parties, and parties shall be
notified in writing of their right to appeal.
                                             
 II. Following the initial appearance the court shall proceed to hear
the case in accordance with the due process rights afforded a child
alleged to be in need of services. The prosecution shall present
witnesses to testify in support of the petition and any other evidence
necessary to support the petition. The child shall have the right to
present evidence and witnesses on his behalf and to cross-examine
adverse witnesses. The provisions of RSA 613:3, I, relative to the
summoning of out-of-state witnesses, shall apply to the proceedings.
                                             
 III. If the court finds the child is in need of services, it shall,
unless a report done on the same child less than 3 months previously is
on file, order the department of health and human services or other
appropriate agency to make an investigation and written report
consisting of, but not limited to, the home conditions, school record
and the mental, physical and social history of the child including
sibling relationships and residences for the purpose of preserving
relationships between siblings who are separated as a result of court
ordered placement. Evaluations performed at the Philbrook center may
occur only upon receiving prior approval for such evaluation from the
commissioner of the department of health and human services or designee.
When ordered by the court, such investigation shall include a physical
and mental examination of the child, parents, guardian, or person having
custody. The court may order a substance abuse evaluation of the child,
parents, guardian, or person having custody. Any substance abuse
evaluation of the parent, guardian, or person having custody of the
child shall be conducted by a provider contracted with the bureau of
substance abuse services, or a provider paid by the parent, guardian, or
person having custody of the child. The cost of said evaluation shall be
paid by private insurance, if available, or otherwise by the person
undergoing the evaluation, to whom the evaluation shall be provided free
or at a reduced cost if the person is of limited means. The court shall
inform the parents, guardian, or person having custody and child of
their right to object to the physical examination, mental health
evaluation, or substance abuse evaluation. Objections shall be submitted
in writing to the court having jurisdiction within 5 business days after
notification of the time and place of the examination or evaluation. The
court may excuse the child, parents, guardian, or person having custody
upon good cause shown. No disposition order shall be made by the court
without first reviewing the investigation report, if ordered.
                                             
 IV. The court shall share the report with the parties. The report
will be used only after a finding that the child is in need of services
and will be used only as a guide for the court in determining an
appropriate disposition for the child.
                                             
 V. The court shall hold a final dispositional hearing within 30 days
of the adjudicatory hearing unless continued for good cause. No
dispositional hearing for a child placed outside the child's home may be
continued more than once for good cause or for a period longer than 14
days, except by agreement of all the parties.
                                             
 VI. Whenever a court contemplates a placement which will require
educational services outside the child's home school district, the court
shall notify the school district and give the district the opportunity
to send a representative to the hearing at which such placement is
contemplated. In cases where immediate court action is required to
protect the health or safety of the child or of the community, the court
may act without providing for an appearance by the school district, but
shall make reasonable efforts to solicit and consider input from the
school district before making a placement decision.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1985, 195:6. 1987, 402:13. 1990, 3:49. 1994,
212:2. 1995, 310:181, 182. 1996, 248:6. 1998, 203:4. 1999, 266:7, 8.
2004, 41:3. 2007, 295:5, eff. Sept. 11, 2007.

### Section 169-D:15

 **169-D:15 Burden of Proof. –** The petitioner has the burden to
prove the allegations in support of the petition beyond a reasonable
doubt.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 169-D:16

 **169-D:16 Release Pending Final Disposition. –** Following the
adjudicatory hearing, custody pending the dispositional hearing shall be
determined in accordance with RSA 169-D:13.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 169-D:17

 **169-D:17 Dispositional Hearing. –**
                                             
 I. If the court finds the child is in need of services, it shall
order the least restrictive and most appropriate disposition considering
the facts in the case, the investigation report, and the dispositional
recommendations of the parties and counsel. The dispositional
recommendation of the department of health and human services shall
include the costs of the recommended services, placements, and programs.
Such disposition may include:
                                             
 (a) Permitting the child to remain with a parent, guardian,
relative, or custodian, subject to such limitations and conditions as
the court may prescribe, including:
                                             
 (1) Ordering the child or parent, guardian, relative, or
custodian, or both, to accept individual or family counseling;
                                             
 (2) Placing the child on conditional release for a term of 2
years or less.
                                             
 (b)(1) Releasing the child in the supervision and care of a
relative or suitable adult; or
                                             
 (2)(A) Where the petition alleges that the child is a habitual
runaway under RSA 169-D:2, II(b) or that the child is a child in need of
services under RSA 169-D:2, II(d), releasing the child to the custody of
the department of health and human services for placement in a foster
home, as defined in RSA 169-C:3, XIII, a group home, a crisis home, or a
shelter care facility with expenses charged in accordance with RSA
169-D:29.
                                             
 (B) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), where the petition
alleges that the child is a habitual truant under RSA 169-D:2, II(a),
that the child repeatedly disregards the reasonable and lawful commands
of his or her parents, guardian, or custodian under RSA 169-D:2, II(b),
or that the child repeatedly or habitually engages in conduct that
constitutes violation level offenses under RSA 169-D:2, II(c), the court
shall not order the out-of-home placement of the child.
                                             
 (c) Imposing a fine or restitution, or both, on a child who has
committed an offense which, if committed by an adult, would be a
violation under the criminal code of this state; or has committed an
offense which, if committed by a person 16 years of age or older, would
be a violation under the motor vehicle code of this state; or has
violated an ordinance or bylaw of a city or town. Such fine shall not
exceed the fine which may be imposed against an adult for the same
offense.
                                             
 (d) Ordering the minor to perform up to 50 hours of uncompensated
public service subject to the approval of the elected or appointed
official authorized to give approval of the city or town in which the
offense occurred. The court's order for uncompensated public service
shall include the name of the official who will provide supervision to
the minor. However, no person who performs such public service under
this subparagraph shall receive any benefits that such employer gives to
its other employees, including, but not limited to, workers'
compensation and unemployment benefits and no such employer shall be
liable for any damages sustained by a person while performing such
public service or any damages caused by that person unless the employer
is guilty of gross negligence.
                                             
 (e) Requiring any child to attend structured after-school or
evening programs which address some of the child's compliance issues, as
well as supervise the child during the time of the day in which the
child most values his or her freedom and the time which is most often
used to perform unruly acts. The cost of said programs shall be paid by
private insurance, if available, or otherwise by the child, parent,
guardian, or person having custody of the child, or may be available to
the child free of charge based on the limited means of the family or
based on the program's receipt of other funding. Payment shall be made
pursuant to RSA 169-D:29 only for those programs that have been
certified pursuant to RSA 170-G:4, XVIII.
                                             
 II. Any child placed under this section with someone other than a
relative shall be placed in a residential care facility licensed
pursuant to RSA 170-E. If a child is placed out of state, the provisions
of RSA 170-A shall be followed.
                                             
 II-a. When a minor is in an out-of-home placement, the court shall
adopt a concurrent plan other than reunification for the minor. The
other options for a permanency plan include termination of parental
rights or parental surrender when an adoption is contemplated,
guardianship with a fit and willing relative or another appropriate
party, or another planned permanent living arrangement.
                                             
 II-b. When a dispositional order places a minor in an out-of-home
placement pursuant to RSA 169-B:19, I(e) or (f), prior to concluding the
dispositional hearing the court shall set a date for a permanency
hearing pursuant to RSA 169-D:21-a.
                                             
 III. The court may order the child or the family or both to undergo
physical treatment or treatment by a mental health center or any other
psychiatrist, psychologist, psychiatric social worker or family
therapist as determined by the court.
                                             
 IV. All dispositional orders issued pursuant to this section shall
include written findings as to the basis for the disposition and such
conditions as the court imposes, and a specific plan of the services to
be provided, including but not limited to those listed in paragraphs I,
II and III.
                                             
 V. (a) The court may punish a child or his parent or parents for
contempt of court for refusal to participate in the specific
dispositional plan as ordered by the court pursuant to paragraph IV.
                                             
 (b) Any child or his parent or parents prosecuted for contempt
under this paragraph shall be afforded notice of the essential facts
constituting the criminal contempt charged, a hearing, counsel, and
shall be adjudged guilty of criminal contempt only upon proof beyond a
reasonable doubt.
                                             
 (c) A child found guilty of contempt may be immediately detained
in home detention or placed in a shelter care facility.
                                             
 VI. If the judge orders services, placements, or programs different
from the recommendations of the department, the judge shall include a
statement of the costs of the services, placements, and programs so
ordered.
                                             
 VII. Prior to any placement which will require educational services
outside the child's home school district, the court shall notify the
school district and give the district the opportunity to send a
representative to the hearing at which such placement is contemplated.
At such hearing the court shall consider the recommendations of the
school district and if such an out-of-district placement is ordered the
court shall make written findings that describe the reasons for the
placement.
                                             
 VIII. The court may issue such orders as are necessary to ensure
provision of services under this chapter, provided that any order issued
involving the department of education or a legally liable school
district shall comply with RSA 169-B:22.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1981, 401:1. 1982, 39:17. 1983, 416:9. 1987,
402:11. 1989, 285:9. 1990, 201:12; 257:7. 1992, 284:4. 1994, 81:3;
212:2. 1995, 181:4; 308:79, 80; 310:175, 181. 1999, 266:9. 2001, 117:2;
286:19. 2007, 236:20; 295:6; 325:14, 17. 2008, 213:1; 274:14. 2011,
224:29. 2013, 249:12, eff. Sept. 1, 2013.

### Section 169-D:17-a

 **169-D:17-a Out-of-District Placement. –** In the case of an
out-of-district placement, the appropriate court shall notify the
department of education on the date that the court order is signed,
stating the initial length of time for which such placement is made.
This section shall apply to the original order and all subsequent
modifications of that order.

**Source.** 1991, 324:3, eff. Aug. 27, 1991.

### Section 169-D:17-b

 **169-D:17-b Presumption in Favor of In-State Placements. –** There
shall be a presumption that an in-state placement is the least
restrictive and most appropriate placement. The court may order an
out-of-state placement only upon an express written finding that there
is no appropriate in-state placement available.

**Source.** 1995, 308:81, eff. July 1, 1995.

### Section 169-D:17-c

 **169-D:17-c Court Order for Services, Placements, and Programs
Required for Minors From Certain Providers Qualified for Third-Party
Payment. –** The court, wherever and to the extent possible, shall order
services, placements, and programs by providers certified pursuant to
RSA 170-G:4, XVIII who qualify for third-party payment under any
insurance covering the minor.

**Source.** 1996, 286:12, eff. June 10, 1996.

### Section 169-D:18

 **169-D:18 Disposition of Child With a Disability. –**
                                             
 I. At any point during the proceedings, the court may, either on its
own motion or that of any other person, and if the court contemplates a
residential placement, the court shall immediately, join the legally
liable school district for the limited purposes of directing the school
district to determine whether the child is a child with a disability as
defined in RSA 186-C or of directing the school district to review the
services offered or provided under RSA 186-C if the child has already
been determined to be a child with a disability. If the court orders the
school district to determine whether the minor is a child with a
disability, the school district shall make this determination by
treating the order as the equivalent of a referral by the child's parent
for special education, and shall conduct any team meetings or
evaluations that are required under law when a school district receives
a referral by a child's parent.
                                             
 II. Once joined as a party, the legally liable school district shall
have full access to all records maintained by the district court under
this chapter. The school district shall also report to the court its
determination of whether the minor is a child with a disability, and the
basis for such determination. If the child is determined to be a child
with a disability, the school district shall make a recommendation to
the court as to where the child's educational needs can be met in
accordance with state or federal education laws. In cases where the
court does not follow the school district's recommendation, the court
shall issue written findings explaining why the recommendation was not
followed.
                                             
 III. If the school district finds or has found that the child is a
child with a disability, or if it is found that the child is a child
with a disability on appeal from the school district's decision in
accordance with the due process procedures of RSA 186-C, the school
district shall offer an appropriate educational program and placement in
accordance with RSA 186-C. Financial liability for such educational
program shall be as determined in RSA 186-C:19-b.
                                             
 IV. In an administrative due process hearing conducted by the
department of education pursuant to RSA 186-C, a school district may
provide a hearing officer with information from district court records
which the school district has accessed pursuant to paragraph II of this
section, provided that:
                                             
 (a) At least 20 days prior to providing any records to the
hearing officer, the school district files notice of its intention to do
so with the court and all parties to the proceedings, and no party
objects to the release of records.
                                             
 (b) The notice filed by a school district under this provision
shall include, on a separate sheet of paper, the following statement in
bold typeface: "Persons subject to juvenile proceedings have important
rights to the confidentiality of juvenile court proceedings. This notice
requests the disclosure of some of that information. If you object to
the disclosure of information, you must file a written objection with
the court no later than 10 days after the filing of the school
district's notice. If you fail to object in writing, the court may allow
private information to be revealed to the New Hampshire Department of
Education hearing officer.''; and
                                             
 (c) Any objection by a party shall be filed with the court no
later than 10 days after the filing of the school district's notice with
the court, unless such time is extended by the court for good cause.
                                             
 V. The court may, on its own initiative and no later than 13 days
after the filing of the school district's notice to the court, issue an
order directing the school district to show cause why the information
should be disclosed to the hearing officer. Upon receipt of an objection
or issuance of a show cause order, the court shall schedule an expedited
hearing on the matter to determine if the requested records may be
released. The court may rule without a hearing if the school district
and a parent or legal guardian or the juvenile, if he or she has reached
the age of majority, agree in writing to waive a hearing. Upon the
filing of an objection or show cause order, the school district may file
a reply explaining why the school district believes that the information
should be disclosed to the hearing officer. In determining whether to
authorize the disclosure of the information requested by the school
district, the court shall balance the importance of disclosure of the
records to a fair and accurate determination of the merits against the
privacy interests of the parties to the proceedings, and render a
written decision setting forth its findings and rulings. No information
released to a hearing officer pursuant to this paragraph shall be
disclosed to any other person or entity without the written permission
of the court, the child's parent or legal guardian, or the juvenile if
he or she has reached the age of majority, except that a court
conducting an appellate review of an administrative due process hearing
shall have access to the same information released to a hearing officer
pursuant to this paragraph.
                                             
 VI. In this section, "child with a disability'' shall be as defined
in RSA 186-C.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1983, 458:3. 1986, 223:14. 1987, 402:23. 1990,
140:2, X. 2008, 274:15, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 169-D:18-a

 **169-D:18-a Determination of Competence. –**
                                             
 I. At any point during the proceedings, the court may, either on its
own motion or that of any of the parties, order the child to submit to a
mental health evaluation for the purpose of determining whether the
child is competent to have committed the offenses or acts alleged in the
petition. The evaluation shall be completed within 60 days of the date
of such order and shall be conducted by an agency other than the
Philbrook center which is approved by the commissioner of health and
human services, or conducted by a psychologist licensed in New Hampshire
or a qualified psychiatrist, or by the Philbrook center only upon
receiving prior approval for admission of the child for such evaluation
by the commissioner of the department of health and human services. The
evaluation shall be submitted to the court in writing prior to the
hearing on the merits.
                                             
 II. The court shall inform the child of his right to object to the
evaluation; if he does object, he shall do so in writing to the court
within 5 days of the court's order for the evaluation. The court shall
hold a hearing to consider the objection, and may, for good cause,
excuse the child from the evaluation.
                                             
 III. Whenever such an evaluation has been made previously for
consideration at a prior proceeding, it shall be jointly reviewed by the
court and the evaluating agency before the case is heard. The evaluator
shall keep records of having conducted the evaluation, but no reports or
records shall be made available, other than to the court and parties,
except upon the written consent of the child or his legal
representative, parent or guardian or pursuant to RSA 169-B:35. The
expense of such evaluation is to be borne as provided in RSA 169-B:40.

**Source.** 1990, 201:13. 1994, 212:2. 1995, 310:182. 1998, 234:6, eff.
Oct. 31, 1998.

### Section 169-D:19

 **169-D:19 Modification of Dispositional Orders. –** Upon the motion
of a child, parent, custodian, guardian, counsel, or the department
alleging a change of circumstances requiring a different disposition,
the court shall conduct a hearing and pursuant to RSA 169-D:17 may
modify a dispositional order; provided that the court may dismiss the
motion if the allegations are not substantiated in the hearing.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1995, 308:82; 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 169-D:20

 **169-D:20 Appeals. –** An appeal, under this chapter, may be taken
to the superior court by the child, parent, guardian or custodian,
within 30 days of the final dispositional order, but an appeal shall not
suspend the order or decision of the court unless the court so orders.
The superior court shall hear the matter de novo, and shall give an
appeal under this chapter priority on the court calendar.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 169-D:21

 **169-D:21 Periodic Review of Disposition Required. –**
                                             
 I. The court shall conduct periodic review hearings to review the
disposition of a child under RSA 169-D:17. The court may review a case
at any time.
                                             
 II. At this hearing, the court shall determine whether the
department has made reasonable efforts to finalize the permanency plan
that is in effect. Where reunification is the permanency plan that is in
effect, the court shall consider whether services to the family have
been accessible, available, and appropriate.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 2007, 236:21, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 169-D:21-a

 **169-D:21-a Permanency Hearings. –**
                                             
 I. For a child who enters an out-of-home placement prior to an
adjudicatory finding and who is in an out-of-home placement for 12 or
more months, the court shall hold and complete an initial permanency
hearing within 14 months of the child's entry into out-of-home placement
or within 12 months of the court's adjudicatory finding, whichever is
earlier. For a child who enters an out-of-home placement subsequent to
an adjudicatory finding and who is in an out-of-home placement for 12 or
more months, the court shall hold and complete an initial permanency
hearing within 12 months of the child's entry into out-of-home
placement. For a child who is in out-of-home placement following the
initial permanency hearing, the court shall hold and complete a
subsequent permanency hearing within 12 months of the initial permanency
hearing and every 12 months thereafter as long as the child is in an
out-of-home placement.
                                             
 II. At a permanency hearing the court shall consider whether the
parent or parents and child have met the responsibilities pursuant to
the dispositional orders issued by the court. If compliance with the
dispositional orders pursuant to RSA 169-D:17 is not met, the court may
adopt a permanency plan other than reunification for the child. Other
options for a permanency plan include:
                                             
 (a) Termination of parental rights or parental surrender when an
adoption is contemplated;
                                             
 (b) Guardianship with a fit and willing relative or another
appropriate party; or
                                             
 (c) Another planned permanent living arrangement.
                                             
 III. At a permanency hearing the court shall determine whether the
department has made reasonable efforts to finalize the permanency plan
that is in effect. Where reunification is the permanency plan that is in
effect, the court shall consider whether services to the family have
been accessible, available, and appropriate.

**Source.** 2007, 236:22. 2008, 213:2, eff. Aug. 15, 2008.

### Section 169-D:22

 **169-D:22 Limitations of Authority Conferred. –** This chapter
shall not be construed as applying to persons 16 years of age or over
who are charged with the violation of a motor vehicle law, an
aeronautics law, a law relating to navigation of boats, a fish and game
law, a law relating to title XIII, or a law relating to fireworks under
RSA 160-B or RSA 160-C, and shall not be construed as applying to any
minor charged with the violation of any law relating to the possession,
sale, or distribution of tobacco products to or by a person under 18
years of age.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1995, 308:83. 1999, 348:16, eff. Jan. 21, 2000.

### Section 169-D:23

 **169-D:23 Religious Preference. –** The court and officials in
placing children shall, as far as practicable, place them in the care
and custody of some individual holding the same religious belief as the
child or parents of the said child, or with some association which is
controlled by persons of like religious faith. No child under the
supervision of any state institution shall be denied the free exercise
of his religion or that of his parents, whether living or dead, nor the
liberty of worshipping God according thereto.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 169-D:24

 **169-D:24 Court Sessions. –** All hearings shall be held separate
from the trial of criminal cases and such hearings shall be held
wherever possible in rooms not used for such trials. Only such persons
as the parties, their witnesses, counsel and representatives of the
agencies present to perform their official duties shall be admitted.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 169-D:25

 **169-D:25 Case and Court Records. –**
                                             
 I. All case records, defined in RSA 170-G:8-a, relative to children
in need of services, shall be confidential and access shall be provided
pursuant to RSA 170-G:8-a.
                                             
 II. The court records of proceedings under this chapter shall be
kept in books and files separate from all other court records. Such
records shall be withheld from public inspection but shall be open to
inspection by juvenile probation and parole officers, a parent, a
guardian, a custodian, the relevant county, the minor's attorney and
others entrusted with the supervision of the child. Additional access to
court records may be granted by court order or upon the written consent
of the minor. Once a child in need of services reaches 18 years of age,
all court and police records shall be destroyed.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1987, 402:14. 1993, 266:5; 355:6. 2000, 294:10,
eff. July 1, 2000.

### Section 169-D:26

 **169-D:26 Penalty for Disclosure of Records. –** It shall be
unlawful for any person to disclose court records, or any part thereof,
to persons other than those entitled to access under RSA 169-D:25,
except by court order. Any person who knowingly violates this provision
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1993, 355:7, eff. Sept. 1, 1993.

### Section 169-D:27

 **169-D:27 Publication Restricted. –** It shall be unlawful for any
newspaper to publish, or any radio or television station to broadcast or
make public the name or address or any other particular information
serving to identify any child taken into custody, without the express
permission of the court; and it shall be unlawful for any newspaper to
publish, or any radio or television station to make public, any of the
proceedings of any court hearing.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 169-D:28

 **169-D:28 Penalty for Forbidden Publication. –** The publisher of
any newspaper or the manager, owner or person in control of a radio or
television station or agent or employee of any of the above who may
violate any provision of RSA 169-D:27 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 169-D:29

 **169-D:29 Liability of Expenses and Hearing on Liability. –**
                                             
 I. (a)(1) When an order creating liability for expenses is issued by
the court under this chapter or when a voluntary service plan is
developed and provided for a minor and the minor's family by the
department, any expenses incurred for services, placements, and programs
the providers of which are certified pursuant to RSA 170-G:4, XVIII,
shall be payable by the department of health and human services.
                                             
 (2) When an order creating liability for expenses is issued by
the court under this chapter or when a voluntary service plan is
developed and provided for a minor, any expenses incurred for approved
diversion services shall be paid by the parent or guardian.
                                             
 (b) Subparagraph (a) shall not apply to expenses incurred for
special education and related services, or to expenses incurred for
evaluation, care, and treatment of the child at the Philbrook center or
to expenses incurred for the cost of accompanied transportation.
                                             
 (c) The state shall have a right of action over for such expenses
against the parents or the people chargeable by law for the child's
support and necessities. Upon written request, the department shall
provide the parents or other persons chargeable by law for the minor's
support and necessities with a statement of the costs of any services,
placements, or programs incurred in the case to date. The parents or
other persons chargeable by law for the minor's support and necessities
shall promptly notify the department of any insurance benefits that may
be available to pay for all or a portion of the services provided. Upon
receipt of notice of a proposed service, the parents or other persons
chargeable by law for the minor's support and necessities shall contact
their insurance carrier within 48 hours to determine if coverage is
available to pay for the particular service and shall notify the
department of the results. If insurance coverage is available, the
parents or other persons chargeable by law for the minor's support and
necessities shall cooperate with the insurance carrier and shall comply
with the insurance carrier's requirements for direct payment to the
provider. The court shall require the individual chargeable by law for
the child's support and necessities to submit a financial statement
annually to the court upon which the court shall make an order as to
reimbursement to the state as may be reasonable and just, based on the
person's ability to pay. Such financial statement shall include, but not
be limited to, any benefits received from the Social Security
Administration or insurance benefits available to the individual. The
court shall include disposition of these benefits in its order as to
reimbursement. Such reimbursement shall be established on a per month or
per week basis and shall continue from the time the services begin until
4 years beyond the time such services end, unless such reimbursement is
fully paid prior to the end of the 4-year period. The court's
jurisdiction to order reimbursement shall continue until the
court-ordered obligation to reimburse has been fulfilled. If the court
does not issue a reimbursement order, the court shall issue written
findings explaining why such reimbursement is not ordered.
                                             
 (d) Liability for placement expenses for any court ordered
placement of any minor mother under this chapter shall include liability
for placement expenses for the child or children of such minor mother if
the minor mother and child or children are placed at the same facility.
                                             
 (e) Payments due under this section for the care of children in
foster homes shall commence within 60 days of the child's placement in
the foster home and shall be made every 30 days thereafter.
                                             
 II. Upon the issuance of the order in paragraph I, the court shall
send notice to the state. The state may, within 30 days from receipt of
notice, request a hearing on the issues of the cost or appropriateness
of services, or recovery. At such hearing, the court shall provide all
financial information, including names and addresses of persons
chargeable by law for the child's support and necessities, to the
state.
                                             
 III. The office of reimbursements acting on behalf of Laconia
developmental services and the New Hampshire hospital is authorized to
compromise or reduce any expense to be charged to the state.
                                             
 IV. The department may enter into an agreement with a county to
collect, on behalf of the department, payments from persons or entities
which are ordered to reimburse the state under paragraph I, or which are
chargeable by law for the minor's support and necessities. An agreement
may authorize the county to deduct reasonable administrative costs from
the amounts collected. The balance of any amounts collected by the
county pursuant to this paragraph shall be forwarded to the department.
                                             
 V. If the person responsible for paying reimbursements to the
department under paragraph IV is financially able to pay such
reimbursements but fails to make such payments, the department may apply
to the district court for a lien on such person's real or personal
property for the amount of reimbursements due.
                                             
 VI. Upon request by the adoptive parent of a child whose birth
parents relinquished their parental rights to the department or the
parental rights of whose birth parents were terminated pursuant to a
petition brought by the department, the state, acting through the
commissioner, may waive its right of action against such adoptive parent
for all or a portion of the expenses of services, placements, and
programs provided pursuant to RSA 169-B, 169-C or 169-D after the
adoption. The department shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A to establish
the procedure to be followed to obtain a waiver of parental
reimbursement pursuant to this paragraph.
                                             
 (a) For the adoptive parent or prospective adoptive parent of a
child in the custody of the state whose birth parents have consented to
the adoption, relinquished their parental rights to the department, or
the parental rights of whose birth parents were terminated pursuant to a
petition brought by the department, authorized agency, or foster parent,
pursuant to RSA 170-C:4, the state shall waive its right of action
against such adoptive parent or prospective adoptive parent for the
expenses of services, placements, and programs provided pursuant to RSA
169-B, 169-C, or 169-D after the adoption.
                                             
 (b) If the department determines that the adoptive parent has
been convicted of sexual or physical abuse of the adopted child pursuant
to RSA 631 or 632-A, or the adoptive parent has misappropriated adoption
subsidy moneys, the adoptive parent shall be responsible for payment for
subsequent services, placements, and programs provided pursuant to RSA
169-B, 169-C, or 169-D after the adoption. A determination of
misappropriation is subject to the provisions of RSA 126-A:5, VIII.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2. 1981, 555:3. 1982, 25:4. 1983, 458:6. 1985,
96:6; 380:39. 1987, 402:33, 34. 1988, 107:5; 153:3, 6. 1989, 75:3;
229:3; 286:3. 1990, 3:50; 203:3. 1991, 265:4. 1993, 266:6. 1994, 212:2.
1995, 220:4; 308:84, 85; 310:175, 181-183. 1996, 286:15, 18. 1997,
305:3. 2007, 263:22. 2008, 274:33. 2009, 144:35. 2010, 175:7, eff. Jan.
1, 2011. 2014, 57:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 169-D:30

 **169-D:30 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is held to be
invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of such
provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected
thereby.

**Source.** 1979, 361:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 169-D:31

 **169-D:31 Data Collection; Reporting Requirement. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall establish a system to collect data related
to:
                                             
 (a) The person or entity who referred the child for services
and/or filed the petition.
                                             
 (b) The racial and ethnic identity of the child.
                                             
 (c) The insurance status and coverage of child served.
                                             
 (d) The length of time a child receives services under this
chapter, including the time prior and subsequent to the filing of a
petition.
                                             
 (e) The identity of any public or private organization to whom
the department has referred a child or family.
                                             
 (f) Any other information, including outcome data, that may
assist the department and the court in evaluating the availability and
effectiveness of services for children who receive assistance under this
chapter.
                                             
 (g) The number of cases in which the department determined that
voluntary services under RSA 169-D:5-c were not appropriate, and the
basis for those decisions.
                                             
 (h) The type of services offered and/or provided to a child on a
voluntary basis and the type of services ordered by the court after
adjudication and disposition.
                                             
 II. The department shall, upon request, make available to members of
the public, compilations of the data which do not contain identifying
information.
                                             
 III. Beginning on or before December 30, 2013, the department shall
provide quarterly reports regarding cases handled pursuant to this
chapter to the chair of the house children and family law committee, the
chair of the senate health, education and human services committee, or
to the chairs of their successor committees, as well as the chair of the
joint fiscal committee. The reports shall include:
                                             
 (a) The number of cases assessed pursuant to RSA 169-D:5-c.
                                             
 (b) The number of cases declined for voluntary services and the
bases for the declinations.
                                             
 (c) The number of cases accepted for voluntary services and their
ultimate disposition.
                                             
 (d) The number of petitions filed pursuant to RSA 169-D:5, I, and
their dispositions.
                                             
 (e) The number of voluntary and court-based cases pending in each
definition category of RSA 169-D:2, II at the beginning and end of the
quarter.
                                             
 (f) The type and cost of services provided in cases accepted for
voluntary services and cases handled through the court, in each
definition category of RSA 169-D:2, II.

**Source.** 2013, 249:13, eff. Sept. 1, 2013.
