---
title: 'CHAPTER 169-G REVIEW OF DISPOSITIONAL ORDERS IN JUVENILE CASES'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 169-G
                                             
REVIEW OF DISPOSITIONAL ORDERS IN JUVENILE CASES
------------------------------------------------

### Section 169-G:1

 **169-G:1 Review Panel. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 368:1(43), eff. Dec.
31, 2010.
                                             ]

### Section 169-G:2

 **169-G:2 Application for Review. –**
                                             
 I. The department of health and human services may file with the
clerk of the district court or the judicial branch family division court
where the dispositional order was issued an application for review of
the order by the review panel. The application shall be filed within 7
days after the date of the dispositional order, but not thereafter
except for good cause shown. The filing of an application for review
shall stay the implementation of the dispositional order.
                                             
 II. Upon issuance of the dispositional order, the clerk shall give
oral and written notice to the department of health and human services
of its right to make such a request. A form for making the application
shall accompany the notice. If an application is filed, the clerk shall
forthwith transmit it to the review panel and shall notify the
administrative justice and judge who issued the dispositional order of
the filing.
                                             
 III. The judge who issued the dispositional order may transmit to
the review panel a statement of the reasons for the dispositional order
and shall transmit such a statement within 7 days if requested to do so
by the review panel.

**Source.** 1995, 308:87; 310:181. 1999, 266:10. 2001, 286:6. 2007,
236:24, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 169-G:3

 **169-G:3 Review Procedure. –**
                                             
 I. The review panel has jurisdiction to consider a request for
review of the dispositional order of the court with or without a
hearing; to review the dispositional order; to amend the dispositional
order by substituting therefor a different appropriate order or orders;
or to make any other disposition of the case.
                                             
 II. The review panel may require the production of any records,
documents, exhibits, or other things connected with the proceedings. The
district court and the judicial branch family division shall by rule
establish forms for review under this chapter and may by rule make such
other regulations of procedure relative to such review, consistent with
law, as justice requires.
                                             
 III. The decision of the review panel shall be rendered within 21
days from the date of receipt of the application for review.

**Source.** 1995, 308:87. 2007, 236:25, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 169-G:4

 **169-G:4 Amendment of Dispositional Orders. –** If the
dispositional order is amended by an order substituting a different
order or disposition of the case, the review panel shall make any other
disposition of the case in accordance with the order of the review
panel.

**Source.** 1995, 308:87, eff. July 1, 1995.

### Section 169-G:5

 **169-G:5 Records. –** The secretary-clerk shall attend all sittings
of the review panel; shall record all appointments to the panel,
notifying the clerks of the district courts or judicial branch family
division courts of such appointments; and shall record the proceedings
of the panel.

**Source.** 1995, 308:87. 2007, 236:26, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 169-G:6

 **169-G:6 Quarterly Reports. –** The commissioner of the department
of health and human services shall make quarterly reports to the house
committee on judiciary and family law and the house finance committee
containing statistical analysis on the use of RSA 169-D and voluntary
service programs. Such reports shall include, but not be limited to, the
costs including transaction costs incurred for services, programs, and
placements provided, parental reimbursements collected, the number of
out-of-state placements and the costs of such placements, and a
comparison of such with the same statistics from the same quarter of the
prior 2 fiscal years, and the number of appeals taken to the review
panel by the department and the results thereof. The first report shall
be due October 1, 1995.

**Source.** 1995, 308:87; 310:182, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.
