---
title: |
    CHAPTER 170-E CHILD DAY CARE, RESIDENTIAL CARE, AND CHILD-PLACING
    AGENCIES
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 170-E
                                             
CHILD DAY CARE, RESIDENTIAL CARE, AND CHILD-PLACING AGENCIES
------------------------------------------------------------

Child Day Care Licensing
------------------------

### Section 170-E:1

 **170-E:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this subdivision is to provide
for the licensing of child day care agencies.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:2

 **170-E:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Applicant'' means a person, institution or agency who intends to
receive for child day care one or more children unrelated to the
operator and who indicates that intent to the department by filling out
the forms prescribed by rule adopted by the commissioner pursuant to RSA
541-A.
                                             
 II. "Child'' means any person under 18 years of age.
                                             
 III. "Child day care'' means the care and supervision of a child
away from the child's home and apart from the child's parents.
                                             
 IV. "Child day care agency'' means any person, corporation,
partnership, voluntary association or other organization, either
established for profit or otherwise, which regularly receives for child
day care one or more children, unrelated to the operator or staff of the
agency. The total number of hours in which a child may remain in child
day care shall not exceed 13 hours per day, except in emergencies. The
types of child day care agencies are defined as follows:
                                             
 (a) "Family day care home'' means an occupied residence in which
child day care is provided for less than 24 hours per day, except in
emergencies, for up to 6 children from one or more unrelated families.
The 6 children shall include any foster children residing in the home
and all children who are related to the caregiver except children who
are 10 years of age or older. In addition to the 6 children, up to 3
children attending a full day school program may also be cared for up to
5 hours per day on school days and all day during school holidays.
                                             
 (b) "Family group day care home'' means an occupied residence in
which child day care is provided for less than 24 hours per day, except
in emergencies, for 7 to 12 children from one or more unrelated
families. The 12 children shall include all children related to the
caregiver and any foster children residing in the home, except children
who are 10 years of age or older. In addition to the 12 children, up to
5 children attending a full day school program may also be cared for up
to 5 hours per day on school days and all day during school holidays.
                                             
 (c) "Group child day care center'' means a child day care agency
in which child day care is provided for preschool children and up to 5
school-age children, whether or not the service is known as day nursery,
nursery school, kindergarten, cooperative, child development center, day
care center, center for the developmentally disabled, progressive
school, Montessori school, or by any other name.
                                             
 (d) "Day care nursery'' means a child day care agency in which
child day care is provided for any part of a day, for 5 or more children
under the age of 3 years.
                                             
 (e) "Night care agency'' means a center or family home in which
child day care is provided during the evening and night hours. A child
day care agency may be licensed for day care, night care, or both.
                                             
 (f) "Preschool program'' means a child day care agency providing
care and a structured program for children 3 years of age and older who
are not attending a full day school program. The total amount of hours a
child may be enrolled in a preschool program shall not exceed 5 hours
per day.
                                             
 (g) "School-age program'' means a child day care agency providing
child day care for up to 5 hours per school day, before or after, or
before and after, regular school hours, and all day during school
holidays and vacations, and which is not licensed under RSA 149, for 6
or more children who are 4 years and 8 months of age or older. The
number of children shall include all children present during the period
of the program, including those children related to the caregiver.
                                             
 (h) "Dual licensure'' means the issuance of 2 licenses by the
department of health and human services to operate both a child day care
agency and a family foster care agency, as provided by RSA 170-E:8, II.
                                             
 V. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 VI. "Corrective action plan'' means a written proposal setting forth
the procedures by which a child day care agency will come into
compliance with the standards set by rules adopted by the commissioner
under RSA 541-A, and subject to the approval of the department. The
proposal shall include the time needed to assure compliance and the
steps proposed by the agency to reach compliance.
                                             
 VII. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 VIII. "Guardian'' means the guardian of the person of a minor, as
defined in RSA 463.
                                             
 IX. "License'' means an authorization granted by the commissioner to
provide one or more types of child day care.
                                             
 X. "Monitoring visit'' means a visit made to the child day care
agency by department personnel for the purpose of assessing compliance
with the standards set by rule adopted by the commissioner pursuant to
RSA 541-A.
                                             
 XI. "Permit'' means the initial authorization to operate issued to
an operator of a child day care agency, which shall not be renewable
except for good cause shown.
                                             
 XI-a. "Recreational program'' means any before and/or after school,
vacation, or summer youth program for children 6 years of age or older
offered by a school or religious group, the Boys and Girls Clubs of
America, Girls, Incorporated, the YMCA, or the YWCA, provided that the
program:
                                             
 (a) Does not operate in a private home;
                                             
 (b) Notifies parents or guardians that the program is not subject
to licensure under RSA 170-E:4;
                                             
 (c) Has policies and procedures to address the filing of
grievances by parents and guardians; and
                                             
 (d) Is a member in good standing and in compliance with the
national organization's minimum standards and procedures.
                                             
 XII. "Regularly'' or "on a regular basis'' means supervision and
care up to and including 7 days a week, whether paid or unpaid, for the
following as defined in RSA 170-E:2, IV: (a) family day care home, (b)
family group day care home, (c) group child day care center, (d) day
care nursery, (e) night care agency, (f) preschool program, and (g)
school-age program.
                                             
 XIII. "Related'' means any of the following relationships by blood,
marriage, or adoption: parent, grandparent, brother, sister, stepparent,
stepgrandparent, stepbrother, stepsister, uncle, aunt, niece and nephew,
first cousin, or second cousin.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 2005, 156:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2005.

### Section 170-E:3

 **170-E:3 Exemptions; Child Endangerment Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. The definitions in RSA 170-E:2, IV shall not apply to the
following:
                                             
 (a) Kindergartens, nursery schools, or any other daytime programs
operated by a public or private elementary or secondary school system or
institution of higher learning.
                                             
 (b) Programs offering instruction to children, including but not
limited to athletics, crafts, music, or dance, the purpose of which is
the teaching of a skill.
                                             
 (c) Private homes in which any number of the provider's own
children, whether related biologically or through adoption, and up to 3
additional children are cared for regularly for any part of the day, but
less than 24 hours, unless the caregiver elects to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and be licensed.
                                             
 (d) Child care services offered in conjunction with religious
services attended by the parent or offered solely for the purpose of
religious instruction.
                                             
 (e) Facilities operated as a complimentary and limited service
for the benefit of the general public in connection with a shopping
center, ski area, bowling alley, or other similar operation where the
parents or custodians of the serviced children are on the premises or in
the immediate vicinity and are readily available.
                                             
 (f) Municipal recreation programs, including after-school and
summer recreation programs.
                                             
 (g) Any recreational program as defined in RSA 170-E:2, XI-a.
                                             
 (h) Private homes in which the only children in care are the
provider's own children, children related to the provider, and children
residing with the provider.
                                             
 II. Persons administering programs exempted from licensing pursuant
to this section shall be subject to the provisions of RSA 170-E:4, II.
                                             
 III. Whenever a child day care that is license exempt under
subparagraphs I(c), (e), (f), or (g) accepts a new child into the
program, the provider shall inform the child's parent or legal guardian
that the program is not licensed and is operating as a legally license
exempt program.
                                             
 IV. If a licensed child day care agency ceases operating as a
licensed program and continues to provide child care services as a
legally license exempt provider, it shall notify the department of the
date it ceased being licensed, return its license to the department, and
notify the parent or legal guardian of all children in the program or
who enroll in the program that it is no longer licensed by the
department.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 1994, 375:1. 1995, 114:1. 1998, 119:1. 2004,
235:1. 2005, 156:2, eff. Aug. 20, 2005. 2016, 161:6, eff. June 3, 2016.

### Section 170-E:3-a

 **170-E:3-a Criminal Records and Central Registry Check of Child Day
Care Providers Exempt From Licensing. –** Any child day care providers
exempt from licensing under RSA 170-E:3 which receive state funds or
subsidies in payment for the provision of child day care shall, as a
condition of receiving state funds or subsidies, provide their names,
birth names, birth dates and addresses, and the same information for any
individual residing in the child day care provider's household who may
be responsible for the care of, or is in regular contact with children,
to the department prior to the receipt of state funds or subsidies on or
before July 1, 1999, and every 3 years thereafter. The department shall
conduct criminal records and central registry checks on these names in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 170-E:7.

**Source.** 1998, 147:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 170-E:4

 **170-E:4 License Required; Prohibition Against Child Endangerment.
–**
                                             
 I. No person shall establish, maintain, operate or conduct any child
day care agency without a license or permit issued by the department
under this subdivision. The requirements of this chapter applicable to
licensed child day care agencies shall apply with equal force to any
child day care agency required to be licensed under this chapter that is
not so licensed.
                                             
 II. No child care provider, whether licensed as a child day care
agency, required to be licensed as a child day care agency under
paragraph I, or exempted from licensing pursuant to RSA 170-E:3, I,
shall care for a child in a manner which endangers the health, safety or
welfare of the child. For purposes of this paragraph, endangerment shall
mean the negligent violation of a duty of care or protection owed to
such child or negligently inducing such child to engage in conduct which
endangers his or her health or safety. Licensees in violation of this
paragraph shall be subject to the provisions of RSA 170-E:12. Persons
exempted from licensing who are in violation of this paragraph shall be
enjoined by a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the
provisions of RSA 170-E:22 from caring for such child and may be
enjoined, as the court may determine, from caring for other children.
Persons operating a child day care agency without a license in violation
of paragraph I who engage in negligent conduct that endangers the
health, safety, or welfare of the children in their care shall be
subject to the criminal penalties in RSA 170-E:21 and may be enjoined
from caring for children in accordance with the provisions of RSA
170-E:22.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991. 2016, 161:2, 9, eff. June 3,
2016.

### Section 170-E:5

 **170-E:5 Assistance From Department. –** The department, in
applying the standards adopted by rule under this subdivision, shall
offer consultation through employed staff or other qualified persons to
assist applicants and licensees in meeting and maintaining minimum
requirements for a license.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:5-a

 **170-E:5-a Child Care Resource and Referral Services. –** The
department of health and human services shall develop and implement a
plan, such plan to be fully funded by federal moneys for child care
resource and referral services, which shall have the following
responsibilities and duties to the public:
                                             
 I. Provide referrals to a variety of licensed child care options
which meet the parent's or guardian's child care needs.
                                             
 II. Provide information on child care subsidies, including public
and private program eligibility requirements and on tax credits and
employer options.
                                             
 III. Provide counselling on selecting quality child care and early
childhood issues.
                                             
 IV. Provide information on training opportunities for parents,
guardians, and child care providers.
                                             
 V. Provide assistance to state human service agencies in seeking
child care for such agencies' clients.
                                             
 VI. Provide information to parents, guardians and providers through
workshops, provider groups, and library resources.
                                             
 VII. Provide assistance in seeking funding for local providers to
develop and improve child care services.
                                             
 VIII. Provide start-up assistance to prospective center and family
day care providers.
                                             
 IX. Provide information on child care supply and demand data.
                                             
 X. Provide technical assistance to employers and public and private
sector decision-makers to support their efforts to expand and improve
quality child care in New Hampshire.
                                             
 XI. Establish a resource library for parents, providers, employers
and the public which includes information on child development, child
care options, licensing, model programs, employer options, and other
related topics.
                                             
 XII. Recruitment of, and technical assistance to, existing and
prospective local child care providers to encourage the development of
special needs child care, protective child care, subsidized child care,
mildly ill child care and second-shift child care.

**Source.** 1991, 327:2, eff. Sept. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:5-b

 **170-E:5-b Nonprofit Child Day Care Loan Program. –**
                                             
 I. There is established the child day care loan program to provide
low interest loans for nonprofit child day care providers. The primary
purposes of these low interest loans include:
                                             
 (a) To construct wheelchair and handicap access ramps, van
conversions, and bathroom renovations to accommodate children with
disabilities.
                                             
 (b) To pay for expansion or construction costs to serve more
children under the state voucher program for low-income families to meet
the expected increase of families receiving temporary assistance to
needy families entering the work force.
                                             
 (c) To renovate or upgrade current facilities to maintain or
exceed code requirements.
                                             
 (d) To renovate or expand facilities to serve priority
populations, such as infants and toddlers, and families in need of
night, weekend, drop-in, and mildly-ill care.
                                             
 (e) To allow after-school programs to expand and purchase startup
supplies, including storage, for school-age children.
                                             
 (f) To enable child day care providers to secure a more stable
environment and continuity of services through ownership or extended
lease arrangements.
                                             
 (g) To allow the purchase or lease of vans to transport
children.
                                             
 (h) To fund any other program-related costs as necessary.
                                             
 II. Criteria for consideration of loan applicants shall include the
provider's commitment to enroll low-income children, children subsidized
through the Child Care and Development Fund, and children with
disabilities, or legally-operating providers who provide services to
these populations. In addition, applicants shall:
                                             
 (a) Be fiscally sound as shown in a financial statement.
                                             
 (b) Meet or exceed state and local operating and zoning
regulations, including public health, fire, and safety requirements, or
present a local exemption from regulations.
                                             
 (c) Demonstrate a commitment to providing quality child day care
through one or more of the following:
                                             
 (1) Local child care resource and referral relationship.
                                             
 (2) Family day care support group participation.
                                             
 (3) Enrollment in the United States Department of Agriculture
food program (Child and Adult Food Program).
                                             
 (4) Documentation of training in the Child Care Basics program
or other training approved by the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 (d) Address a geographic or community need for projected child
day care services.
                                             
 III. (a) The department of health and human services may, after
consultation with the state child care advisory committee established in
RSA 126-A:17, adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the
implementation and administration of the child day care loan program
under this section.
                                             
 (b) The department shall have the responsibility for notifying
providers of the availability of the loans and shall provide guidelines
for loan application. Notification shall be made publicly, as well as
through child care associations and the child care resource and referral
network of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (c) The department of health and human services shall have the
authority to designate a statewide, nonprofit community development
financial institution as recipient of the funds, or a portion of the
funds, to be used as a loan loss reserve or interest subsidy, or both.
                                             
 (d) The department may elect to contract with a statewide,
nonprofit community development financial institution for provision of
the following services:
                                             
 (1) To establish programmatic and credit criteria.
                                             
 (2) To establish a mechanism for making lending decisions
related to project feasibility.
                                             
 (3) To maintain documentation on the borrower's organization,
collateral, and on-going repayment ability.
                                             
 (4) To collect and report the number of day care slots
retained, created, or improved and the number of low-income families
served through the child day care loan program or related activities.
                                             
 IV. The terms and conditions of the loan shall be contained in a
binding agreement between the child day care provider and the lender and
may include provisions for a lien on the property. Loans subsidized by
an interest-rate subsidy shall carry a term of no more than 15 years and
shall, to the extent possible and consistent with this section, be
determined to match the useful life of the improvements funded by the
loan. The department shall annually, on or before July 1, account for
any subsidy or loss reserve expended, as well as for the repayment
status of all loans made under this program.

**Source.** 1998, 303:2, eff. June 26, 1998.

### Section 170-E:6

 **170-E:6 Applications; Compliance With Local Codes Required. –**
Any person who intends to operate a child day care agency as defined in
RSA 170-E:2, IV, shall apply for a license to operate one or more types
of child day care agencies. Application for a license to operate a child
day care agency shall be made to the department in the manner and on
forms prescribed by rules adopted by the commissioner pursuant to RSA
541-A. Such forms shall provide for the names, birth names, birth dates,
and addresses of all persons having responsibility for care of or
regular contact with children at the agency. The applicant shall obtain
approvals in accordance with state and local requirements pertaining to
health, safety and zoning, as applicable. School age programs located in
currently operating public or private schools shall be exempt from the
requirement to provide documentation of approval pertaining to fire,
health, and zoning.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 1999, 326:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 170-E:6-a

 **170-E:6-a Registration of Day Care Providers Receiving State
Funds. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who provides child day care services and receives
state funds for such services, but is not required to be licensed under
RSA 170-E:4 as a child day care agency, shall register with the
department of health and human services.
                                             
 II. The department of health and human services shall maintain a
registry of all providers of child day care services who are not
required to be licensed under RSA 170-E:4, but who receive state funds
for their services.

**Source.** 1998, 256:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 170-E:6-b

 **170-E:6-b Insurance Disclosures. –** Every person required to be
licensed as a child day care agency under RSA 170-E:4 and every child
day care provider required to be registered under RSA 170-E:6-a shall
either maintain liability insurance or provide a disclosure to parents
that the facility is uninsured.

**Source.** 1998, 256:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1999. 2016, 161:3, eff. June 3,
2016.

### Section 170-E:7

 **170-E:7 State Registry and Criminal Records Check; Revocation of
Registration and Withholding of State Funds. –**


                                             [Paragraph I effective until October 1, 2016; see also paragraph I set
out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. Child day care providers who are required to be licensed or
registered according to the provisions of this chapter shall, no later
than an individual's first day of employment, which individual is
responsible for the care of, or having regular contact with children,
and upon adding new household members or other individuals who will have
regular contact with children, submit to the department, the names,
birth names, birth dates, and addresses of such individuals and other
information required by the department as prescribed by rules adopted by
the commissioner under RSA 541-A. The persons described in this
paragraph shall submit directly to the department of safety a notarized
criminal history records release form, as provided by the New Hampshire
division of state police, which authorizes the release of the person's
criminal records, if any, to the department. The person shall submit
with the release form a complete set of fingerprints taken by a
qualified law enforcement agency or an authorized employee of the
department of safety. The department of safety shall complete the
criminal history records check and forward such record, if any, to the
department. In the event that the first set of fingerprints is invalid
due to insufficient pattern, a second set of fingerprints shall be
necessary to complete the criminal history records check. If, after 2
attempts, a set of fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern,
the department may, in lieu of the criminal history records check,
accept police clearances from every city, town, or county where the
person has lived during the past 5 years.


                                             [Paragraph I effective October 1, 2016; see also paragraph I set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. Child day care providers who are required to be licensed or
registered according to the provisions of this chapter shall, prior to
the date an individual is responsible for the care of, or has regular
contact with children, and upon adding new household members or other
individuals who will have regular contact with children, submit to the
department, the names, birth names, birth dates, and addresses during
the preceding 5 years of such individuals and other information required
by the department as prescribed by rules adopted by the commissioner
under RSA 541-A.


                                             [Paragraph I-a effective October 1, 2016.
                                             ]


                                             
 I-a. The persons described in paragraph I shall submit directly to
the department of safety a notarized criminal history records release
form, as provided by the New Hampshire division of state police, which
authorizes the release of the person's criminal records, if any, to the
department. The person shall complete a Federal Bureau of Investigation
fingerprint check using the Integrated Automated Fingerprint
Identification System through a qualified law enforcement agency or an
authorized employee of the department of safety. The department of
safety shall complete the criminal history records check and forward
such record, if any, to the department. In the event that the first set
of fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern, a second set of
fingerprints shall be necessary to complete the criminal history records
check. If, after 2 attempts, a set of fingerprints is invalid due to
insufficient pattern, the department may, in lieu of the criminal
history records check, accept police clearances from every city, town,
or county where the person has lived during the past 5 years.


                                             [Paragraph II effective until October 1, 2016; see also paragraph II
set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 II. (a) The department shall, for every name submitted on an
application, in the registration process, and for each individual for
whom information is required to be submitted pursuant to paragraph I,
review the names, birth names, birth dates, and current and previous
addresses of such persons against the state registry of founded abuse
and neglect reports.
                                             
 (b) The department of safety shall submit the criminal history
records release form to the New Hampshire division of state police,
which shall conduct a criminal history records check through its records
and through the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Upon completion of the
background investigation, the division of state police shall release
copies of the criminal conviction records to the department. The
department shall maintain the confidentiality of all criminal history
records information received pursuant to this paragraph.
                                             
 (c) The costs of criminal history record checks shall be borne by
the child day care provider; provided, that the child day care provider
may require an applicant to pay the actual costs of the criminal history
check of the employee.


                                             [Paragraph II effective October 1, 2016; see also paragraph II set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 II. (a) For every name submitted on an application, in the
registration process, and for each individual for whom information is
required to be submitted pursuant to paragraph I, the department shall
search for such persons against the New Hampshire sex offender and abuse
and neglect registries, the sex offender and abuse and neglect
registries of each state where the individual resided in the past 5
years, and the National Sex Offender Registry.
                                             
 (b) The department of safety shall submit the notarized criminal
history record information authorization form to the New Hampshire
division of state police, which shall conduct a criminal history records
check through its records and through the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. Upon completion of the background investigation, the
division of state police shall release copies of the criminal conviction
records to the department. The department shall maintain the
confidentiality of all criminal history records information received
pursuant to this paragraph.
                                             
 (c) The costs of criminal history record checks shall be borne by
the child day care provider; provided, that the child day care provider
may require an applicant to pay the actual costs of the criminal history
check of the employee.


                                             [Paragraph II-a effective until October 1, 2016; see also paragraph
II-a set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 II-a. If an individual who is or has been employed or volunteered at
a child day care agency is offered employment or volunteers at another
child day care agency, the individual shall not be required to submit a
new set of fingerprints and undergo a new criminal records check through
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as required in subparagraph II(b),
provided that the individual has submitted fingerprints and undergone
such a criminal records check under this section within 3 years of the
individual's first day of employment or volunteer service at the new
agency. Before entering employment or volunteering with the new agency,
the individual shall undergo a New Hampshire state criminal records
check through the department of safety.


                                             [Paragraph II-a effective October 1, 2016; see also paragraph II-a set
out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 II-a. An individual shall not be required to submit a request under
paragraph I-a if:
                                             
 (a) In the previous 5 years, the individual submitted a state
criminal records release form and fingerprints and completed a criminal
records check under this section;
                                             
 (b) The individual is currently employed by a child care provider
within the state, or has been separated from employment from a child
care provider within the state for a period of not more than 180
consecutive days; and
                                             
 (c) The department made a determination that when the individual
completed the criminal records check within the previous 5 years as
described in this section, the individual was eligible for employment as
provided in paragraphs III and IV.


                                             [Paragraph III effective until October 1, 2016; see also paragraph III
set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 III. If any individual whose name has been submitted for a check
under this section has been convicted of a violent or sexually-related
crime against a child, or of a crime which shows that the person might
be reasonably expected to pose a threat to a child, such as a violent
crime or a sexually-related crime against an adult, the department
shall:
                                             
 (a) If the individual is the applicant or owner, revoke or deny
the license or permit, or withhold state funds if the child day care
provider is not required to be licensed.
                                             
 (b) If the individual is a board member, household member, or
child day care personnel, or any other individual having regular contact
with the enrolled children, inform the child day care agency or
registered provider that the individual poses a threat to children and
give the agency or registered provider an opportunity to take immediate
corrective action to remove the individual from the agency, and, in
conjunction with the department, to develop a corrective action plan,
approved by the department, which shall ensure that the individual will
not be on the premises of the child day care program and shall have no
contact with children enrolled in the child day care program.
                                             
 (c) Suspend, deny, or revoke the license or permit if the child
day care program refuses to take corrective action as indicated in
subparagraph (b), or subsequently fails to comply with the corrective
action plan approved by the department.
                                             
 (d) Upon a finding of criminal activity as described in this
paragraph, withhold state funding to registered child day care providers
that are exempt from the licensing requirements of RSA 170-E:4 if the
provider refuses to take corrective action as indicated in subparagraph
(b), or fails to comply with the corrective action plan approved by the
department.


                                             [Paragraph III effective October 1, 2016; see also paragraph III set
out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 III. The department shall make a determination regarding the
individual's eligibility for employment no later than 45 days from
submission of all required information as described in paragraphs I and
I-a. If any individual whose name has been submitted for a check under
this section is registered or required to be registered on a state sex
offender registry or repository, or the National Sex Offender Registry,
or has been convicted of a felony consisting of murder, child abuse or
neglect, a crime against a child including child pornography and
trafficking, spousal abuse, a crime involving rape or sexual assault,
kidnapping, arson, physical assault or battery, or a drug-related
offense committed during the previous 5 years, or any other violent or
sexually-related misdemeanor against a child, including child abuse,
child endangerment, sexual assault, or a misdemeanor involving child
pornography, or of a crime which shows that the person might be
reasonably expected to pose a threat to a child, such as a violent crime
or a sexually-related crime against an adult, the department shall:
                                             
 (a) If the individual is the applicant or owner, revoke or deny
the license or permit, or withhold state funds if the child day care
provider is not required to be licensed.
                                             
 (b) If the individual is a board member, household member, or
child day care personnel, or any other individual having regular contact
with the enrolled children, inform the child day care agency or
registered provider that the individual is ineligible for employment and
give the agency or registered provider an opportunity to take immediate
corrective action to remove the individual from the agency, and, in
conjunction with the department, to develop a corrective action plan,
approved by the department, which shall ensure that the individual will
not be on the premises of the child day care program and shall have no
contact with children enrolled in the child day care program.
                                             
 (c) Suspend, deny, or revoke the license or permit, and withhold
state funding, if the child day care program refuses to take corrective
action as indicated in subparagraph (b), or subsequently fails to comply
with the corrective action plan approved by the department.
                                             
 (d) Upon a finding of criminal activity as described in this
paragraph, withhold state funding to registered child day care providers
that are exempt from the licensing requirements of RSA 170-E:4 if the
provider refuses to take corrective action as indicated in subparagraph
(b), or fails to comply with the corrective action plan approved by the
department.
                                             
 IV. If any individual whose name has been submitted for this check
has been convicted of a felony offense deemed directly or indirectly
harmful to children in child day care, crimes against minors or adults,
except crimes as provided in paragraph III, or is the subject of a
founded complaint of child abuse or neglect, the department may deny,
revoke, or suspend a license, permit, or registration pending the
development and implementation of a corrective action plan approved by
the department. In addition, the department may, upon a finding of
criminal activity or a founded complaint of child abuse or neglect as
described in this paragraph, withhold state funding to registered child
day care providers that are exempt from the licensing requirements of
RSA 170-E:4 pending the development and implementation of a corrective
action plan approved by the department. The department shall conduct an
investigation in accordance with rules adopted under this subdivision to
determine whether the individual poses a present threat to the safety of
children. The investigation shall include an opportunity for the
individual to present evidence on his behalf to show that the individual
does not pose a threat to the safety of children.


                                             [Paragraph IV-a effective October 1, 2016.
                                             ]


                                             
 IV-a. After the department has made a determination that an
individual required to complete a criminal record check under paragraph
I does not pose a present threat to the safety of children, the
department may issue a child care employment eligibility card, which
shall be valid for 5 years provided that no disqualifying convictions
are subsequently submitted, and the individual remains eligible as
described in subparagraph II-a(b). The state may require additional
background checks to be completed based upon conviction information
submitted.


                                             [Paragraph IV-b effective October 1, 2016.
                                             ]


                                             
 IV-b. Child day care providers who are required to be licensed or
registered according to the provisions of this chapter shall, for every
individual submitted for a check under paragraph I who is not required
to complete the criminal background check pursuant to paragraph II-a,
have on file a signed statement from the individual stating since the
day the individual's background check was completed, that he or she:
                                             
 (a) Has not been convicted of any crimes; and
                                             
 (b) Has not had a finding by the department or any administrative
agency in this or any other state for abuse, neglect, or exploitation.


                                             [Paragraph IV-c effective October 1, 2016.
                                             ]


                                             
 IV-c. Child care providers, whether registered or licensed, and
individuals as described in paragraph I, shall complete the background
check process described in this section no later than 5 years from the
previous background check submission.


                                             [Paragraph IV-d effective October 1, 2016.
                                             ]


                                             
 IV-d. The fee for a child care employment eligibility card issued
under paragraph IV-a shall be 
                                             $50 and the card shall be valid for 5
years from the date of issuance. A replacement card may be requested for
a 
                                             $15 fee.
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to the confidentiality of information collected under this
section and to the release, if any, of such information.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 1994, 212:2. 1995, 310:134. 1998, 147:2, 3;
256:2; 390:1. 1999, 326:2. 2000, 157:1. 2006, 289:8. 2009, 144:255.
2011, 100:1, eff. July 26, 2011. 2016, 158:1-5, eff. Oct. 1, 2016.

### Section 170-E:8

 **170-E:8 Issuance. –**
                                             
 I. Licenses shall be issued in such form and manner as prescribed by
rules adopted by the commissioner under RSA 541-A and shall be valid for
3 years from the date issued unless revoked or suspended by the
department or voluntarily surrendered by the licensee. Licenses shall
not be transferable and shall be surrendered in the event of change of
ownership.
                                             
 II. The department may provide dual licensure to operate a child day
care agency and a family foster care agency. Such licensure shall be
granted only upon application and shall be contingent upon a
determination that the standards of both programs have been met without
compromising any licensing requirements.
                                             
 III. The department shall make monitoring visits a minimum of once
yearly during each licensing period. At least one such visit during the
licensing period shall be unannounced. Clear and comprehensive records
shall be maintained by the department on each licensed agency showing
the dates and findings of each such visit. Such records shall be made
available to the child day care agency. If the child day care agency is
found not to be in compliance with the statute or with rules adopted by
the commissioner, a corrective action plan shall be submitted to the
department. Failure to submit an acceptable plan shall result in license
suspension, denial, or revocation.
                                             
 IV. The department may, in lieu of a license, issue a permit to a
newly established facility for child day care for the purpose of
demonstrating compliance with this subdivision and the rules adopted
under it during actual operation. At the end of the permit period, the
department shall renew the permit for good cause, issue a license for
the balance of the license period, or deny the license.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 1999, 326:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 170-E:9

 **170-E:9 License Renewal. –**
                                             
 I. A licensed child day care agency shall file for renewal of its
license or permit no later than 3 months prior to the expiration date of
the license or permit on forms prescribed by rules adopted by the
commissioner under RSA 541-A.
                                             
 II. The department shall reexamine every child day care agency for
renewal of its license or permit, including examination of the premises,
program and such records of the agency as the department considers
necessary to determine that minimum standards for licensing continue to
be met. If the department is satisfied that the agency continues to
comply with the minimum standards established by rule for that category
of care, it shall renew the license to operate.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may designate an agency or person to carry out
the reexamination specified in paragraph II.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:10

 **170-E:10 Record of Licenses and Investigatory and Monitoring
Visits. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall keep in a central depository records of
licenses issued under this subdivision and all investigatory and
monitoring reports, and final decisions relative to licensure that have
been made relative to licensees. When a license is issued to a child day
care agency, the department shall give notice to the health officer and
fire department of the city or town in which the licensee is located
stating the granting of such license and its terms. A like notice shall
be given of any suspension or revocation of such license.
                                             
 II. The license itself, the findings of investigatory and monitoring
visits, and final decisions relative to licensure of the child day care
agency shall be considered public information, posted on the
department's website, and available for review by members of the public;
information submitted in the application process, however, shall be
private, confidential, and not available for review.
                                             
 III. At least 5 business days before posting the results or findings
of an investigatory visit, monitoring visit, or a final decision
relative to licensure on the department's website, the department shall
provide the child day care agency with the results or findings by email
or, if the child day care agency has not provided an email address, by
United States mail. If the child day care agency submits a reasonable
response to the department's findings, the child day care agency's
response shall be posted with the department's findings on the website.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991. 2014, 128:1, eff. Aug. 15,
2014.

### Section 170-E:10-a

 **170-E:10-a Informal Dispute Resolution. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall offer an opportunity for informal dispute
resolution to any child day care agency that disagrees with the results
or findings of a monitoring visit. The child day care agency shall
submit a written request for informal dispute resolution no later than
14 days from the date the findings were issued by the department. Within
30 days of receipt of a request for informal dispute resolution and
receipt of information from the child day care agency, the department
shall review the evidence presented and provide written notice of its
decision to the child day care agency.
                                             
 II. Informal dispute resolution shall not be available to any child
day care agency against which the department has initiated action to
suspend, revoke, deny, or refuse to renew a license or permit under this
chapter.

**Source.** 2014, 128:2, eff. Aug. 15, 2014.

### Section 170-E:11

 **170-E:11 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules, under
RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Minimum standards for licensing which apply to the various types
of child day care agencies. The department shall seek the advice and
assistance of persons representative of the various types of child day
care agencies in adopting rules. The standards prescribed shall
include:
                                             
 (a) The operation and conduct of the agency and the
responsibility it assumes for child day care.
                                             
 (b) The character, qualifications, mental and physical ability
and competence of the applicant as well as all persons directly
responsible for the care and welfare of children served, or of persons
who will be providing necessary care for children and maintaining
prescribed standards, or of persons who will do both.
                                             
 (c) The number of individuals or staff required to insure
adequate supervision and care of the children received.
                                             
 (d) The appropriateness, safety, environmental health and general
adequacy of the premises, including maintenance of adequate fire
prevention and health standards conforming to state laws and municipal
codes, to provide for the physical comfort, health and care of children
received; provided that, health and safety requirements with regard to
school-age children shall be no more stringent than those required for
the public schools.
                                             
 (e) Provisions for food, clothing, educational opportunities,
program, equipment and individual supplies to assure the health and the
physical and mental development of children served.
                                             
 (f) Provisions to safeguard the legal rights of children served.
                                             
 (g) Maintenance of records pertaining to the admission, progress,
health and discharge of children.
                                             
 (h) Filing of reports with the department, including format,
frequency and content of such reports.
                                             
 (i) Discipline of children.
                                             
 (j) Protection and fostering of the particular religious faith of
the children served, where applicable.
                                             
 (k) Provisions to provide for a report of any new staff, paid or
unpaid, or resident of the facility which shall include the name, birth
name, date of birth and previous addresses of the person, or other
information as required by rules of the department.
                                             
 (l) The process and forms for application and renewal of
licenses.
                                             
 (m) The process and forms for requesting waivers to minimum
standards and for placing conditions on licenses.
                                             
 II. The confidentiality of information collected pursuant to RSA
170-E:7, 170-E:10, 170-E:17, III and 170-E:19.
                                             
 III. The procedures for the appeals processes provided by RSA
170-E:13, II and III.
                                             
 IV. Policy and procedures concerning monitoring visits,
investigation of complaints and disciplinary proceedings, including
corrective action plans, against licensees.
                                             
 V. Policy and procedures concerning suspension or revocation of
licenses.
                                             
 VI. A schedule of administrative fines which may be imposed under
RSA 170-E:21-a for a violation of this chapter or the rules adopted
pursuant to it.
                                             
 VII. Procedures for notice and hearing prior to the imposition of an
administrative fine imposed under RSA 170-E:21-a.
                                             
 VIII. Administration and enforcement of the registration process and
maintenance of the registry established under RSA 170-E:6-a.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 1991, 355:45. 1998, 256:3, 4, eff. Jan. 1,
1999.

### Section 170-E:12

 **170-E:12 License or Permit Suspension, Revocation, or Denial. –**
The department may suspend, revoke, deny or refuse to renew any license
or permit if the licensee or permit holder:
                                             
 I. Neglects or abuses children in his care;
                                             
 II. Does not comply with this subdivision or the rules adopted under
this subdivision relative to the supervision of children in his care;
                                             
 III. Violates any provision of this subdivision, or is unable to
meet and maintain standards adopted by the commissioner;
                                             
 IV. Substantially or repeatedly violates any provisions of the
license or permit issued;
                                             
 V. Furnishes or makes any misleading or any false statement or
report to the department;
                                             
 VI. Refuses or fails to submit any reports or to make available to
the department any records required by it in making an investigation of
the facility for licensing purposes;
                                             
 VII. Refuses or fails to submit to an investigation or to the
required visits by the department;
                                             
 VIII. Refuses or fails to admit authorized representatives of the
department at any time child care is being provided for the purpose of
investigation or visit;
                                             
 IX. Fails to provide, maintain, equip and keep in safe and sanitary
condition premises established or used for child day care as required
under standards prescribed by rules adopted by the commissioner under
RSA 541-A or as otherwise required by any law, rule, ordinance, or term
of the license applicable to the location of such facility;
                                             
 X. Retaliates against an employee who in good faith reports a
suspected violation of the provisions of this subdivision and rules
adopted under it;
                                             
 XI. Meets the conditions specified in RSA 170-E:7, III;
                                             
 XII. Fails to comply with the corrective action plan submitted by
the child day care agency and approved by the department; or
                                             
 XIII. Loses health, safety or zoning approval.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 1999, 326:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 170-E:13

 **170-E:13 Notice and Hearing. –**
                                             
 I. Should the department determine to suspend, revoke, deny, or
refuse to renew a license or permit, it shall send to the applicant,
licensee or permittee, by registered mail, an order setting forth the
particular reasons for the determination. The suspension, revocation or
denial shall become final 10 days after receipt of such order unless the
applicant, licensee or permittee requests a hearing under paragraph II
of this section.
                                             
 II. Any applicant, licensee or permittee aggrieved by a decision of
the department to suspend, revoke, deny or refuse to renew a license or
permit may appeal to the commissioner. For purposes of carrying out the
provisions of this section, the commissioner may, in accordance with the
rules adopted by the department of personnel pursuant to RSA 541-A,
appoint a hearings officer or officers, as necessary, to preside over
such hearings. A hearings officer may affirm, deny or modify the
decision of the department. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant
to RSA 541-A, relative to procedures for the appeal process provided
under this paragraph.
                                             
 III. When the department decides to suspend, revoke, deny, or refuse
to renew a license or permit, and it expressly finds that the continued
operation of a child day care agency violates any minimum standard
prescribed by law or rule, or otherwise jeopardizes the health, safety,
morals or welfare of children served by the agency, the department shall
include in its order issued under paragraph I an order of closure
directing that the operation of the agency terminate immediately. In
this event, the agency shall not operate during the pendency of any
proceeding for the review of the decision of the department, except
under court order.
                                             
 IV. Rehearings and appeals from a decision of the hearings officer
shall be in accordance with rules adopted under RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:14

 **170-E:14 Appeal. –** Any person aggrieved by any decision rendered
after a rehearing held or an appeal brought under RSA 170-E:13, IV may
appeal the decision to the superior court.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:15

 **170-E:15 Operation Without a License. –** Whenever the department
is advised, or has reason to believe, that any person is operating a
child day care agency without a license or permit, or in violation of
any of the provisions of this subdivision, it may make an investigation
to ascertain the facts. If it finds that such person is operating or has
operated without a license or permit, or in violation of any of the
provisions of this subdivision, the department shall issue by certified
mail a notice informing such person of the violation and requesting that
it cease operating within 24 hours of the date notice is received. The
department may report the results of its investigation to the attorney
general or to the appropriate county attorney for prosecution.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:16

 **170-E:16 Advertising. –** A child day care agency licensed or
operating under a permit issued by the department may publish
advertisements of the services for which it is specifically licensed or
issued a permit under this subdivision. No person who is required to
obtain a license or permit under this subdivision may advertise or cause
to be published an advertisement soliciting a child for child day care
unless the person has obtained the requisite license or permit. A child
care provider that is legally operating as a license exempt provider
under RSA 170-E:3 shall not hold itself out in any way or advertise that
it is licensed by the department, including using forms developed by the
department for use by licensed child day care agencies.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991. 2016, 161:7, eff. June 3,
2016.

### Section 170-E:17

 **170-E:17 Investigation. –**
                                             
 I. If the department has reason to believe that state or federal
funds solicited and received by a corporation for conduct of a child day
care agency are not being used for the purpose for which the funds were
awarded, or are being fraudulently used by the corporation or its
members, or purportedly are being used for a facility or agency which is
actually defunct, or are being used by or for an agency which no longer
carries a valid license or permit, the department shall report these
facts to the attorney general and request an investigation of the
corporation to determine if the corporation should be dissolved or
whether other action should be taken against the corporation or its
members.
                                             
 II. The department shall conduct an investigation of any complaint
of violations of any licensing or operating standards against permitted
or licensed child day care agencies. All investigations shall be
conducted at reasonable times, with the cooperation of other state or
municipal authorities, if required, and may include unannounced visits.
The commissioner shall request an annual narrative summary of complaints
received by the department.
                                             
 III. Records compiled during an investigation shall be confidential
and shall not be made public by the department.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 1995, 310:135, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 170-E:18

 **170-E:18 Oaths; Subpoenas. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall have the power to administer oaths in any
disciplinary proceedings.
                                             
 II. Upon request of the commissioner, the attorney general shall be
authorized, for good cause shown, to subpoena witnesses and to compel,
by subpoena duces tecum, the production of papers and records in any
disciplinary proceedings under this subdivision.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:19

 **170-E:19 Records. –** Every child day care agency shall keep and
maintain such records as the department shall prescribe by rule
pertaining to the admission, progress, health and discharge of children
under the care of the child day care agency and shall report relative to
such matters to the department whenever called for, upon forms
prescribed by rule. All records regarding children and all facts learned
about children and their relatives shall be kept confidential both by
the child day care agency and by the department.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:20

 **170-E:20 Notice of Death. –** If any child under the control of
any licensed child day care agency dies, the licensee shall give notice
of such event to the department within 24 hours.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:21

 **170-E:21 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Any natural person shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor, and
any other person shall be guilty of a class B felony, who conducts,
operates, or acts as a child day care agency without a license or permit
to do so in violation of RSA 170-E:4, I.
                                             
 II. Any person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor who:
                                             
 (a) Makes materially false statements to obtain or retain a
license or permit.
                                             
 (b) Fails to keep the records and make the reports required under
this subdivision.
                                             
 (c) Is required to obtain a license or permit under this
subdivision and who advertises or causes to be published an
advertisement soliciting a child for child day care which is not
authorized by any license or permit held.
                                             
 (d) Violates any other provision of this subdivision or any rule
adopted under RSA 541-A by the commissioner for the enforcement of this
subdivision.
                                             
 (e) Holds themselves out in any way or advertises that they are
licensed if they do not hold a license issued by the department.
                                             
 II-a. Any person who operates a licensed or unlicensed child day
care agency in violation of RSA 170-E:4, and, as a direct result of that
persons' negligent operation, a child suffers permanent impairment to
brain function, permanent paralysis, or other permanent debilitating
injury, or death, shall be guilty of a class B felony.
                                             
 III. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 2006, 76:2, eff. July 1, 2006. 2016, 161:4, 5,
8, eff. June 3, 2016.

### Section 170-E:21-a

 **170-E:21-a Administrative Fines. –** The commissioner of the
department of health and human services, after notice and hearing,
pursuant to rules adopted under RSA 541-A, may impose an administrative
fine not to exceed 
                                             $2,000 for each offense upon any person who violates
any provision of this chapter or rules adopted under this chapter.
Rehearings and appeals from a decision of the commissioner shall be in
accordance with RSA 541. Any administrative fine imposed under this
section shall not preclude the imposition of further penalties or
administrative actions under this chapter. The commissioner shall adopt
rules in accordance with RSA 541-A relative to administrative fines
which shall be scaled to reflect the scope and severity of the
violation. The sums obtained from the levying of administrative fines
under this chapter shall be forwarded to the state treasurer to be
deposited into the general fund.

**Source.** 1991, 355:46, eff. July 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:22

 **170-E:22 Injunctive Relief. –** Any person may institute in any
court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct
or abate any violation of this subdivision or of the rules adopted under
RSA 170-E:11; and the court shall adjudge relief, by way of injunction,
which may be mandatory or otherwise as may be proper under all the facts
and circumstances of the case, in order fully to effectuate the purpose
of this subdivision and the rules adopted under it. In a prosecution
under this subdivision, a defendant who relies upon the relationship of
any child to himself has the burden of proof as to that relationship.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:23

 **170-E:23 Confidentiality and Investigations. –** State registry
files and all other related confidential information kept by any state
agency may be used by the department for the purpose of investigation
and licensure. The department shall strictly observe the confidentiality
requirements of the agency from which it receives information.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

Residential Care and Child-Placing Agency Licensing
---------------------------------------------------

### Section 170-E:24

 **170-E:24 Purpose. –** The purpose of this subdivision is to
provide for the licensing of residential care and child-placing
agencies.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:25

 **170-E:25 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Child'' means any person under 21 years of age.
                                             
 II. "Child care agency'' means any person, corporation, partnership,
voluntary association or other organization either established for
profit or otherwise, who regularly receives for care one or more
children, unrelated to the operator of the agency, apart from the
parents, in any facility as defined in this subdivision and maintained
for the care of children. The types of child care agencies are defined
as follows:
                                             
 (a)(1) "Foster family home'' means child care in a residence in
which family care and training are provided on a regular basis for no
more than 6 unrelated children, unless all the children are of common
parentage. The maximum of 6 children includes the children living in the
home and children received for child care who are related to the
residents.
                                             
 (2) If the limit of 6 children under subparagraph (a)(1) is
reached, the foster family is willing and able to take a sibling or a
group of siblings of a child already in their care, and the department
has concluded that the foster family is able to provide for the safety,
permanency, and well-being of the child or children, the department may,
notwithstanding the limitations of subparagraph (a)(1), place the
sibling or group of siblings in the foster family home.
                                             
 (b) "Group home'' means a child care agency which regularly
provides specialized care for at least 5 but no more than 12 children
who can benefit from residential living either on a short-term or
long-term basis.
                                             
 (c) "Specialized care'' means a child care agency which regularly
provides general care for children who are diagnosed as mentally ill,
intellectually disabled, or physically disabled and who are determined
to be in need of special mental treatment or nursing care, or both.
                                             
 (d) "Homeless youth program'' means a program, including any
housing facilities utilized by such program, which receives any child
for the purpose of providing services to facilitate independent living
including all of the following program components: individual
assessment, referral, housing, and case management. Such services may be
provided directly by the agency or through one or more contracts for
services.
                                             
 III. "Child care institution'' means a residential child care agency
where more than 12 children are received and maintained for 24-hour care
for the purpose of providing them with care or training, or both. The
term "child care institution'' shall not include:
                                             
 (a) Any state operated institution for child care or juvenile
detention established by law.
                                             
 (b) Any institution, home, place or facility operating under a
license pursuant to RSA 151:2.
                                             
 (c) Any bona fide boarding school in which children are primarily
taught branches of education corresponding to those taught in public
elementary schools or high schools, or both, and which operates on a
regular academic school year basis, and which is approved by the
department of education.
                                             
 (d) Any bona fide summer camp.
                                             
 IV. "Child-placing agency'' means any firm, corporation or
association which:
                                             
 (a) Receives any child for the purpose of providing services
related to arranging for the placement of children in a foster family
home, group home, or child care institution; or
                                             
 (b) Receives any child for the purpose of providing services
related to arranging for the placement of children in adoption.
                                             
 V. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 VI. "Corrective action plan'' means a written proposal setting forth
the procedures by which a child care agency, child care institution, or
child-placing agency will come into compliance with the standards set by
rule adopted by the commissioner under RSA 541-A and subject to the
approval of the department. The proposal shall include the time needed
to assure compliance and the steps proposed by the agency to reach
compliance.
                                             
 VII. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 VIII. "Experiential/wilderness facility'' means a child care
institution which regularly provides specialized care and training in
daily living for more than 12 children but fewer than 57 children, and
meets the standards established by the commissioner by rule under RSA
170-E:34, I(a).
                                             
 IX. "Guardian'' means the guardian of the person of a minor, as
defined in RSA 463.
                                             
 X. "Independent living home'' means a child care agency which
regularly provides specialized services in adult living preparation in
an experiential residential setting for persons 16 years of age or older
who have a legal relationship with the department of health and human
services and who can benefit from independent living training.
                                             
 XI. "License'' means a complete license issued to an operator of a
child care agency, child care institution or child-placing agency,
authorizing the licensee to operate in accordance with the term and
conditions of the license, this subdivision, and the rules of the
department.
                                             
 XII. "Permit'' means an issuance to an operator of a child care
agency or child-placing agency which shall not be renewable except for
good cause shown and which may be granted for a period not exceeding 6
months to agencies whose services the department finds are needed, but
which are temporarily unable to conform to the qualification for a
license.
                                             
 XIII. "Regularly'' or "on a regular basis'' means supervision and
care up to and including 7 days a week service, whether continuous or
not, for all types of child care subject to the provisions of this
subdivision.
                                             
 XIV. "Related'' means any of the following relationships by blood,
marriage, or adoption: parent, grandparent, brother, sister, stepparent,
stepgrandparent, stepbrother, stepsister, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew,
first cousin or second cousin.
                                             
 XV. "Respite care'' means substitute care provided by a person or
agency which is licensed as a child care or child-placing agency.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 1992, 11:3. 1994, 212:2. 1995, 310:181. 2001,
188:1. 2006, 92:1. 2008, 52:12, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 170-E:26

 **170-E:26 Exemptions; Child Endangerment Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. The definitions in RSA 170-E:25, II and III shall not apply to
the following:
                                             
 (a) Families housing exchange students or up to 4 children in
summer exchange programs.
                                             
 (b) Nonresident families visiting the state for purposes of a
vacation who have in their care foster children from their home state
and have written approval of the out-of-state agency which supervises
the foster children.
                                             
 II. Families exempted from licensing pursuant to this section shall
be subject to the provisions of RSA 170-E:27, II.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:27

 **170-E:27 License Required; Prohibition Against Child Endangerment.
–**
                                             
 I. No person may establish, maintain, operate or conduct any agency
for child care or for child-placing without a license or permit issued
by the department under this subdivision.
                                             
 II. No person, whether licensed as a child care agency or
institution or child-placing agency, or exempted from licensing pursuant
to RSA 170-E:26, I, shall care for a child in a manner which endangers
the health, safety or welfare of the child. For purposes of this
paragraph, endangerment shall mean the negligent violation of a duty of
care or protection owed to such child or negligently inducing such child
to engage in conduct which endangers his health or safety. Licensees in
violation of this paragraph shall be subject to the provisions of RSA
170-E:35. Persons exempted from licensing who are in violation of this
paragraph shall be enjoined by a court of competent jurisdiction in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 170-E:46 from caring for such
child and may be enjoined, as the court may determine, from caring for
other children. The court in its order for injunctive relief shall
provide for removal and placement of the child who is the subject of the
order with an organization licensed pursuant to this subdivision.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:27-a

 **170-E:27-a Homeless Youth Programs; Special Provisions. –** Any
child care agency which receives children for the purpose of providing a
homeless youth program, as defined in RSA 170-E:25, II(d), shall be
subject to the following provisions:
                                             
 I. When a child 16 or 17 years of age contacts a homeless youth
program requesting emergency shelter or homeless services, the program
shall:
                                             
 (a) Assess the child's essential needs, physical and mental
health condition, and the circumstances that led the child to seek
services.
                                             
 (b) Upon completion of the assessment, but in no case later than
72 hours from the child's initial request for services, attempt to
notify the child's parent or legal guardian that such child is present
at the agency's facility. If compelling circumstances become evident
during assessment which justify not notifying the parent or legal
guardian, the program shall instead notify the department according to
RSA 169-C:29. In this paragraph, the term "compelling circumstances''
means circumstances which indicate that notifying the parent or legal
guardian would subject the child to risk of abuse or neglect as defined
in RSA 169-C:3.
                                             
 (c) Notify the department no later than 30 days after the child's
initial request for services if the program is unable to make contact
with either of the child's parents or the legal guardian after
reasonable attempts to do so.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this section shall alter the legal relationship
between parent or legal guardian and child, and in the absence of a
court order directing otherwise, the program shall release the child to
the custody of his or her parent or legal guardian upon request by the
parent or guardian.
                                             
 III. If the child is discharged from the program or voluntarily
terminates participation in the program, the program shall immediately
notify the parents or legal guardian; or the department if the parent or
legal guardian has never consented to the child's placement in the
program.
                                             
 IV. A parent or legal guardian who consents in writing to the
child's participation in a licensed homeless youth program shall not be
deemed neglectful under RSA 169-C:3, XIX.
                                             
 V. The agency may charge the child a reasonable fee for the services
provided the child is working and/or has other regular income and such
fee is within his or her ability to pay.

**Source.** 2001, 188:2, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 170-E:28

 **170-E:28 Applications; Compliance With State and Local Codes
Required. –**
                                             
 I. Any entity which intends to receive children, or arranges for
child care or child placement of one or more children unrelated to the
operator, shall apply for a license to operate one or more of the types
of facilities for child care. Application for a license to operate a
child care agency or institution or a child-placing agency shall be made
to the department in the manner and on forms prescribed by rules adopted
by the commissioner under RSA 541-A. Such forms shall provide for the
birth names, birth dates and addresses of all persons having
responsibility for care or placement of children or regular contact with
children at the institution or agency. The agency or institution shall
obtain approvals in accordance with state and local requirements
pertaining to health, safety and zoning as applicable; and, if the
department is satisfied that the person, institution, agency, or program
conforms to standards prescribed for the type of child care or child
placement for which application is made, the department shall issue a
license in proper form designating on that license the type of child
care or child placement, the name and address of the person or
institution, the duration of the license and, except for child-placing
agencies, the age range, the gender, and the number of children to be
served.
                                             
 II. Either the state fire marshal or the local fire department shall
review compliance of the foster family home with applicable state fire
safety laws and local ordinances. In conducting the review, the state
fire marshal or local fire department shall apply the appropriate single
family or multi-unit dwelling provisions of the applicable code.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 2001, 77:1, eff. Aug. 18, 2001.

### Section 170-E:29

 **170-E:29 State Registry and Criminal Records Check for Foster
Family Homes, Institutions, and Child-Placing Agencies. –**
                                             
 I. Foster family homes, institutions, and child-placing agencies
shall, within 30 days of adding new staff members responsible for care
of or in regular contact with children, submit the names, birth dates,
and addresses of such staff members to the department.
                                             
 II. Except in the case of an initial application for a foster family
home, the department shall, for every name submitted on the application
and for each new staff member, or at each renewal, review the names,
birth names, birth dates, and current and previous addresses of such
persons against the state registry of founded abuse and neglect reports.
The department shall submit the names, birth names, birth dates, and
addresses to the state police files to obtain information about criminal
convictions.
                                             
 II-a. In the case of an initial application for a foster family
home, the department shall conduct a background check of the prospective
foster parents and any other adult living in the home. The background
check shall consist of a fingerprint-based criminal record check of
national crime information databases for the prospective foster parents
and a central registry check for the prospective foster parents and any
other adult living in the home.
                                             
 (a) For the criminal record check required under this paragraph,
the department shall submit the prospective foster parents' fingerprints
to the department of safety, division of state police, for forwarding to
the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Upon completion of the criminal
record check, the division of state police shall forward the results to
the department.
                                             
 (b) The central registry check shall include a check of the
department's central registry of founded reports of child abuse and
neglect under RSA 169-C:35 and shall include a check of the child abuse
and neglect registries in any other state in which the prospective
foster parents or other adult living in the home has resided in the
preceding 5 years. Information obtained from another state pursuant to
this subparagraph shall be used only for the purposes of conducting the
background checks.
                                             
 III. If any individual whose name has been submitted for a check
under this section has been convicted of a violent or sexually-related
crime against a child, or of a crime which shows that the person might
be reasonably expected to pose a threat to a child, such as a violent
crime or a sexually-related crime against an adult, the department shall
deny the license, pending the development and implementation of a
corrective action plan approved by the department.
                                             
 IV. If any individual whose name has been submitted for this check
has been convicted of crimes against minors or adults, except crimes as
provided in paragraph III, or is the subject of a founded complaint of
child abuse or neglect, the department may deny the license or permit,
revoke a license, or suspend a license pending the development and
implementation of a corrective action plan approved by the department.
The department shall conduct an investigation in accordance with rules
adopted under this subdivision to determine whether the individual poses
a present threat to the safety of children. The investigation shall
include an opportunity for the individual to present evidence on his
behalf to show that he does not pose a threat to the safety of
children.
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to the confidentiality of information collected under this
section and to the release, if any, of such information.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 1994, 212:2. 1995, 310:136. 2007, 325:4, 5.
2013, 216:1, eff. Sept. 8, 2013.

### Section 170-E:29-a


                                             


                                             [RSA 170-E:29-a effective until October 1, 2016; see also RSA
170-E:29-a set out below.
                                             ]

 **170-E:29-a State Registry and Criminal Records Check for Child
Care Institutions and Child Care Agencies. –**
                                             
 I. Child care institutions and child care agencies, with the
exception of foster family homes, that are required to be licensed
according to the provisions of this chapter shall, prior to making a
final offer of employment to a person who will be responsible for the
care of, or who will have regular contact with children, and upon adding
a new household member, a current household member who turns 17 years of
age, or other persons who will have regular contact with children,
submit to the department, the names, birth names, birth dates, and
addresses of such persons and other information required by the
department as prescribed by rules adopted by the commissioner under RSA
541-A. The persons described in this paragraph shall submit directly to
the department of safety a notarized criminal history records release
form, as provided by the New Hampshire division of state police, which
authorizes the release of the person's criminal records, if any, to the
department. The person shall submit with the release form a complete set
of fingerprints taken by a qualified law enforcement agency or an
authorized employee of the department of safety. The department of
safety shall complete the criminal history records check and forward
such record, if any, to the department. In the event that the first set
of fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern, a second set of
fingerprints shall be necessary to complete the criminal history records
check. If, after 2 attempts, a set of fingerprints is invalid due to
insufficient pattern, the department may, in lieu of the criminal
history records check, accept police clearances from every city, town,
or county where the person has lived during the past 5 years.
                                             
 II. (a) The department shall, for every name submitted on an
application and for each person for whom information is required to be
submitted pursuant to paragraph I, review the names, birth names, birth
dates, and current and previous addresses of such persons against the
state registry of founded abuse and neglect reports.
                                             
 (b) The department of safety shall submit the criminal history
records release form to the New Hampshire division of state police,
which shall conduct a criminal history records check through its records
and through the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Upon completion of the
background investigation, the division of state police shall release
copies of the criminal conviction records to the department. The
department shall maintain the confidentiality of all criminal history
records information received pursuant to this paragraph.
                                             
 (c) The costs of criminal history record checks shall be borne by
the licensee; provided, that the licensee may require an applicant to
pay the actual costs of the criminal history check of the employee.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding paragraph I, a licensee may make a final offer
of employment and allow a person to begin working in the program while
the results of the state and national criminal background check is
pending provided that, prior to beginning employment, the applicant
completes a sworn statement signed by a notary public or justice of the
peace stating that he or she:
                                             
 (a) Does not have any felony conviction in this or any other
state.
                                             
 (b) Has not been convicted of a sexual assault, assault including
simple assault, any other violent crime, abuse, neglect, or any other
crime that shows that they may pose a threat to well-being of children,
such as a violent crime or a sexually-related crime against an adult.
                                             
 (c) Has not had a finding by the department or any administrative
agency in this or any other state for abuse, neglect or exploitation of
children.
                                             
 IV. The results of the federal criminal background check shall be
valid for 3 years. Prior to the expiration of that 3-year period, a
person required to undergo a criminal background check pursuant to this
section shall submit a new set of fingerprints and undergo a subsequent
federal criminal background check. If a person who is or has been
employed or volunteered at a child care institution or child care agency
is offered employment or volunteers at another child care institution or
child care agency or a child day care agency, the person shall, before
entering employment or volunteering with the new agency, undergo a New
Hampshire state criminal records check through the department of safety
and shall complete a sworn statement as set forth in paragraph III.
                                             
 V. If any person whose name has been submitted for a check under
this section has been convicted of a violent or sexually-related crime
against a child, or of a crime which shows that the person might be
reasonably expected to pose a threat to a child, such as a violent crime
or a sexually-related crime against an adult, the department shall:
                                             
 (a) If the person is the applicant or owner, revoke or deny the
license.
                                             
 (b) If the person is a board member, household member, or child
care institution or child care agency personnel, or any other person
having regular contact with the enrolled children:
                                             
 (1) Inform the child care institution or child care agency
that the person poses a threat to children and give the program an
opportunity to take immediate corrective action to remove the person
from the program, and, in conjunction with the department, to develop a
corrective action plan, approved by the department, which shall ensure
that the person will not be on the premises of the child care
institution or child care agency and shall have no contact with children
enrolled in the child care institution or child care agency; and/or
                                             
 (2) Suspend, deny, or revoke the license or permit if the
child care institution or child care agency refuses to take corrective
action as indicated in subparagraph (b)(1), or subsequently fails to
comply with the corrective action plan approved by the department.
                                             
 VI. If any person whose name has been submitted for this check has
been convicted of a felony offense or violent crime deemed directly or
indirectly harmful to children in child residential care, crimes against
minors or adults, except crimes as provided in paragraph V, or is the
subject of a founded complaint of child abuse or neglect, the department
may deny, revoke, or suspend a license, permit, or registration pending
the development and implementation of a corrective action plan approved
by the department. The department shall conduct an investigation in
accordance with rules adopted under this subdivision to determine
whether the person poses a present threat to the safety of children. The
investigation shall include an opportunity for the person to present
evidence on his or her behalf to show that the person does not pose a
threat to the safety of children.
                                             
 VII. At the time the licensee is next due to renew the license, the
licensee shall submit a notarized criminal conviction record release
authorization form and a set of fingerprints to the department of safety
for any existing employee or household member who is 17 years of age or
older and who has not undergone a national criminal background check as
of the effective date of this section. Upon receiving the results of the
state and national criminal records check, if the licensee learns that a
current employee has been convicted of any felony, a sexual assault, any
other violent crime, assault including simple assault, abuse, neglect or
any other crime that shows that they may pose a threat to well-being of
children, such as a violent crime or a sexually-related crime against an
adult, or has a founded allegation of abuse, neglect or exploitation
against children, the licensee shall either terminate the employee or
suspend the employee and promptly request a waiver from the department
allowing the employee to resume working in the program. Upon receiving
the results of the state and national criminal records check, if the
licensee learns that a current household member has been convicted of
any felony, a sexual assault, any other violent crime, assault including
simple assault, abuse, neglect or any other crime that shows that the
person may pose a threat to well-being of children, such as a violent
crime or a sexually-related crime against an adult, or has a founded
allegation of abuse, neglect or exploitation against children, the
licensee shall take immediate corrective action to remove the person
from the child care institution or child care agency, and, in
conjunction with the department, develop a corrective action plan,
approved by the department, which shall ensure that the person will not
be on the premises of the child care institution or child care agency
and shall have no contact with children residing in the child care
institution or agency. If the licensee fails to take such corrective
action, the department shall suspend the license until such time as the
licensee does implement the corrective action, or it shall revoke the
license.
                                             
 VIII. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to the confidentiality of information collected under this
section and to the release, if any, of such information.


                                             [RSA 170-E:29-a effective October 1, 2016; see also RSA 170-E:29-a set
out above.
                                             ]


                                             
**170-E:29-a State Registry and Criminal Records Check for Child Care
Institutions and Child Care Agencies.** --
                                             
 I. Child care institutions and child care agencies, with the
exception of foster family homes, that are required to be licensed
according to the provisions of this chapter shall, prior to making a
final offer of employment to a person who will be responsible for the
care of, or who will have regular contact with children, and upon adding
a new household member, or other persons who will have regular contact
with children, submit to the department, the names, birth names, birth
dates, and addresses during the preceding 5 years of such persons and
other information required by the department as prescribed by rules
adopted by the commissioner under RSA 541-A.
                                             
 I-a. The persons described in paragraph I shall submit directly to
the department of safety a notarized criminal history record information
authorization form, as provided by the New Hampshire division of state
police, which authorizes the release of the person's criminal records,
if any, to the department. The persons shall complete a Federal Bureau
of Investigation fingerprint check using the Integrated Automated
Fingerprint Identification System through a qualified law enforcement
agency or an authorized employee of the department of safety. The
department of safety shall complete the criminal history records check
and forward such record, if any, to the department. In the event that
the first set of fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern, a
second set of fingerprints shall be necessary to complete the criminal
history records check. If, after 2 attempts, a set of fingerprints is
invalid due to insufficient pattern, the department may, in lieu of the
criminal history records check, accept police clearances from every
city, town, or county where the person has lived during the past 5
years.
                                             
 II. (a) For every name submitted on an application and for each
person for whom information is required to be submitted pursuant to
paragraph I, the department shall search for such persons against the
New Hampshire sex offender and abuse and neglect registries, the sex
offender and abuse and neglect registries of each state where the
individual resided in the past 5 years, and the National Sex Offender
Registry.
                                             
 (b) The department of safety shall submit the criminal history
records release form to the New Hampshire division of state police,
which shall conduct a criminal history records check through its records
and through the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Upon completion of the
background investigation, the division of state police shall release
copies of the criminal conviction records to the department. The
department shall maintain the confidentiality of all criminal history
records information received pursuant to this paragraph.
                                             
 (c) The costs of criminal history record checks shall be borne by
the licensee; provided, that the licensee may require an applicant to
pay the actual costs of the criminal history check of the employee.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding paragraph I, a licensee may make a final offer
of employment and allow a person to begin working in the program while
the results of the state and national criminal background check is
pending provided that, prior to beginning employment, the applicant
completes a statement stating that he or she:
                                             
 (a) Does not have any felony conviction in this or any other
state.
                                             
 (b) Has not been convicted of a sexual assault, assault including
simple assault, any other violent crime, abuse, neglect, or any other
crime that shows that they may pose a threat to well-being of children,
such as a violent crime or a sexually-related crime against an adult.
                                             
 (c) Has not had a finding by the department or any administrative
agency in this or any other state for abuse, neglect or exploitation of
children.
                                             
 IV. The results of the criminal background check shall be valid for
5 years. Prior to the expiration of that 5-year period, a person
responsible for the care of, or who has regular contact with children in
child care institutions or child care agencies, or household members, or
other persons who will have regular contact with children, shall undergo
a background check pursuant to this section.
                                             
 IV-a. If a person who is or has been employed or volunteered at a
child care institution or child care agency is offered employment or
volunteers at another child care institution or child care agency or a
child day care agency, the person shall not be required to undergo the
criminal records check described in paragraph I-a if the previous
criminal records check was completed within the last 5 years and the
person was determined by the department to be eligible for employment.
Before entering employment or volunteering with the new agency, the
person shall complete a statement as set forth in paragraph III.
                                             
 V. The department shall make a determination regarding the
individual's eligibility for employment no later than 45 days from
submission of all required information as described in paragraphs I and
I-a. If any person whose name has been submitted for a check under this
section is registered or required to be registered on a state sex
offender registry or repository, or the National Sex Offender Registry,
or has been convicted of a felony consisting of murder, child abuse or
neglect, a crime against children including child pornography and
trafficking, spousal abuse, a crime involving rape or sexual assault,
kidnapping, arson, physical assault or battery, or a drug-related
offense committed during the previous 5 years, or any other violent or
sexually related misdemeanor or against a child, including child abuse,
child endangerment, sexual assault, or a misdemeanor involving child
pornography, or of a crime which shows that the person might be
reasonably expected to pose a threat to a child, such as a violent crime
or a sexually-related crime against an adult, the department shall:
                                             
 (a) If the person is the applicant or owner, revoke or deny the
license.
                                             
 (b) If the person is a board member, household member, or child
care institution or child care agency personnel, or any other person
having regular contact with the enrolled children inform the child care
institution or child care agency that the person is ineligible for
employment and give the program an opportunity to take immediate
corrective action to remove the person from the program, and, in
conjunction with the department, to develop a corrective action plan,
approved by the department, which shall ensure that the person will not
be on the premises of the child care institution or child care agency
and shall have no contact with children enrolled in the child care
institution or child care agency.
                                             
 (c) Suspend, deny, or revoke the license or permit if the child
care institution or child care agency refuses to take corrective action
as indicated in subparagraph (b), or subsequently fails to comply with
the corrective action plan approved by the department.
                                             
 VI. If any person whose name has been submitted for this check has
been convicted of a felony offense or violent crime deemed directly or
indirectly harmful to children in child residential care, crimes against
minors or adults, except crimes as provided in paragraph V, or is the
subject of a founded complaint of child abuse or neglect, the department
may deny, revoke, or suspend a license or permit pending the development
and implementation of a corrective action plan approved by the
department. The department shall conduct an investigation in accordance
with rules adopted under this subdivision to determine whether the
person is ineligible for employment. The investigation shall include an
opportunity for the person to present evidence on his or her behalf to
show that the person does not pose a threat to the safety of children.
                                             
 VII. (a) Once the department has made a determination that the
individual required to complete a criminal record check under paragraph
I-a is eligible for employment, the department shall issue a child care
employment eligibility card, which shall be valid for 5 years provided
that no disqualifying convictions are subsequently submitted, and the
individual remains eligible as described in RSA 170-E:7, II-a(b). The
state may require additional background checks to be completed based
upon conviction information submitted.
                                             
 (b) The fee for a child care employment eligibility card shall be

                                             $50, and the card shall be valid for 5 years from the date of issuance.
The fee for a replacement card shall be 
                                             $15.
                                             
 VIII. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to the confidentiality of information collected under this
section and to the release, if any, of such information.

**Source.** 2013, 216:2, eff. Sept. 8, 2013. 2016, 158:6, eff. Oct. 1,
2016.

### Section 170-E:30

 **170-E:30 Child Care Institution; Child-Placing Agency; Information
Required. –** In addition to the steps required in RSA 170-E:29, the
department, upon receiving an application and authorization filed by a
child care institution or child-placing agency in proper order, shall,
in cooperation with the operator, examine the facility or agency, and
investigate the program and person or persons responsible for the care
of children. When the facility or agency is administered through an
executive board, board of trustees, board of directors, or other
governing body, the names, addresses, and any connection of individuals
on such bodies with the facility or agency shall be included. The
institution or child-placing agency shall obtain and provide receipts of
approval of state and local requirements pertaining to health, safety
and zoning, as applicable. If the department is satisfied that the
institution or child-placing agency conforms to the standards prescribed
for the type of facility or agency to be operated, a license shall be
issued. The commissioner or his designee may inspect the facility or
agency at any time.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:31

 **170-E:31 Issuance. –**
                                             
 I. Licenses shall be issued in such form and manner as prescribed by
rules adopted by the commissioner under RSA 541-A and, for foster family
homes and specialized care, shall be valid for 2 years from the date
issued, unless revoked by the department, or voluntarily surrendered by
the licensee, or subject to conditions attached to the license which
provide for a shorter license period than 2 years.
                                             
 II. The department may provide dual licensure to a facility or
child-placing agency. Such licensure shall be granted only upon
application and shall be contingent upon a determination, by the
appropriate licensing units consulting with each other, that the
standards of both programs have been met without compromising any
licensing requirements. If the licensing units are unable to agree, the
final decision shall be made by the commissioner.
                                             
 III. Licensure for child care institutions and child-placing
agencies shall be valid as follows:
                                             
 (a) Group homes and child care institutions: 3 years from the
effective date of the license.
                                             
 (b) Child-placing agencies: 4 years from the effective date of
the license.
                                             
 IV. The department shall make monitoring visits a minimum of once
yearly each licensing period. At least one such visit during the
licensing period shall not be announced in advance; however, such
unannounced visit is optional for foster family homes. Clear and
comprehensive records shall be maintained by the department on each
licensed facility showing the dates and findings of each such visit.
Such records shall be made available to the facility. If the facility is
found not to be in compliance either with the statute or the rules
adopted by the commissioner, a corrective action plan shall be submitted
to the department. Failure to submit an acceptable plan shall result in
license suspension or revocation.
                                             
 V. The department may issue a 6-month permit to a newly established
facility for child care, or to an established facility which has changed
its physical location, to allow that facility reasonable time to become
eligible for full licensure. The 6-month permit may be issued
immediately upon completion of the necessary licensing inspections. If
the language on such permit allows it, the facility may begin operation
immediately without waiting for the state office to complete the
processing of the application.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:32

 **170-E:32 License Renewal. –**
                                             
 I. A licensed child care agency, child care institution, or
child-placing agency shall file for renewal of its license 3 months
prior to the expiration date of the license on forms prescribed by rules
adopted by the commissioner under RSA 541-A.
                                             
 II. The department, a duly licensed child-placing agency, or a
person designated by the department as its agent, shall reexamine every
child care facility for renewal of its license, including examination of
the premises, program, and such records of the facility as the
department considers necessary to determine that minimum standards for
licensing continue to be met. If the department is satisfied that the
person, institution, or child-placing agency continues to maintain the
minimum standards established by rule for that category of child care or
child-placing, it shall renew the license to operate.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:33

 **170-E:33 Record of Licenses. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall keep in a central depository records of
licenses issued under this subdivision and all monitoring reports that
have been made relative to licensees. When a license is issued to a
person or institution, the department shall give notice to the health
officer and the fire department of the city or town in which the
licensee is located stating the granting of such license and its terms.
A like notice shall be given of any suspension or revocation of such
license.
                                             
 II. The license itself shall be considered public information and
available for review by members of the public; information submitted in
the application process, however, shall be private, confidential and not
available for review.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:34

 **170-E:34 Rulemaking; Consultation. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative
to:
                                             
 (a) Minimum standards for licensing which apply to the various
types of facilities for child care and child placement. The department
shall seek the advice and assistance of persons representative of the
various types of child care and child-placing agencies in establishing
such standards. The standards prescribed shall include:
                                             
 (1) The operation and conduct of the person, institution, or
child-placing agency and the responsibility it assumes for child care or
child placement, or both.
                                             
 (2) The character, qualifications, mental and physical ability
and competence of the applicant as well as all persons directly
responsible for the care and welfare of children served, or of persons
who will be providing necessary care for children and maintaining
prescribed standards, or of persons who will do both.
                                             
 (3) The number of individuals or staff required to insure
adequate supervision and care of the children provided the particular
type of care.
                                             
 (4) The appropriateness, safety, environmental health and
general adequacy of the premises, including maintenance of adequate fire
prevention and health standards conforming to state laws and municipal
codes, to provide for the physical comfort, health and care of children
received.
                                             
 (5) Provisions for food, clothing, educational opportunities,
program, equipment and individual supplies to assure the health and the
physical and mental development of children served.
                                             
 (6) Provisions to safeguard the legal rights of children
served.
                                             
 (7) Maintenance of records pertaining to the admission,
progress, health and discharge of children.
                                             
 (7-a) Provisions for the permanent retention of records
pertaining to the placement of children for adoption, including
maintenance of such records in the event that a licensed agency ceases
to operate as a licensed child-placing agency.
                                             
 (8) Filing of reports with the department, including format,
frequency and content of such reports.
                                             
 (9) Discipline of children.
                                             
 (10) Protection and fostering of the particular religious
faith of the children served, where applicable.
                                             
 (11) Provisions to provide for a report of any new staff, paid
or unpaid, or resident of the facility which shall include the name,
birth name, date of birth and previous addresses of the person, or other
information as required by rules of the department.
                                             
 (12) Duties and responsibilities of the board of directors or
other governing body of the facility or child-placing agency with
respect to compliance with this subdivision and the standards relating
to this subdivision as established by the department.
                                             
 (13) Retention of records and, in the event the facility or
child-placing agency is no longer functioning, transfer of records.
                                             
 (b) Minimum standards for facilities for specialized care, where
there are children diagnosed as mentally ill, intellectually disabled,
or physically disabled, who are determined to be in need of special
mental treatment or nursing care, or both, when the facility is not
subject to licensure under RSA 151. The department shall seek the advice
and recommendation of the department of education, as appropriate,
regarding the residential treatment, education, and nursing care
provided by the facility.
                                             
 (c) The confidentiality of information gathered pursuant to RSA
170-E:28, 170-E:29, 170-E:33 and RSA 170-E:42.
                                             
 (d) The procedures for the appeals processes provided by RSA
170-E:36, II and IV.
                                             
 (e) Policy and procedures concerning the investigation of
licensees and all disciplinary proceedings, including corrective action
plans, against licensees.
                                             
 (f) Compensation to foster family homes for the costs of caring
for each child placed in their home.
                                             
 (g) The release of information to persons receiving the child
which pertains to the life and safety of the child either about to be
placed or already in placement, and which may pertain to the life and
safety of the persons who are receiving or who have received the child
for placement, including any physical and mental health issues, history
of abuse or neglect, behaviors that may be expected, and recommended
ways of handling the child's problems. For purposes of this
subparagraph, placement shall mean out-of-home placements, including
placements for adoption.
                                             
 (h) Establishing, maintaining, and directing a system of child
care resource and referral pursuant to RSA 170-E:5-a.
                                             
 II. The department, in applying the standards adopted by rule under
paragraph I, shall offer consultation through employed staff or other
qualified persons to assist applicants and licensees in meeting and
maintaining minimum requirements for a licensee.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 1991, 327:3. 1995, 310:138. 1996, 234:4. 2004,
98:1. 2008, 52:13, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 170-E:35

 **170-E:35 License or Permit Suspension, Revocation, or Denial. –**
The department may suspend, revoke, deny, or refuse to renew any
license, or revoke or refuse to issue a full license to any permit
holder, whether or not the person, institution or agency is approved by
a child-placing agency, if the licensee or permit holder:
                                             
 I. Neglects or abuses children in his care;
                                             
 II. Does not comply with this subdivision or the rules adopted under
this subdivision relative to the supervision of children in his care;
                                             
 III. Violates any provision of this subdivision, or is unable to
meet and maintain standards adopted by the commissioner;
                                             
 IV. Substantially or repeatedly violates any provisions of the
license or permit issued;
                                             
 V. Furnishes or makes any misleading or any false statement or
report to the department or to the child-placing agency;
                                             
 VI. Refuses or fails to submit any reports or to make available to
the department any records required by it in making an investigation of
the facility for licensing purposes;
                                             
 VII. Refuses or fails to submit to an investigation or to the
required visits by the department;
                                             
 VIII. Refuses or fails to admit authorized representatives of the
department at any reasonable time for the purpose of investigation or
visit;
                                             
 IX. Fails to provide, maintain, equip and keep in safe and sanitary
condition premises established or used for child care as required under
standards prescribed by rules adopted by the commissioner under RSA
541-A or as otherwise required by any law, rule, ordinance, or term of
the license applicable to the location of such facility;
                                             
 X. Refuses to display its license or permit or to make it readily
available to view, if requested;
                                             
 XI. Fails to exhibit, meet or maintain financial or other resources,
or both, adequate for the satisfactory care of children served in regard
to upkeep of premises and provisions for personal care, medical
services, clothing, education and other essentials in the proper care,
rearing, training and placement of children, so long as such lack of
financial resources is not due primarily to delays in state payments for
care;
                                             
 XII. Retaliates against an employee who in good faith reports a
suspected violation of the provisions of this subdivision and rules
adopted under it;
                                             
 XIII. Continues to employ a person without taking corrective action,
after receipt of written notification from the department that the
person poses a risk to children, such notification including the basis
for the department's determination that the risk exists; or
                                             
 XIV. Fails to comply with the corrective action plan jointly
developed between the department and the person, institution or agency.
                                             
 XV. Demonstrates a repeated failure to cooperate with the
department, other service providers, or the parents of a child who is
placed with the child care agency, as necessary to implement the child's
case plan or the department's treatment decisions.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 2010, 70:1, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 170-E:36

 **170-E:36 Notice and Hearing. –**
                                             
 I. Should the department determine to suspend, revoke or deny, or
refuse to renew a license or permit, it shall send to the applicant,
licensee or permittee, by registered mail, a notice which sets forth the
particular reasons for the determination. The suspension, revocation, or
denial shall become final 10 days after receipt of such notice unless
the applicant, licensee or permittee requests a hearing under paragraph
II of this section.
                                             
 II. Any applicant, licensee or permittee aggrieved by a decision of
the department to suspend, revoke, deny, or refuse to renew a license or
permit may appeal to the commissioner through an administrative hearings
process. For purposes of carrying out the provisions of this section,
the commissioner may, in accordance with the rules adopted by the
department of personnel pursuant to RSA 541-A, appoint a hearings
officer or officers, as necessary, to preside over such hearings. A
hearings officer may affirm, deny or modify the decision of the
department. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to procedures for the appeals process provided under this
paragraph.
                                             
 III. When the department decides to suspend, revoke, deny, or refuse
to renew a license or permit, and it expressly finds that the continued
operation of a child care facility or child-placing agency violates any
minimum standard prescribed by law or rule, or otherwise jeopardizes the
health, safety, morals, well-being or welfare of children served by the
facility or child-placing agency, the department shall include in its
notice an order of closure directing that the operation of the facility
or child-placing agency terminate immediately. In this event, the
facility or child-placing agency shall not operate during the pendency
of any proceeding for the review of the decision of the department,
except under court order.
                                             
 IV. Rehearings and appeals from a decision of the hearings officer
shall be in accordance with rules adopted under RSA 541-A.
                                             
 V. On or before December 31, 2010, and each year thereafter, the
department shall submit a report to the chair of the house standing
committee on children and family law relative to the number of license
or permit suspensions, revocations, denials, and appeals for that year.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 2010, 70:2, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 170-E:37

 **170-E:37 Appeal. –** Any person aggrieved by any decision rendered
after a rehearing held or an appeal brought under RSA 170-E:36, IV may
appeal the decision to the superior court.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:38

 **170-E:38 Operation Without a License. –** Whenever the department
is advised, or has reason to believe, that any entity is operating a
child care facility or child-placing agency without a license or permit,
it may make an investigation to ascertain the facts. If it finds that
the child care facility or child-placing agency is operating or has
operated without a license or permit, the department may report the
results of its investigation to the attorney general or to the
appropriate county attorney for prosecution.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:39

 **170-E:39 Advertising. –** A child care agency, child care
institution, or child-placing agency licensed or operating under a
permit issued by the department may publish advertisements of the
services for which it is specifically licensed or issued a permit under
this subdivision. No person who is required to obtain a license or
permit under this subdivision may advertise or cause to be published an
advertisement soliciting or offering care for a child for care or
placement unless the person has obtained the requisite license or
permit.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:40

 **170-E:40 Investigation. –**
                                             
 I. If the department has reason to believe that state or federal
funds solicited and received by a corporation for conduct of a child
care facility or child-placing agency are not being used for the purpose
for which the funds were awarded, or are being fraudulently used by the
corporation or its members, or purportedly are being used for a facility
or child-placing agency which is actually defunct, or are being used for
a facility or child-placing agency which no longer carries a valid
license or permit, the department shall report these facts to the
attorney general and request an investigation of the corporation to
determine if the corporation should be dissolved or whether other action
should be taken against the corporation or its members.
                                             
 II. The department shall conduct an investigation of any complaint
of violations of any licensing or operating standards against permitted
or licensed child care or child-placing agencies. All investigations
shall be conducted at reasonable times, with the cooperation of other
state or municipal authorities, if required, and may include unannounced
visits. The commissioner shall request an annual narrative summary of
complaints received by the department.
                                             
 III. Records compiled during an investigation shall be confidential
and shall not be made public by the department.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 1995, 310:137, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 170-E:41

 **170-E:41 Oaths; Subpoenas. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall have the power to administer oaths in any
disciplinary proceedings.
                                             
 II. Upon request of the commissioner, the attorney general shall be
authorized, for good cause shown, to subpoena witnesses and to compel,
by subpoena duces tecum, the production of papers and records in any
disciplinary proceedings under this subdivision.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:42

 **170-E:42 Records. –** Every child care facility and child-placing
agency shall keep and maintain such records as the department prescribes
pertaining to the admission, progress, health, and discharge or
placement, or both, of children under the care of the facility or
child-placing agency, and shall report relative to such matters to the
department whenever called for, upon forms prescribed by rule. All
records regarding children and all facts learned about children and
their relatives shall be kept confidential by the child care facility,
the child-placing agency, and the department.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:43

 **170-E:43 Notice of Death. –** If any child under the control of
any licensed child care agency or institution dies, the licensee shall
give notice of such event to the department within 24 hours thereafter
stating the date and cause of death, to the extent known, duration of
the most recent illness, and the names and addresses of the attending
physician and undertaker.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:44

 **170-E:44 Reports to the Department of Health and Human Services.
–**
                                             
 I. Any child care facility or child-placing agency receiving a child
for care or supervision from a foreign state or country shall report
that child to the department of health and human services in the same
manner as it is required for reporting other children pursuant to RSA
170-A:1.
                                             
 II. A person other than a licensed child care institution or
child-placing agency shall not receive a child from a foreign state or
country without prior notice to and approval of the department of health
and human services. Any placement of children shall conform to RSA 170-A
and RSA 170-B:28.
                                             
 III. The department of health and human services may require a
guarantee that a child accepted for care or supervision from a foreign
state or country will not become a public charge upon this state.
                                             
 IV. The department of health and human services may enter into
agreements with public or voluntary social agencies headquartered in
states adjacent to this state regarding the placement of children in
licensed foster family homes within the boundaries of this state if the
agencies meet the standards and criteria required for license as a
child-placing agency in this state. The agreements may allow foreign
agencies to place and supervise children for whom they have
responsibility with this state without regard to paragraph I. These
agreements shall, however, include a requirement that the agencies
cooperate fully with the department in its inquiry or investigation into
the activities and standards of those agencies, and provide that the
department of health and human services may, at any time upon 15 days'
written notice to an agency by registered mail, void the agreement and
require the observance of paragraph I.
                                             
 V. The department of health and human services shall perform its
duties under this section with the approval of the commissioner.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 1994, 212:2. 1995, 310:175, 181. 2004, 255:5,
eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-E:45

 **170-E:45 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Any person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor who:
                                             
 (a) Conducts, operates or acts as a child care facility or
child-placing agency without a license or permit to do so in violation
of RSA 170-E:27, I;
                                             
 (b) Makes materially false statements in order to obtain or
retain a license or permit;
                                             
 (c) Fails to keep the records and make the reports required under
this subdivision;
                                             
 (d) Is required to obtain a license or permit under this
subdivision and who advertises or causes to be published an
advertisement for a service which is not authorized by any license or
permit held;
                                             
 (e) Violates any other provision of this subdivision or any rule
adopted under RSA 541-A by the commissioner for the enforcement of this
subdivision;
                                             
 (f) Fails to comply with the requirements for notifying parents,
legal guardians, or the department under RSA 170-E:27-a, I.
                                             
 II. Foster family homes which have not been licensed but which have
been asked to receive children by the department or another
child-placing agency on an emergency basis shall not be subject to the
penalty provided in subparagraph I(a). The exemption provided in this
paragraph is valid for a period of 30 days from the date of placement of
the child in the home.
                                             
 III. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8. 1995, 310:175. 2001, 188:3, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 170-E:46

 **170-E:46 Injunctive Relief. –** Any person may institute in any
court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct
or abate any violation of this subdivision or of the rules adopted under
RSA 170-E:34; and the court shall adjudge relief, by way of injunction,
which may be mandatory or otherwise as may be proper under all the facts
and circumstances of the case, in order fully to effectuate the purpose
of this subdivision and the rules adopted under it. In a prosecution
under this subdivision, a defendant who relies upon the relationship of
any child to himself has the burden of proof as to that relationship.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:47

 **170-E:47 License Remains in Effect. –** Any license issued under
this subdivision remains valid until its expiration date, unless revoked
by the department, or until the date established by conditions placed on
the license.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:48

 **170-E:48 Retaliation Prohibited. –** A child care agency or
child-placing agency license holder shall not retaliate, through
discharge, harassment, or other discrimination, against an employee who
in good faith reports a suspected violation of the provisions of this
subdivision and rules adopted under it. Such retaliation shall
constitute grounds for license revocation.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 170-E:49

 **170-E:49 Confidentiality and Investigations. –** The department
may request and shall receive cooperation from other state agencies in
connection with investigations and licensure. Because certain
information kept by other state agencies and requested by the department
may be confidential, the department shall strictly observe the
confidentiality requirements of the agency from which it receives
information.

**Source.** 1990, 257:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

Credentialing of Personnel in Early Care and Education Programs
---------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 170-E:50

 **170-E:50 Credentialing of Personnel in Early Care and Education
Programs; Rulemaking. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to
accepting applications and issuing a credential to early care and
education personnel including, but not limited to child care, preschool,
and Head Start program personnel who have requested such a credential
and who have satisfied the education and training requirements set forth
in the child care program licensing rules established by the department
of health and human services. Each application for a credential shall be
accompanied by a fee which shall be credited to the general fund. The
commissioner shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, establishing a fee for
this purpose.
                                             
 II. The department of health and human services shall incorporate
this program, funded by the fee established in paragraph I of this
section, into the next biennial department budget after the effective
date of this section.

**Source.** 1999, 185:1, eff. Aug. 31, 1999.
