---
title: 'CHAPTER 170-H PAROLE OF DELINQUENTS'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 170-H
                                             
PAROLE OF DELINQUENTS
---------------------

### Section 170-H:1

 **170-H:1 Purpose of Juvenile Parole. –** It is the intent of the
general court that the juvenile parole system provide a means of
rehabilitating delinquents who have been committed to the custody of the
department of health and human services, without continued
incarceration. It is also the intent of the general court that the
juvenile parole board and the department of health and human services,
when administering this system, demonstrate recognition of the need to
protect the public from criminal acts by juvenile parolees.

**Source.** 1983, 416:27. 1994, 81:3; 212:2. 1995, 181:6. 2001, 286:9,
eff. Sept. 14, 2001.

### Section 170-H:2

 **170-H:2 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter, the following
words shall have the following meanings:
                                             
 I. "Administrative release to parole'' means an administrative
procedure to provide a period of community adjustment before parole
status is granted.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. "Board'' means the juvenile parole board.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV-a. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 V. "Delinquent'' means any person who has been adjudicated
delinquent by a district or superior court and committed to the custody
of the commissioner.
                                             
 V-a. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 VI. "Detention'' means the care of a minor in a physically
restricted facility while awaiting further action by a court.
                                             
 VII. "Parole'' means a conditional release from the custody of the
department which allows a delinquent to serve the remainder of his
commitment outside of an institution or facility operated by the
department, contingent upon compliance with the terms and conditions of
parole as established by the juvenile parole board.

**Source.** 1983, 416:27. 1994, 81:3; 212:2. 1995, 181:7, 8, 22, 23, IX.
1999, 219:3-5, 17, I. 2001, 286:19. 2002, 170:4, eff. July 14, 2002.

### Section 170-H:3

 **170-H:3 Juvenile Parole Board. –** There shall be a juvenile
parole board with 5 members and 2 alternate members. The members and
alternate members of the board shall be appointed by the governor with
the consent of the council for staggered terms of 5 years or until their
successors are appointed. An alternate member may attend any hearing of
the juvenile parole board but may only vote in the absence of a member.
A vacancy on the board shall be filled by an alternate member designated
by the chairman for the unexpired term. No member shall serve more than
2 consecutive terms. The governor shall designate one member as
chairman, and the chairman shall designate one other member to serve as
chairman in his or her absence. At least 3 members of the board shall be
present at all meetings and 3 members shall constitute a quorum. The
board shall hold at least 12 parole hearings each year and may hold more
hearings as necessary. Members and alternate members shall be paid
mileage at the state employee rate while engaged in the duties of the
board and to the extent funds are available in the youth development
center budget.

**Source.** 1983, 416:27. 2006, 150:1, eff. May 22, 2006.

### Section 170-H:4

 **170-H:4 Duties; Juvenile Parole Board. –** The juvenile parole
board shall:
                                             
 I. Be responsible for paroling delinquents from facilities under the
supervision of the commissioner, subject to the applicable provisions of
this chapter.
                                             
 II. Have legal custody of all delinquents released on parole until
they receive their discharge or are recommitted to the custody of the
commissioner.
                                             
 III. Adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (a) The parole process, including the conduct of parole
hearings;
                                             
 (b) Criteria used to evaluate prospective parolees;
                                             
 (c) Conditions for the conduct of parolees;
                                             
 (d) Procedures for revocation of parole;
                                             
 (e) Conditions under which the department may return a parolee to
a secure facility pending action by the board; and
                                             
 (f) Procedures for providing effective notice to children subject
to parole revocation proceedings of the right to counsel, for
determining if a waiver of the right to counsel by a child is knowing,
voluntary, and intelligent, and for the accurate determination of the
existence of a disability which would interfere with a child's ability
to understand the proceedings, make decisions, or otherwise handle the
proceedings without the assistance of counsel.

**Source.** 1983, 416:27. 1995, 181:22. 1999, 219:16. 2013, 249:23, eff.
Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 170-H:5

 **170-H:5 Administrative Release. –** The commissioner, if he or she
determines it is in the best interests of a delinquent and the public,
may place a delinquent in custody on administrative release. Except in
cases of emergency as determined by the commissioner, such an
administrative release shall be in effect for no longer than 30 days.

**Source.** 1983, 416:27. 1999, 219:6, eff. July 6, 1999.

### Section 170-H:6

 **170-H:6 Eligibility for Release. –**
                                             
 I. The board may parole a delinquent, if:
                                             
 (a) The commissioner has determined that parole is in the best
interest of the delinquent and the public and that further incarceration
will be of no benefit; and
                                             
 (b) It shall appear to the board that there is a reasonable
probability that the delinquent will remain at liberty without violating
the law and will conduct himself as a good citizen.
                                             
 II. No delinquent detained at a juvenile correctional facility under
RSA 169-B shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter regarding
parole.

**Source.** 1983, 416:27. 2001, 286:10, eff. Sept. 14, 2001.

### Section 170-H:7

 **170-H:7 Juvenile Parole Records. –** The board shall have access
to all juvenile records of the department. Notwithstanding any provision
of law to the contrary, the board shall have access to all records in
the possession of the department of health and human services concerning
juveniles committed to the custody of the department of health and human
services pursuant to RSA 169-B:19, I(j). The board shall review the
records of the department for each offender in its custody at least once
every 36 months.

**Source.** 1983, 416:27. 1995, 181:22. 1999, 219:7. 2001, 286:19, eff.
Sept. 14, 2001.

### Section 170-H:8

 **170-H:8 Return to Detention Facility. –** When the commissioner
determines that circumstances exist which justify returning a paroled
delinquent to a secure facility, the commissioner may, subject to the
conditions established by the board under RSA 170-H:4, III(e), return a
paroled delinquent to such a facility. In all such cases, the
commissioner shall notify the board of his action within 72 hours.

**Source.** 1983, 416:27. 1999, 219:16, eff. July 6, 1999.

### Section 170-H:9

 **170-H:9 Report Required. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall report any delinquent who violates the
conditions of his parole to the parole board. However, the department
shall, within 30 days of official knowledge of such an occurrence,
submit a report on any parolee who:
                                             
 (a) Is arrested for any felony or misdemeanor offense;
                                             
 (b) Is convicted of any offense;
                                             
 (c) Absconds from supervision for a period of 30 days or more;
                                             
 (d) Commits numerous parole violations.
                                             
 II. This report shall include information on the circumstances of
the alleged violation as well as a recommendation as to whether parole
should be revoked.

**Source.** 1983, 416:27. 1995, 181:22, eff. July 1, 1995.

### Section 170-H:10

 **170-H:10 Parole Revocation. –** Any delinquent returned to a
secure facility under the provisions of RSA 170-H:8 shall be entitled to
a hearing before the board within 10 working days. The parolee shall
have the right to appear and be heard at this hearing. If the board,
after a hearing, finds that the parolee has violated the conditions of
parole or violated the law and in its judgment should be recommitted to
the custody of the commissioner, the board shall revoke his parole. An
offender whose parole is revoked shall be recommitted to the custody of
the commissioner.

**Source.** 1983, 416:27. 1985, 379:5. 1999, 219:16, eff. July 6, 1999.

### Section 170-H:10-a

 **170-H:10-a Right to Counsel of Children Subject to Parole
Revocation. –**
                                             
 I. Every child subject to revocation of parole has the right to the
assistance of counsel, which may not be waived except following
consultation between the child and a parent or counsel. Consultation
between a child and parent is not sufficient to support waiver under
this section if the parent was a victim or complainant in the underlying
proceeding or is a witness or provided information in support of the
basis for revocation in the parole revocation proceeding. Children known
to the department or the board to have an emotional disorder,
intellectual disability, or any other condition which may be expected to
interfere with a child's ability to understand the proceedings, make
decisions, or otherwise handle the proceedings without the assistance of
counsel may not waive their right to counsel.
                                             
 II. For purposes of this section, a child shall be considered a
child who is subject to a parole revocation proceeding if the child has
been released pursuant to RSA 170-H:5 or RSA 621:19, I for longer than a
total of 30 days during one or more periods of release and is subject to
return under RSA 621:25.

**Source.** 2013, 249:21, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 170-H:11

 **170-H:11 Effect of Recommittal. –** Any delinquent whose parole is
revoked shall be returned to the custody of the commissioner. The
offender may at any time prior to his or her eighteenth birthday be
paroled again. If not paroled, a delinquent shall remain in custody
until his or her eighteenth birthday.

**Source.** 1983, 416:27. 1999, 219:8, eff. July 6, 1999. 2014, 215:14,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 170-H:12

 **170-H:12 Early Discharge. –** A delinquent on parole may be
discharged by the board whenever it finds discharge to be in the best
interest of the juvenile and of the state. Every discharge shall be in
writing and shall be a full release from all penalties and disabilities
created by the commitment.

**Source.** 1983, 416:27, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 170-H:13

 **170-H:13 Administrative Attachment. –**
                                             
 I. The juvenile parole board shall be administratively attached to
the department of health and human services.
                                             
 II. The juvenile parole board shall:
                                             
 (a) Exercise its powers, duties, functions and responsibilities
independently of the department of health and human services and without
approval or control of the department, except as otherwise specifically
provided by statute;
                                             
 (b) Submit the budget requests required by RSA 9 through the
department; and
                                             
 (c) Submit reports required of it by law or by the governor
through the department.
                                             
 III. The department of health and human services shall:
                                             
 (a) Provide budgeting, recordkeeping and related administrative
and clerical assistance to the board if mutually agreed to in writing,
provided that the board shall pay the department on a cost allocation
basis for such services;
                                             
 (b) Include the board's budget requests, as submitted and without
changes, in the departmental budget.
                                             
 IV. Unless otherwise provided by law, the juvenile parole board
shall hire personnel in accordance with state personnel laws.

**Source.** 1983, 291:1, I; 416:27. 1999, 219:9-11. 2001, 286:19, eff.
Sept. 14, 2001.
