---
title: 'CHAPTER 170-C TERMINATION OF PARENTAL RIGHTS'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 170-C
                                             
TERMINATION OF PARENTAL RIGHTS
------------------------------

### Section 170-C:1

 **170-C:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to provide for
the involuntary termination of the parent-child relationship by a
judicial process which will safeguard the rights and interests of all
parties concerned and when it is in the best interest of the child.
Implicit in this chapter is the philosophy that whenever possible family
life should be strengthened and preserved, and that the parent-child
relationship is to be terminated only when the adoption of that child
may be contemplated.

**Source.** 1973, 523:1, eff. Aug. 31, 1973.

### Section 170-C:2

 **170-C:2 Definitions. –** When used in this chapter, unless the
text otherwise requires:
                                             
 I. "Court'' means the probate court.
                                             
 II. "Child'' or "minor'' means a person less than 18 years of age.
                                             
 III. The singular includes the plural, the plural the singular, and
the masculine the feminine, when consistent with the intent of the
chapter.
                                             
 IV. "Legal custody'' means a status created by court order,
embodying the following rights and responsibilities:
                                             
 (a) The right to have the physical possession of the child;
                                             
 (b) The right and the duty to protect, train and discipline the
child; and
                                             
 (c) The responsibility to provide the child with food, clothing,
shelter, education and ordinary medical care, provided that such rights
and responsibilities shall be exercised subject to the powers, rights,
duties and responsibilities of the guardian of the person and subject to
residual parental rights and responsibilities if these have not been
terminated by judicial decree.
                                             
 V. "Guardianship of the person'' with respect to a minor means the
duty and authority to make important decisions in matters having a
permanent effect on the life and development of the minor, and to be
concerned about the general welfare of the minor. It includes but is not
necessarily limited either in number or kind to:
                                             
 (a) The authority to consent to marriage, to enlistment in the
armed forces of the United States, and to major medical, psychiatric and
surgical treatment, to represent the minor in legal actions and to make
other decisions concerning the child of substantial legal significance.
                                             
 (b) The authority and duty of reasonable visitation, except to
the extent that such right of visitation has been limited by court
order.
                                             
 (c) The rights and responsibilities of legal custody except where
legal custody has been vested in another individual or in an authorized
agency.
                                             
 (d) When the parent-child relationship has been terminated by
judicial decree with respect to the parents, or only living parent, or
when there is no living parent, the authority to consent to the adoption
of the child and to make any other decision concerning the child which
the child's parents could make.
                                             
 VI. "Guardian ad litem'' means a person appointed by the court to
protect the interest of a minor or an incompetent in a case before the
court.
                                             
 VII. "Authorized agency'' means the New Hampshire department of
health and human services or a licensed child-placing agency.
                                             
 VIII. "Parent'' means (a) the mother, (b) a father as to whom a
child is legitimate, (c) a person as to whom a child is presumed to be a
legitimate child, (d) an alleged father who is living with the mother
and child or who has complied with the provisions of RSA 170-B:5, I(c),
or (d) an adoptive parent. Such term does not include a parent as to
whom the parent- child relationship has been terminated by judicial
decree.
                                             
 IX. "Residual parental rights and responsibilities'' means those
rights and responsibilities remaining with the parent (where there has
not been termination of the parent-child relationship by judicial
decree) after the transfer of legal custody and guardianship of the
person, including but not necessarily limited to, the right to
reasonable visitation, consent to adoption, the right to determine the
child's religious affiliation, and the responsibility for support.
                                             
 X. "Parties'' includes the child, the petitioners, and the child's
parents.

**Source.** 1973, 523:1. 1983, 291:1. 1986, 223:7. 1994, 212:2. 1995,
310:181. 2004, 255:4, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-C:3

 **170-C:3 Jurisdiction. –** The probate court shall have exclusive
original jurisdiction over petitions to terminate the parent-child
relationship when the child involved is present in the state or is in
the legal custody or legal guardianship of an authorized agency located
in the state. The petition shall be filed in the probate court of the
county in which the child or his parents reside at the time of filing of
the petition, or in the probate court of the county in which the
authorized agency has provided services to the child.

**Source.** 1973, 523:1. 1983, 331:6, eff. Aug. 17, 1983.

### Section 170-C:4

 **170-C:4 Petition. –** A petition for termination of the
parent-child relationship may be filed by the following:
                                             
 I. Either parent when termination of the parent-child relationship
is sought with respect to the other parent.
                                             
 II. The guardian of the person or the legal custodian of the child
or the foster parents. Foster parents may file only when the following
conditions are met:
                                             
 (a) The child has lived in the foster home continuously for 24
months; and
                                             
 (b) The foster parents have requested in writing the licensed
child-placing agency to legally free the child for adoption, but that
the agency has not initiated proceedings, and there is reasonable cause
to believe that grounds exist.
                                             
 III. An authorized agency.

**Source.** 1973, 523:1. 1981, 381:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 170-C:5

 **170-C:5 Grounds for Termination of the Parent-Child Relationship.
–** The petition may be granted where the court finds that one or more
of the following conditions exist:
                                             
 I. The parent has abandoned the child. It shall be presumed that the
parent intends to abandon the child who has been left by his parent
without provision for his identification or who has been left by his
parent in the care and custody of another without any provision for his
support, or without communication from such parent for a period of 6
months. If in the opinion of the court the evidence indicates that such
parent has made only minimal efforts to support or communicate with the
child, the court may declare the child to be abandoned.
                                             
 II. That, although the parents are financially able, they have
substantially and continuously neglected to provide the child with
necessary subsistence, education or other care necessary for his mental,
emotional, or physical health or have substantially and continuously
neglected to pay for such subsistence, education or other care when
legal custody is lodged with others; provided, however, it shall not be
grounds for the termination of the parent-child relationship for the
sole reason the parent of said child relies upon spiritual means through
prayer in accordance with a recognized religious method of healing in
lieu of medical treatment for the healing of said child.
                                             
 III. The parents, subsequent to a finding of child neglect or abuse
under RSA 169-C, have failed to correct the conditions leading to such a
finding within 12 months of the finding despite reasonable efforts under
the direction of the district court to rectify the conditions.
                                             
 IV. Because of mental deficiency or mental illness, the parent is
and will continue to be incapable of giving the child proper parental
care and protection for a longer period of time than would be wise or
prudent to leave the child in an unstable or impermanent environment.
Mental deficiency or mental illness shall be established by the
testimony of either 2 licensed psychiatrists or clinical psychologists
or one of each acting together.
                                             
 V. The parent knowingly or willfully caused or permitted another to
cause severe sexual, physical, emotional, or mental abuse of the child.
Subsequent to a finding of such abuse pursuant to RSA 169-C, the
parent-child relationship may be terminated if return of the child to
the parent would result in a substantial possibility of harm to the
child. A substantial possibility of harm to the child shall be
established by testimony of at least 2 of the following factors:
                                             
 (a) The parent's conduct toward the child has resulted in severe
harm to the child.
                                             
 (b) The parent's conduct toward the child has continued despite
the reasonable efforts of authorized agencies in obtaining or providing
services for the parent to reduce or alleviate such conduct.
                                             
 (c) The parent's conduct has continued to occur either over a
period of time, or many times, or to such a degree so as to indicate a
pattern of behavior on the part of the parent which indicates a complete
disregard for the child's health and welfare.
                                             
 (d) Such conduct is likely to continue with no change in parental
behavior, attitude or actions.
                                             
Testimony shall be provided by any combination of at least 2 of the
following people: a licensed psychiatrist, a clinical psychologist, a
physician, or a social worker who possesses a master's degree in social
work and is a member of the Academy of Certified Social Workers.
                                             
 VI. If the parent or guardian is, as a result of incarceration for a
felony offense, unable to discharge his responsibilities to and for the
child and, in addition, has been found pursuant to RSA 169-C to have
abused or neglected his child or children, the court may review the
conviction of the parent or guardian to determine whether the felony
offense is of such a nature, and the period of incarceration imposed of
such duration, that the child would be deprived of proper parental care
and protection and left in an unstable or impermanent environment for a
longer period of time than would be prudent. Placement of the child in
foster care shall not be considered proper parental care and protection
for purposes of this paragraph. Incarceration in and of itself shall not
be grounds for termination of parental rights.
                                             
 VII. The parent has been convicted of one or more of the following
offenses:
                                             
 (a) Murder, pursuant to RSA 630:1-a or 630:1-b, of another child
of the parent, a sibling or step-sibling of the child, the child's other
parent, or other persons related by consanguinity or affinity, including
a minor child who resided with the defendant.
                                             
 (b) Manslaughter, pursuant to RSA 630:2, of another child of the
parent, a sibling or step-sibling of the child, the child's other
parent, or other persons related by consanguinity or affinity, including
a minor child who resided with the defendant.
                                             
 (c) Attempt, pursuant to RSA 629:1, solicitation, pursuant to RSA
629:2, or conspiracy, pursuant to RSA 629:3, to commit any of the
offenses specified in subparagraphs VII(a) and VII(b).
                                             
 (d) A felony assault under RSA 631:1, 631:2, 632-A:2, or 632-A:3
which resulted in injury to the child, a sibling or step-sibling of the
child, the child's other parent, or other persons related by
consanguinity or affinity, including a minor child who resided with the
defendant.

**Source.** 1973, 523:1. 1975, 280:5. 1979, 332:1. 1983, 331:7; 401:1.
1990, 240:5. 1999, 133:2, 4. 2003, 79:1. 2005, 235:1, eff. July 11,
2005.

### Section 170-C:5-a

 **170-C:5-a Termination of the Parent-Child Relationship in Cases of
Sexual Assault. –** A petition for termination of the parent-child
relationship shall be granted in cases where the child's birth is the
result of sexual assault of the birth mother and where termination of
the parent-child relationship is in the best interests of the child.
This section shall apply to a person who has been found to be the father
of a child and who:
                                             
 I. Has been convicted of or who has pled guilty or nolo contendere
to a violation of sexual assault as defined in RSA 632-A:2 through RSA
632-A:4, or a similar statute in another state against the birth mother
for his conduct in fathering the child; or
                                             
 II. At a fact-finding hearing, is found beyond a reasonable doubt to
have fathered the child through an act of non-consensual sexual
penetration.

**Source.** 2014, 244:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 170-C:6

 **170-C:6 Contents of Petition. –** The petition for the termination
of the parent-child relationship shall include, to the best information
or belief of the petitioner:
                                             
 I. The name and place of residence of the petitioner.
                                             
 II. The name, sex, date and place of birth, and residence of the
child.
                                             
 III. The basis for the court's jurisdiction.
                                             
 IV. The relationship of the petitioner to the child, or the fact
that no relationship exists.
                                             
 V. The names, addresses, and dates of birth of the parents.
                                             
 VI. When the child's parent is a minor, the names and addresses of
said minor's parents or guardian of the person.
                                             
 VII. The names and addresses of the person having legal custody or
guardianship of the person or acting in loco parentis to the child or
the organization or authorized agency having legal custody or providing
care for the child.
                                             
 VIII. The grounds on which termination of the parent-child
relationship is sought.
                                             
 IX. The names of the authorized agency to whom or to which legal
custody or guardianship of the person of the child may be transferred.

**Source.** 1973, 523:1, eff. Aug. 31, 1973.

### Section 170-C:7

 **170-C:7 Notice. –** After a petition has been filed, the court
shall set the time and place for a hearing and shall give notice thereof
to the petitioner who shall cause notice to be given to the parents of
the child, the guardian of the person of the child, the person having
legal custody of the child, any individual standing in loco parentis to
the child, and the guardian ad litem of any party. Where the child's
parent is a minor, notice shall also be given to said minor's parents or
guardian of the person unless the court is satisfied, in the exercise of
its discretion, that such notice is not in the best interest of said
minor and that it would serve no useful purpose. Notice shall be given
by personal service to the parent whose parental rights may be
terminated pursuant to the petition that has been filed. Where it shall
appear impractical to personally serve said parent, the court shall
order service by certified mail to the parent's last known address or
publication once a week for 2 successive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the area where that person was last domiciled or both.
All other parties shall be given notice by regular mail at their last
known address. The hearing shall take place no sooner than 20 days after
service of notice, except that if notice is by publication the hearing
shall take place no sooner than 7 days after the last date of
publication.

**Source.** 1973, 523:1. 1974, 18:3, eff. April 2, 1974.

### Section 170-C:8

 **170-C:8 Guardian Ad Litem. –** When termination of the
parent-child relationship is sought under RSA 170-C:5, IV, the court
shall appoint a guardian ad litem for the alleged incompetent parent.
The court shall appoint a guardian ad litem to represent the interests
of the child in all termination hearings. The court may, in any other
case, appoint a guardian ad litem, as may be deemed necessary or
desirable, for any party.

**Source.** 1973, 523:1, eff. Aug. 31, 1973.

### Section 170-C:9

 **170-C:9 Social Study Prior to Disposition. –**
                                             
 I. Upon the filing of a petition, the court shall direct that a
social study be made by the department of health and human services or
by any other authorized agency and that a report in writing of such
study be submitted to the court prior to the hearing. The social study
shall include the circumstances of the petition, the social history, the
present condition of the child and parents, proposed plans for the
child, and such other facts as may be pertinent to the parent-child
relationship. The purpose of the social study is to aid the court in
making disposition of the petition and shall be considered by the court
prior thereto. Copies of the social study shall be made available to the
parties' attorneys. The contents of said study shall be treated in a
confidential manner so as not to injure any party.
                                             
 II. If the petition is filed by one parent with respect to the other
parent, the court may waive or limit the extent of the social study
otherwise required by this section. In such cases, the age of the child
shall be considered; as well as the alleged grounds for termination of
parental rights; the length of time the child has lived with the
stepparent, if any; and the wishes of the child, parents, and other
persons found by the court to have an appropriate interest in the child.

**Source.** 1973, 523:1. 1983, 291:1. 1986, 223:7. 1987, 174:4. 1994,
212:2. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 170-C:9-a

 **170-C:9-a Evaluations. –** The court, at any time prior to the
final decree, may order the child who is subject to the petition or the
parents of such child or both the child and the parents to undergo a
mental health evaluation. Such an evaluation shall be done at a mental
health center or elsewhere by one or more psychiatrists or clinical
psychologist or one of each acting together, as ordered by the court,
who shall provide a written assessment of the subject evaluated to the
court.

**Source.** 1979, 332:2, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.

### Section 170-C:10

 **170-C:10 Hearing. –** Cases under this chapter shall be heard by
the court sitting without a jury. The hearing may be conducted in an
informal manner and may be adjourned from time to time. The general
public and any member of the news media shall be excluded, and only such
persons admitted whose presence is requested by any person entitled to
notice under RSA 170-C:7 or as the judge shall find to have a direct
interest in the case or in the work of the court; provided that persons
so admitted shall not disclose any information secured at the hearing
which would identify an individual child or parent who is involved in
the hearing. The court may require the presence of witnesses deemed
necessary to the disposition of the petition. When termination of the
parent-child relationship is sought, the parent shall be notified at the
same time notice is given pursuant to RSA 170-C:7 of his right to
counsel, and if counsel is requested and the parent is financially
unable to employ counsel, counsel shall be provided by the court and
shall be paid for by the judicial council in accordance with RSA
170-C:13, III. The court's finding with respect to grounds for
termination shall be based upon clear and convincing evidence, provided
that relevant and material information of any nature, including that
contained in reports, studies or examinations, may be admitted and
relied upon to the extent of its probative value. When information
contained in a report, study or examination is admitted in evidence, the
person making such a report, study or examination shall be subject to
both direct and cross-examination if he or she is residing or working
within the state, or if he or she is otherwise reasonably available.

**Source.** 1973, 523:1. 2013, 104:1, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 170-C:11

 **170-C:11 Decree. –**
                                             
 I. Every order of the court terminating the parent-child
relationship or transferring legal custody or guardianship of the person
of the child shall be in writing and shall recite the findings upon
which such order is based, including findings pertaining to the court's
jurisdiction.
                                             
 II. If the court finds grounds for the termination of the
parent-child relationship, it shall terminate such relationship and
appoint the department of health and human services or another
authorized agency as guardian of the child's person and vest legal
custody in such agency. The court shall also make an order fixing
responsibility for the child's support.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 170-C:11, II, the court
may terminate the parent-child relationship with respect to one parent
without affecting the relationship between the child and the other
parent, and unless the court finds that the best interest of the child
requires substitution or supplementation of parental care and
supervision, it shall award guardianship and vest legal custody in the
other parent.
                                             
 IV. Where the court does not order termination of the parent-child
relationship, it shall dismiss the petition; provided, however, that
where the court finds that the best interest of the child requires
substitution or supplementation of parental care and supervision, it
shall make an order awarding guardianship with the department of health
and human services or an authorized agency and fixing responsibility for
temporary child support.
                                             
 V. The court shall issue a decision which shall include a
disposition not later than 60 days after the date of the final hearing.
                                             
 VI. The status of all children for whom termination decrees have
been issued and for whom guardianship for the purpose of adoption has
been granted to the department of health and human services shall be
reviewed at least once a year following the initial decree until the
adoption decree has been finalized.

**Source.** 1973, 523:1. 1975, 280:6, 7. 1979, 332:3. 1983, 291:1;
416:24. 1985, 367:3. 1986, 223:7. 1994, 212:2. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov.
1, 1995.

### Section 170-C:12

 **170-C:12 Effect of Decree. –** An order terminating the
parent-child relationship shall divest the parent and the child of all
legal rights, privileges, duties and obligations. A guardian appointed
under this chapter may give his consent to the adoption of such child in
lieu of the parents whose parent-child relationship has been terminated
by the decree of the court. The rights of inheritance of both the parent
and the child shall not be divested until the adoption of said child.

**Source.** 1973, 523:1, eff. Aug. 31, 1973.

### Section 170-C:13

 **170-C:13 Fees and Court Costs. –**
                                             
 I. The petitioner shall pay all entry fees and court costs including
costs of giving notice, costs of advertising, and court-appointed
guardian ad litem fees. The court, however, may waive entry fees and
court costs where payment would work a hardship on the petitioner. Where
the court waives payment by the petitioner, the state, through the court
system, shall pay court costs. The judicial council shall pay the cost
of a CASA guardian ad litem appointed for the child or other guardian ad
litem in cases arising from an underlying abuse and neglect proceeding
when the state is the moving party or in cases where payment would work
a hardship on the petitioner.
                                             
 II. The department of health and human services is exempted from
paying any entry fees and court costs.
                                             
 III. When appointment of counsel is made by the court pursuant to
RSA 170-C:10 for a parent determined to be financially unable to employ
counsel, the court shall use a financial eligibility guideline
established by the office of cost containment to determine if the party
is indigent. Upon determination that the party is indigent, the court
may appoint counsel, subject to an order of repayment through the office
of cost containment. The judicial council shall bear the financial
responsibility for the payment of costs for attorneys appointed pursuant
to RSA 170-C:10 in accordance with the financial eligibility guideline
established by the office of cost containment.

**Source.** 1973, 523:1. 1983, 291:1. 1986, 223:7. 1987, 333:1. 1994,
212:2. 1995, 310:181. 2002, 9:5. 2011, 224:78. 2013, 104:2, eff. July 1,
2013.

### Section 170-C:14

 **170-C:14 Confidentiality of Records. –**
                                             
 I. All hearings held in termination proceedings shall be in closed
court without admittance of any person other than essential officers of
the court, the parties, their witnesses, counsel, and representatives of
the agencies present to perform their official duties.
                                             
 II. All papers and records, including birth certificates, pertaining
to the termination, whether part of the permanent record of the court or
of a file in the department, in an agency or office of the town clerk,
or in the division of vital records administration are subject to
inspection only upon written consent of the court for good cause shown.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding paragraph II, if the New Hampshire department
of health and human services has petitioned for termination of parental
rights under this chapter and the child named in the petition resides
with a foster parent who intends to adopt the child, the department may
share information regarding the status of the case with the child's
foster parent.
                                             
 IV. If any person shall violate any of the provisions of this
section, he or she shall be subject to the following penalty:
                                             
 (a) If the offense occurs prior to November 1, 1973, he or she
shall be fined 
                                             $500 or be imprisoned for 6 months, or both.
                                             
 (b) If the offense occurs on or after November 1, 1973, he or she
shall if a natural person be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any other
person shall be guilty of a felony.

**Source.** 1973, 523:1. 1995, 310:175. 2003, 319:63, eff. July 1, 2003.
2015, 235:2, eff. Sept. 11, 2015.

### Section 170-C:15

 **170-C:15 Appeals. –** Any party aggrieved by any order or decree
of the court may appeal in accordance with RSA 567. The pendency of an
appeal, or an application therefor, shall not suspend the order of the
court regarding the child.

**Source.** 1973, 523:1, eff. Aug. 31, 1973.
