---
title: 'CHAPTER 170-B ADOPTION'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 170-B
                                             
ADOPTION
--------------

### Section 170-B:1

 **170-B:1 Purpose. –** The general court hereby declares its
conviction that the policies and procedures for adoption contained in
this chapter are necessary and desirable, having as their purpose the
threefold protection of:
                                             
 I. The adoptive child, from unnecessary separation from the child's
birth parents and from adoption by parents who should not have such
responsibility. This protection also includes the protection of the
child from a birth parent attempting to surrender his or her parental
rights and responsibilities without a pending legitimate adoption of the
child first being filed with the court or in the case of an adoption
facilitated by the department or an agency, without an adoption first
being contemplated.
                                             
 II. The birth parent or parents, from hurried and coerced decisions
to give up the child.
                                             
 III. The adoptive parent or parents and ensuring them an undisturbed
relationship with the child from and after the date of adoption.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1. 2006, 200:1, eff. July 30, 2006.

### Section 170-B:2

 **170-B:2 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter, unless the
context otherwise requires:
                                             
 I. "Adult'' means an individual who is not a minor.
                                             
 II. "Agency'' means any person licensed by existing law to place
minors for adoption.
                                             
 III. "Birth father'' means a person or persons other than a legal
father who has been named, pursuant to RSA 170-B:6, as the father of the
child, or who is the subject of a pending paternity action, or who has
filed an unrevoked notice of intent to claim paternity of the child
pursuant to RSA 170-B:6.
                                             
 IV. "Birth mother'' means a woman who gestates an embryo conceived
by natural or artificial insemination, in vitro fertilization, or
preembryo transfer, or becomes a parent pursuant to RSA 168-B:23, IV.
                                             
 V. "Child'' means a son or daughter, whether by birth or by
adoption.
                                             
 VI. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 VII. "Court'' means probate court.
                                             
 VIII. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 IX. "Guardian'' means a person so appointed by the probate court.
                                             
 X. "Legal father'' means:
                                             
 (a) The person designated as the father pursuant to RSA 5-C:24 on
that child's birth certificate; or
                                             
 (b) The person designated as the father pursuant to court order
resulting from a paternity action;
                                             
 (c) The person designated as the father upon legitimation
pursuant to RSA 457:42; or
                                             
 (d) The person that was determined by the court to be married to
the birth mother at the time of either conception or birth or any time
between conception and birth.
                                             
 XI. "Minor'' or "minor child'' means any individual under the age of
18.
                                             
 XII. "Parent'' means mother, birth father, legal father, or adoptive
parent, but such term shall not include a parent as to whom the
parent-child relationship has been terminated by judicial decree or
voluntarily surrender.
                                             
 XIII. "Person'' means an individual, corporation, government or
governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership or association, or any other legal entity.
                                             
 XIV. "Prospective adoptive parent'' means the petitioner named on an
adoption petition filed in the court.
                                             
 XV. "Related child'' means a child within the second degree of
kinship either by blood or affinity. Relatives within the second degree
includes step-parents, sisters, brothers, grandparents, aunts, or
uncles.
                                             
 XVI. "Sibling'' means one of 2 or more persons having a common
parent.
                                             
 XVII. "Surrender'' means the release of all parental rights,
including but not limited to care, custody, and control of the child, by
a parent, legal guardian, or agency.
                                             
 XVIII. "Voluntarily mediated agreement'' means an agreement made
through a court-approved mediation program between the department, birth
parents, and prospective adoptive parents in contemplation of
post-adoption sharing of information and/or contact regarding the
adoption of a child who is either under the legal custody or
guardianship of the department.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1. 2005, 246:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2006; 268:5, eff.
Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 170-B:3

 **170-B:3 Who May Be Adopted; Requirements. –** Any individual may
be adopted, provided, however, that:
                                             
 I. If the adoptee is 14 years of age or older, he or she must assent
to the adoption unless the court determines that it is not in the best
interests of the adoptee to require assent. Such an assent shall be
executed by the adoptee in writing and signed in the presence of the
court in which the petition for adoption has been filed.
                                             
 II. If the adoptee is alleged to be incapacitated, incompetent,
mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or is in any other way
emotionally or mentally deficient, the court may also appoint a guardian
ad litem to protect that adoptee's interests.
                                             
 III. If the adoptee, whether a minor or an adult, is married, the
spouse of the adoptee shall also assent to the adoption. The court may
waive this requirement for good cause shown.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:4

 **170-B:4 Who May Adopt. –** Any of the following adults may adopt:
                                             
 I. Husband and wife together.
                                             
 II. An unmarried adult.
                                             
 III. The unmarried parent of the adoptee.
                                             
 IV. A married person without that person's spouse joining as a
petitioner, if the adoptee is not the petitioner's spouse; and if any
one of the following circumstances apply:
                                             
 (a) The petitioner's spouse is a parent of the adoptee and
assents to the adoption;
                                             
 (b) The petitioner and his or her spouse are legally separated;
                                             
 (c) The failure of the petitioner's spouse to join in the
petition is excused by the court by reason of prolonged unexplained
absence, unavailability, or circumstances constituting an unreasonable
withholding of assent; or
                                             
 (d) The petitioner's spouse assents to the adoption and the
adoptee is over the age of 18.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:5

 **170-B:5 Persons Required to Execute a Surrender of Parental
Rights. –**
                                             
 I. Unless excused pursuant to RSA 170-B:7, a surrender of parental
rights shall be obtained from:
                                             
 (a) The birth mother, provided that if the birth mother is under
18 years, the court may require the assent of her parents or legal
guardian;
                                             
 (b) The legal father, provided that if the legal father is under
18 years, the court may require the assent of his parents or legal
guardian;
                                             
 (c) The birth father, provided that he was found to be entitled
to notice and found to be entitled to the right to surrender his
parental rights under RSA 170-B:6, and provided that if the birth father
is under 18 years, the court may require the assent of his parents or
legal guardian;
                                             
 (d) The legal guardian of the adoptee, if both birth parents are
deceased, or if parental rights of the birth parent or parents have been
surrendered or involuntarily terminated and the court has granted the
guardian authority to surrender parental rights for an adoption; or
                                             
 (e) The department or any licensed child-placing agency which
through court action or surrender has been given the care, custody, and
control of the adoptee including the right to surrender.
                                             
 II. If a surrendering parent is alleged to be incapacitated,
incompetent, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or in any other way
mentally deficient, the court may appoint a guardian ad litem to protect
the interest of said parent.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:6

 **170-B:6 Notice to Person Claiming Paternity and Hearing to
Determine Right to Surrender. –**
                                             
 I. In an intrastate or interstate adoption, but not an international
adoption, the following persons shall be given notice by the court and
shall have the right to request a hearing to prove paternity:
                                             
 (a) A person named by the birth mother in an affidavit:
                                             
 (1) Filed with the court; and
                                             
 (2) Given prior to or at the time of the surrender of parental
rights pursuant to RSA 170-B:9, or her parental rights being
involuntarily terminated.
                                             
 (b) The birth or legal father, if his identity is known by the
court, the department or licensed child placing agency which is legal
guardian of the child, or the proposed adoptive parents or their
attorney, prior to the birth mother surrendering her parental rights
pursuant to RSA 170-B:9 or her parental rights being involuntarily
terminated.
                                             
 (c) A person who claims to be the father and who has registered
his claim of paternity with the office of child support services in what
shall be known as the New Hampshire putative father registry or in the
putative father registry of the state where the child was born. The
registration form filed with the appropriate putative father registry
may be filed prior to the birth of the child but shall be filed prior to
the birth mother's parental rights being surrendered pursuant to RSA
170-B:9 or involuntarily terminated. Failure to register with the
appropriate putative father registry prior to this time shall bar the
alleged father from thereafter bringing an action to establish his
paternity of the child, and shall constitute an abandonment of said
child and a waiver of any right to a notice of hearing in any adoption
proceeding concerning the child.
                                             
 (1) In an interstate adoption, the petition shall provide the
court with the name, address, and telephone number of the putative
father registry in the state where the child was born.
                                             
 (2) In New Hampshire, the registration form shall be supplied
by the office of child support services. The form shall require the
claimant to affirmatively express his intent to support the child to the
best of his ability.
                                             
 (d) A person who is openly living with the child or the child's
birth mother or providing financial support to her or the child at the
time any action under this chapter is initiated and who is holding
himself out to be the child's father prior to the mother surrendering
her parental rights pursuant to RSA 170-B:9 or the mother's parental
rights being involuntarily terminated.
                                             
 II. Any person entitled to notice from the court under paragraph I
shall be provided 30 days from the date of the court's notice to request
a hearing at which he shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the evidence that he is the legal or birth father of
the child. The failure to request such hearing within 30 days from the
date of the court's notice shall result in a forfeiture of all parental
rights and any right to notice by the court of any adoption proceedings
concerning the child.
                                             
 III. This section shall be construed broadly in favor of providing
an alleged father with notice by the court pursuant to paragraph I.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1. 2006, 200:2, 3, eff. July 30, 2006.

### Section 170-B:7

 **170-B:7 Persons Not Required to Surrender. –** Surrender of
parental rights is not required of:
                                             
 I. The alleged father who has not met the requirements of RSA
170-B:5, I or RSA 170-B:6;
                                             
 II. A parent whose parental rights have been voluntarily or
involuntarily terminated by order of a court in another state;
                                             
 III. An alleged father who is found not to be the father pursuant to
RSA 168-A;
                                             
 IV. Any parent of the adoptee, if the adoptee is an adult;
                                             
 V. A parent whose parental rights have been terminated pursuant to
RSA 170-C;
                                             
 V-a. An alleged father who is convicted of an offense under RSA
632-A:2, RSA 632-A:3, RSA 632-A:4, or RSA 639:2 which resulted in
conception of the adoptee; or
                                             
 VI. Parents whose parental rights have been determined to be
voluntarily or involuntarily terminated by the proper authorities in
another country, such determination to be evidenced by documentation
issued by the United States Department of Justice or the United States
Department of State and deemed acceptable by probate court rule.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1. 2006, 200:13, eff. July 30, 2006.

### Section 170-B:8

 **170-B:8 Immediate Surrender Prohibited; Availability of
Counseling. –**
                                             
 I. No surrender shall be taken until a passage of a minimum of 72
hours after the birth of the child.
                                             
 II. Any parent wishing to surrender his or her parental rights for
the adoption of a child shall be informed by the parent's legal counsel,
or if counsel has been waived, by the potential adoptive parents or by
their attorney, physician or any intermediary, acting in their behalf or
a licensed child-placing agency, that child-placing agencies licensed
under RSA 170-E are available to provide counseling about the parent's
decision to place the child for adoption.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:9

 **170-B:9 Procedure for Execution of Surrender. –**
                                             
 I. Any parent surrendering parental rights shall be represented by
legal counsel who is not representing an intended adoptive parent or the
agency, unless such representation is waived with approval of the court
for good cause shown. This paragraph is not intended, however, to create
a right to counsel to be provided by the state where the surrendering
parent is indigent. Instead, this paragraph is intended to make clear
that the petitioning party to the adoption shall provide the
surrendering parent with legal counsel consistent with RSA 170-B:13, I
unless waived by the court for good cause shown.
                                             
 II. A surrender of parental rights by a parent or guardian shall be
executed by an instrument in writing, signed by the parent, in the
presence and with the approval of the court of the county in which the
parent resides. The court may designate a person or another court to
take the parent's surrender on the court's behalf for good cause shown.
                                             
 III. Any parent surrendering parental rights shall file with the
court information on the age and medical and personal backgrounds of the
birth parents and child. Such personal information may include but not
be limited to ethnic and religious background, as is reasonably known.
This requirement may be waived by the court for good cause shown.
                                             
 IV. If the parent surrendering is under 18 years of age, the court
may require the assent of the minor's parents or legal guardian.
                                             
 V. If the parent does not reside in this state, such surrender may
be taken pursuant to the laws of the state where the parent resides. A
surrender executed pursuant to the laws of a state other than New
Hampshire shall include an affidavit stating that the surrender was
taken in accordance with the laws of that state and, where applicable,
that the agency named has the authority to surrender the child for an
adoption.
                                             
 VI. The identification of the intended adoptive parents need not be
known or disclosed to the birth parent or legal guardian in the
surrender.
                                             
 VII. A surrender executed by the department or by an agency, shall
be in writing and signed by the executive head or other authorized
representative, in the presence of a person authorized to take
acknowledgments.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1. 2006, 200:4, eff. July 30, 2006.

### Section 170-B:10

 **170-B:10 Content of Surrender. –**
                                             
 I. A surrender shall state that the individual executing the
surrender document acknowledges that the individual's parental rights
over the child will cease upon the court's approval of the surrender.
                                             
 II. A surrender shall further state:
                                             
 (a) An acknowledgement that after the surrender is executed in
substantial compliance with 170-B:9, it is final and except under a
circumstance stated in 170-B:12, may not be revoked or set aside for any
reason, including the failure of an adoptive parent to comply with an
arrangement or understanding reached with the birth parent with respect
to the post-surrender exchange of identifying or non-identifying
information, communication, or contact.
                                             
 (b) An acknowledgement that the surrender will extinguish all
parental obligations, except the obligation to pay any accrued unpaid
child support.
                                             
 (c) That the person executing the surrender has:
                                             
 (1) Been informed of counseling services available through
child placing agencies pursuant to RSA 170-E.
                                             
 (2) Been provided legal counsel, consistent with RSA 170-B:9,
I and RSA 170-B:13, I, unless waived with approval of the court for good
cause shown.
                                             
 (d) That the person executing the surrender has not received or
been promised any money or anything of value for the surrender, except
for payments permissible under 170-B:13.
                                             
 (e) Whether the person executing the surrender has been informed
of the identity of the adoptive parents.
                                             
 (f) Whether the child is an Indian child as defined in the Indian
Child Welfare Act, 25 U.S.C. Section 1901 et seq.
                                             
 (g) Whether the person who is surrendering wishes to be notified
that a final decree of adoption has been entered.
                                             
 (h) That the person who is surrendering has read and understands
the content of the document, any questions the person has asked have
been answered by the court or its designee, and the person wishes the
surrender to take effect.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1. 2006, 200:5, eff. July 30, 2006.

### Section 170-B:11

 **170-B:11 Consequences of Surrender. –**
                                             
 I. All parental rights, with the exception of inheritance rights and
privileges as provided in RSA 170-B:25, II, shall cease and the right to
notice of any future hearings shall be waived by a surrender executed in
accordance with RSA 170-B:9 and approved by the court.
                                             
 II. Except in the case of stepparent adoptions, upon approval of a
surrender of a minor executed by the parent, the court shall issue an
order granting temporary care, custody, and control of the child to the
prospective adoptive parents or where applicable, to the department or
agency. The temporary order shall impose upon the prospective adoptive
parents or the department or agency, the responsibility for the support
and medical and other care of the minor child. The temporary order shall
not be valid for longer than 6 months, unless otherwise ordered by the
court, and, with the exception of adoptions in which the department or
an agency is involved, shall cease upon the granting of the
interlocutory decree of adoption. In adoptions in which the department
or an agency is involved, during the interlocutory period, the
department or agency shall continue to have a legal relationship giving
it responsibility for oversight of the support, medical, and other care
of the minor child.
                                             
 III. At the time of giving the surrender, the parent may elect to
waive notice that a final decree of adoption has been entered.
                                             
 IV. A surrender by a parent, executed and acknowledged in accordance
with the provisions of RSA 170-B:9, may not be withdrawn except as
provided in RSA 170-B:12.
                                             
 V. A surrender executed by any individual not a parent waives any
objection to the adoption.
                                             
 VI. The status of all children for whom care, custody, and control
has been transferred through surrender shall be reviewed at least once
every 6 months, unless waived by the court, until an adoption decree has
been finalized.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1. 2006, 200:6, eff. July 30, 2006.

### Section 170-B:12

 **170-B:12 Withdrawal of Surrender. –**
                                             
 I. A parent wishing to withdraw a surrender shall notify the court
in writing where the surrender was taken. Notification shall be prior to
the entry of the final decree.
                                             
 II. Upon receiving written notice of a parent's request to withdraw
his or her surrender the court shall:
                                             
 (a) Notify the prospective adoptive parents and the agency, if
any, of the parent's request.
                                             
 (b) Conduct an evidentiary hearing. The rules of evidence are not
applicable at this hearing. In addition, the court has the discretion to
determine who shall be present at the hearing.
                                             
 III. A surrender executed and acknowledged in accordance with the
provisions of RSA 170-B:9 may not be withdrawn unless the court finds
that:
                                             
 (a) The parent seeking to withdraw his or her surrender has
proven by a preponderance of the evidence that the surrender was
obtained by fraud or duress.
                                             
 (b) The withdrawal of the surrender is in the best interests of
the adoptee. In making this determination, the court may consider every
facet of each parent's life.
                                             
 IV. The court shall notify any other party who has surrendered
rights to the child of the issuance of its order granting the withdrawal
of such surrender. Notice sent by regular first class mail to the last
known address on file with the court shall be sufficient and shall
include with it a replication of RSA 170-B:12. The party shall have 30
days from the date of the register's notice of decision to request in
writing to the court that his or her surrender be withdrawn as well. The
30-day time period to file such a request shall not be extended by the
court absent a showing of good cause.
                                             
 (a) Upon the court's timely receipt of the request, the court
shall, except in the case of a surrender to the department, allow that
party's withdrawal as of right and shall enter an order withdrawing such
surrender.
                                             
 (b) In the case of a surrender to the department, upon timely
receipt of the request, the provisions of paragraphs II and III shall
apply.
                                             
 V. A surrender may not be withdrawn after the entry of the final
decree of adoption for any reason.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:13

 **170-B:13 Payment of Birth Parent Expenses; Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. In any adoption of an unrelated minor child under this chapter,
an intended adoptive parent or anyone acting in concert with, at the
direction of, or on behalf of an intended adoptive parent shall pay only
the following expenses of the birth parent:
                                             
 (a) Reasonable counseling, medical, and legal fees, which shall
be paid by the party responsible for payment to the provider of the
service.
                                             
 (b) Reasonable expenses for transportation, meals, clothing, and
lodging incurred for placement of the minor child.
                                             
 (c) Reasonable expenses for adoption services provided by an
agency at the request of the birth parent, which shall be paid directly
to the agency.
                                             
 (d) Reasonable living expenses of the birth mother which are
necessary to maintain an adequate standard of living, which the birth
mother is unable to otherwise maintain because of loss of income or
other support resulting from the pregnancy and lost wages resulting from
the pregnancy or delivery. Payments may cover expenses incurred during
the pregnancy-related incapacity, but not for a period longer than 6
weeks following delivery. Reasonable living expenses shall not include
gifts in excess of 
                                             $50, educational expenses, or other payments for the
monetary gain of the birth parent.
                                             
 II. A contract purporting to require a birth parent to reimburse an
intended adoptive parent for such payments under any circumstances,
including circumstances in which a birth parent refuses to surrender his
or her parental rights or withdraws said surrender, is void as against
public policy.
                                             
 III. Violations of this section shall not affect the force or effect
of an adoption decree issued pursuant to this chapter; specifically, it
shall not be grounds for the finding of fraud or duress affecting the
validity of a surrender that an adoptive parent paid or refused to pay
expenses or other money or things of value not allowed by this section.
                                             
 IV. The court may issue appropriate orders to enforce this section,
including orders for reimbursement.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:14

 **170-B:14 Arrangements Between Adoptive and Birth Parents. –**
                                             
 I. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as encouraging,
discouraging, or prohibiting arrangements or understandings reached
between the prospective adoptive parents, the birth parents, or the
licensed child-placing agency with respect to the post-surrender
exchange of identifying or non-identifying information, communication,
or contact. Except in cases involving the department as provided in
paragraph II, no such arrangement or understanding shall be binding or
enforceable at law or in equity.
                                             
 II. In adoptions involving a child who is under either the legal
custody or guardianship of the department, a voluntarily mediated
agreement shall be enforceable as provided in this paragraph. The
purpose of this paragraph is to facilitate the timely achievement of
permanency for children who are in the custody or guardianship of the
department by providing an option for the parties to enter into a
voluntarily mediated agreement for ongoing communication or contact that
is in the best interests of the child, that recognizes the parties'
interests and desires for ongoing communication or contact, that is
appropriate given the role of the parties in the child's life, and that
is legally enforceable by the courts.
                                             
 (a) Prior to the entry of any adoption decree, the department,
prospective adoptive parents, and birth parents may voluntarily
participate in a court-approved mediation program in order to reach a
voluntarily mediated agreement. If the department is the only party
unwilling to participate in mediation, the department shall provide a
written explanation of its position to the court, the birth parents, and
the prospective adoptive parents. Venue for approval and enforcement of
such agreement shall lie in a court of competent jurisdiction that would
otherwise issue the termination decree under RSA 170-C. Any breach,
modification, or invalidation of the agreement, or any part of it, shall
not affect the validity of any surrender of parental rights or the
interlocutory or final decree of adoption.
                                             
 (b) Other people may be invited to participate in the mediation
by mutual consent of the department, birth parents, and prospective
adoptive parents. However, these invitees shall not be parties to any
agreement reached during that mediation.
                                             
 (c) Mediation proceedings and information relating to those
proceedings under this paragraph shall be confidential. Information or
the statements of any person participating in the mediation shall not be
disclosed or used in any subsequent proceeding. Regardless, evidence
that would otherwise be admissible at trial shall not be rendered
inadmissible as a result of its use in a mediation proceeding. There
shall be no record made of any mediation proceedings under this
paragraph, and the mediator shall destroy all of his or her notes
immediately after the mediation.
                                             
 (d) The court shall approve the voluntarily mediated agreement if
the court determines that:
                                             
 (1) The agreement is in the best interests of the child. In
making this determination, factors that the court may consider include:
                                             
 (A) The length of time that the child has been under the
actual care, custody, and control of any person other than a birth
parent and the circumstances relating thereto.
                                             
 (B) The desires of the child's birth parents as to custody
or residency and the desire of the child as to the child's custody or
residency.
                                             
 (C) The interaction and interrelationship of the child with
birth parents, siblings, and any other person who may significantly
affect the child's best interests.
                                             
 (D) The adjustment to the child's home, school, and
community.
                                             
 (E) The willingness and ability of the birth parents to
respect and appreciate the bond between the child and the prospective
adoptive parents.
                                             
 (F) The willingness and ability of the prospective adoptive
parents to respect and appreciate the bond between the child and the
birth parents.
                                             
 (G) Any evidence of abuse or neglect of the child.
                                             
 (H) The recommendations of any guardian ad litem.
                                             
 (2) The agreement has been entered into knowingly and
voluntarily by all parties. An affidavit made under oath shall accompany
the agreement affirmatively stating that the agreement was entered into
knowingly and voluntarily and is not the product of coercion, fraud, or
duress. The affidavit may be executed jointly or separately.
                                             
 (e) To be approved by the court, a voluntarily mediated agreement
shall contain the following statements:
                                             
 (1) This agreement is entered into pursuant to the provisions
of RSA 170-B:14, II.
                                             
 (2) Any breach, modification, or invalidation of the
agreement, or any part of it, shall not affect the validity of the
surrender of parental rights or the interlocutory or final decree of
adoption.
                                             
 (3) The parties acknowledge that either the birth or
prospective adoptive parents who have entered into the agreement have
the right to seek enforcement as set forth in RSA 170-B:14, II(i).
                                             
 (4) The parties have not relied on any representations other
than those contained in the agreement.
                                             
 The agreement shall be signed by the parties and acknowledged
before a notary public as the free act and deed of the parties. If the
child is 14 years of age or older, the agreement also shall contain the
written assent of the child.
                                             
 (f) To be enforceable, a voluntarily mediated agreement shall
be:
                                             
 (1) In writing.
                                             
 (2) Approved by the court prior to the date for entry of any
adoption decree.
                                             
 (3) Incorporated but not merged into any adoption decree, and
shall survive as an independent agreement.
                                             
 (g) A voluntarily mediated agreement under this paragraph need
not disclose the identity of the parties to be enforceable; but if an
identity is not disclosed, the unidentified person shall designate a
resident agent for the purpose of service of process. Failing service on
the designated resident agent, the court may order alternative service
reasonably calculated to notify the undisclosed party.
                                             
 (h) A voluntarily mediated agreement shall cease to be
enforceable on the date the child turns 18 years of age. The court
issuing final approval of the agreement shall have continuing
jurisdiction over enforcement of the agreement until the child reaches
his or her 18th birthday.
                                             
 (i) A party to a court-approved voluntarily mediated agreement
may seek to modify, enforce, or discontinue the agreement by commencing
an equity action in the court that approved the underlying agreement.
However, before a court may enter an order requiring modification of,
compliance with, or discontinuance of the agreement, the moving party
shall certify under oath that he or she has participated, or attempted
to participate, in good faith in mediating the dispute giving rise to
the action prior to filing the equity action. A court order for
modification, enforcement, or discontinuance of the terms of the
voluntarily mediated agreement shall be the sole remedies for breach of
the agreement.
                                             
 (1) In a proceeding under this subparagraph, parties shall not
be entitled to the appointment of counsel; provided, however, that the
court may appoint a guardian ad litem to represent the interests of the
child.
                                             
 (2) The court may modify the terms of the voluntarily mediated
agreement if the court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that
there has been a material and substantial change in the circumstances
and that the modification is in the best interests of the child. A
court-imposed modification of a previously approved agreement may limit,
restrict, condition, decrease, or discontinue the sharing of information
and/or contact between the birth parents and the child but in no event
shall a court-imposed modification serve to expand, enlarge, or increase
the amount of contact between the birth parents and the child or place
new obligations on the parties to the agreement. The court also may
impose appropriate sanctions consistent with its equitable powers but
not inconsistent with this section, including the power to issue
restraining orders.
                                             
 (3) If the court finds that an action brought under this
subparagraph was wholly insubstantial, frivolous, and not advanced in
good faith, the court may award attorneys' fees and costs to the
prevailing parties.
                                             
 (j) Nothing contained in RSA 170-B:14, II shall be construed so
as to abrogate the rights of the adoptive parents to make decisions on
behalf of the child, except as provided in the court-approved
voluntarily mediated agreement.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1. 2005, 246:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 170-B:15

 **170-B:15 Jurisdiction, Venue, and Inconvenient Forum. –**
                                             
 I. The probate court has exclusive jurisdiction to grant a petition
for adoption if the adoptee is present in the state or is in the legal
custody or legal guardianship of an authorized agency located in the
state at the time of filing of the petition. All of the requirements of
RSA 170-A, if applicable, shall be met.
                                             
 II. The petition for adoption shall be filed in the probate court of
the county in which the surrender has taken place, or in the probate
court of the county where a guardianship under RSA 463 or a termination
of parental rights under RSA 170-C proceeding has occurred related to
the same adoptee.
                                             
 III. If the court finds that in the interest of substantial justice
the matter should be heard in another court, the court may transfer the
proceeding in whole or in part to another court within the state or
other foreign jurisdiction.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:16

 **170-B:16 Petition for Adoption. –**
                                             
 I. A proceeding to adopt a minor child, other than a related minor
child, shall be commenced by the filing of a petition within 30 days
after such minor child has been placed in an adoptive home, provided
that such petition may be filed at a later date by leave of court upon a
showing that the failure to file such petition within such 30-day period
was not due to the petitioners' culpable negligence or their willful
disregard of the provisions of this section.
                                             
 II. A petition to adopt an adult or a related minor child may be
filed at any time.
                                             
 III. The following information shall accompany every petition for
adoption:
                                             
 (a) Written surrenders as required by RSA 170-B:5.
                                             
 (b) The name of any person whose surrender is required but who
has not surrendered his or her parental rights.
                                             
 (c) Facts or circumstances which excuse the lack of such
surrender normally required, including but not limited to an order of
termination of parental rights, forfeiture, or waiver.
                                             
 IV. A petition for adoption shall be signed and verified by the
petitioner, filed with the clerk and shall state:
                                             
 (a) As the caption, "In the Adoption of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _''.
The adoptee shall be designated in the caption under the person's birth
name.
                                             
 (b) The date and place of birth of the adoptee, if known.
                                             
 (c) The name to be used for the adoptee.
                                             
 (d) The date and name of the court where the petitioner acquired
custody of the minor and of placement of the minor and the name of the
person or agency placing the minor.
                                             
 (e) The full name, age, place, and duration of residence of the
petitioner.
                                             
 (f) The marital status of the petitioner, including the date and
place of marriage, if married.
                                             
 (g) That the petitioner has facilities and resources, including
those available under a subsidy agreement, suitable to provide for the
nurture and care of the minor adoptee, and that it is the desire of the
petitioner to establish the relationship of parent and child with the
adoptee.
                                             
 V. A certified copy of the birth certificate or verification of
birth record of the adoptee shall be sent to the court.
                                             
 VI. Any name by which the adoptee was previously known shall not be
disclosed in the notice of hearing, or in the decree of adoption.
                                             
 VII. If a minor child is to be adopted from another state or
country, the petition shall include documentation indicating compliance
with RSA 170-A and RSA 170-B:28.
                                             
 VIII. If the surrender was executed in another state or country, or
medical information was not provided as required under 170-B:9, III, the
petitioner shall file with the court information on the age and medical
and personal backgrounds of the birth parents and minor child. Such
personal information may include but not be limited to ethnic and
religious background, as is reasonably known.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1. 2006, 200:7. 2011, 88:20, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 170-B:17

 **170-B:17 Notice of Petition. –**
                                             
 I. After the filing of a petition to adopt a minor, the court shall
fix a time and place for hearing the petition. Notice shall be given by
the court to the petitioners, all guardians of the child, the person
having legal custody of the child, and the guardian ad litem of any
party. Notice shall be given by regular mail.
                                             
 II. After the filing of a petition to adopt an adult, the court, by
order, shall direct that a copy of the petition and a notice of the time
and place of the hearing be given to any person whose assent is required
but who has not assented as provided in RSA 170-B:3. The court may order
an appropriate assessment to assist it in determining whether the
adoption is in the best interest of the persons involved.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:18

 **170-B:18 Assessment. –**
                                             
 I. Before the petition is heard, in the adoption of a related minor
child, or an adoption of a minor child through an agency, an assessment
shall be made by the department, or by a licensed child-placing agency
into the conditions of the petitioner for the purpose of ascertaining
whether the adoptive home is a suitable home for the minor child and
whether the proposed adoption is in the best interest of the minor
child. In determining whether the petitioner will be able to give the
prospective adoptee a proper home and education, the court shall give
due consideration to any assurance by the commissioner or designee that
the commissioner will provide or contribute funds for the necessary
maintenance or medical care of the prospective adoptee under an adoption
subsidy agreement. The court has the discretion to also request an
assessment of the extended birth family of a minor child sought to be
adopted. The written report of the assessment shall be filed with the
court by the investigating agency not later than 60 days after the
petition has been filed in the probate court.
                                             
 II. In the adoption of a minor child, other than a related minor
child or an adoption through an agency, the potential adoptive parents
shall request such an assessment by the department, or by a licensed
child-placing agency, at least 30 days before the minor child is placed
in the parents' home. Failure to comply with the provisions of this
paragraph shall be grounds for dismissal of the petition for adoption,
provided that such petition may be granted upon a showing that the
failure to request an assessment within such 30-day period was not due
to the petitioners' culpable negligence or their willful disregard of
the provisions of this paragraph. However, prior to the hearing on the
petition, an assessment by the department, or by a licensed
child-placing agency, shall be filed with the court.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 170-B:18, I and II, the
court may proceed to hearing and decree without an assessment where the
petitioner or petitioner's spouse is the birth parent of the minor child
to be adopted. If the court has waived or limited the extent of an
assessment pursuant to RSA 170-C:9, II, the court may order the
petitioners to consult with a child-placing agency licensed pursuant to
RSA 170-E to consider whether adoption is in the best interests of the
minor child subject to the petition and themselves.
                                             
 IV. The department or a licensed child-placing agency making the
required assessment may request other departments or licensed
child-placing agencies within or outside this state to make the
assessment or designated portions thereof as may be appropriate. Where
such written assessments are made, a written report shall be filed with
the court; provided, however, said report shall not violate RSA 170-A,
the interstate compact on the placement of children.
                                             
 V. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 170-B:18, I and II, in the
adoption of a related minor child, the court may, for good cause shown,
proceed to a hearing and a decree without an assessment when both of the
following circumstances are met:
                                             
 (a) The parents of the minor child have surrendered their
parental rights; and
                                             
 (b) The minor child has resided with the petitioners to whom the
child is related for at least 3 years prior to filing the petition for
adoption.
                                             
 VI. Notwithstanding any of the above requirements, the court shall
require a background check in all private adoption proceedings if there
has not been an assessment. The background check shall include both a
criminal records check conducted by the New Hampshire state police and a
search of the abuse and neglect registry maintained by the department.
If the court has information that the petitioner has lived in another
state, the court may also request a search of that state's abuse and
neglect registry.
                                             
 VII. The court shall require a background check in all adoption
proceedings initiated by the department or by another child placing
agency. The background check shall consist of a fingerprint-based
criminal record check of national crime information databases for all
prospective adoptive parents and a central registry check for all
prospective adoptive parents and any other adult living in the home.
                                             
 (a) For the criminal record check required under this paragraph,
the department shall submit the prospective adoptive parents'
fingerprints to the department of safety, division of state police, for
forwarding to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Upon completion of
the criminal record check, the division of state police shall forward
the results to the department.
                                             
 (b) The central registry check shall include a check of the
department's central registry of founded reports of child abuse and
neglect under RSA 169-C:35 and shall include a check of the child abuse
and neglect registries in any other state in which the prospective
adoptive parent or other adult living in the home has resided in the
preceding 5 years. Information obtained from another state pursuant to
this subparagraph shall be used only for the purposes of conducting the
background checks.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1. 2007, 325:2, 3, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 170-B:19

 **170-B:19 Hearing. –**
                                             
 I. The petitioner and the adoptee shall appear at the hearing on the
petition, unless the presence of either is excused by the court for good
cause shown.
                                             
 II. The court may continue the hearing from time to time to permit
further observation, assessment, or consideration of any facts or
circumstances affecting the granting of the petition.
                                             
 III. In the case of an adult adoptee, if at the conclusion of the
hearing, the court determines that the required assents as required by
RSA 170-B:3 have been obtained and the adoption is in the adoptee's best
interests, the court may issue a final decree of adoption.
                                             
 IV. In the case of a minor adoptee, if at the conclusion of the
hearing the court determines that the required surrenders have been
obtained or excused and that the adoption is in the best interest of the
adoptee, it:
                                             
 (a) May issue a final decree of adoption, where the petitioner or
the petitioner's spouse is a birth parent of the minor adoptee;
                                             
 (b) May issue a final decree of adoption in the adoption of a
related minor child pursuant to RSA 170-B:18, V; or
                                             
 (c) Shall issue an interlocutory decree of adoption which shall
not become final until the minor adoptee has lived in the adoptive home
for at least 6 months after placement by an agency or the department or
for at least 6 months after the department or the court has been
informed of the custody of the minor by the petitioner, and the
department or a licensed child-placing agency has had an opportunity to
observe or investigate the adoptive home.
                                             
 V. Before a final decree of adoption is issued in the adoption of a
minor child not related to the petitioner or one of the petitioners, the
petitioners shall file with the court on forms supplied by the
department an affidavit listing the amount of fees or other charges,
whether in the form of cash, gifts, or other thing of value, paid to, or
on behalf of, birth parents, physicians, attorneys, or any other person
in connection with the adoption, including but not limited to fees for
medical, legal, or assessment services conducted pursuant to RSA
170-B:18, or board and care for the birth mother or minor child.
                                             
 VI. If the requirements of a decree under RSA 170-B:19, III or IV
have not been met, the court shall either:
                                             
 (a) Dismiss the petition and determine the person to have custody
of the minor child pursuant to RSA 170-B:20, III; or
                                             
 (b) Extend the interlocutory period, and determine the person to
have custody of the minor child, including the petitioners if in the
best interest of the minor child. The court may provide for observation,
assessment, and further report on the adoptive home during the extended
interlocutory period.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:20

 **170-B:20 Dismissal of Adoption Proceedings. –**
                                             
 I. If at any time between the filing of a petition and the issuance
of the final order completing the adoption it is known to the court that
circumstances are such that the adoptee should not be adopted, the court
may dismiss the proceedings.
                                             
 II. Before entering an order to dismiss the proceedings and prior to
a hearing, the court shall give notice of not less than 5 days to the
petitioners and to the department or agency having made the assessment,
and they shall be entitled to be present at such hearing to admit or
refute the facts upon which the impending action of the court is based.
                                             
 III. If the petition is dismissed or withdrawn, the custody of the
minor child shall revert to the department or agency having had custody
prior to the filing of the petition. In all other cases when a petition
is dismissed or withdrawn, the minor child shall be placed in the
custody of the department and the court shall order the department to
make further assessment and report to the court regarding a suitable
plan for the future well-being of the minor child.
                                             
 IV. The court may order and require persons having an obligation, to
contribute to the support and maintenance of the minor child in such
amounts and at such times as it determines are just and reasonable.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:21

 **170-B:21 Appeals and Validation of Adoption Decrees. –**
                                             
 I. An appeal from any final or interlocutory decree rendered by the
court may be taken in the manner and time provided in RSA 567-A, except
that no appeal shall be allowed from any order or decree involving
proceedings for adoption unless taken within 30 days from receipt of
such order or decree.
                                             
 II. Subject to the disposition of an appeal upon the expiration of
one year after a final adoption decree is issued, the decree cannot be
challenged by any person including the petitioner, in any manner upon
any ground, including fraud, misrepresentation, failure to give any
required notice, or lack of jurisdiction of the parties or of the
subject matter.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:22

 **170-B:22 Report of Adoption. –**
                                             
 I. Within 7 days after the final decree is filed, the clerk shall
send a hard copy of the report of the adoption to the town clerk of the
town where the adoptee was born, to the commissioner, and to the
department of state, division of vital records administration. The
department of state, division of vital records administration shall
provide suitable forms for such reports.
                                             
 II. Each month the clerk shall send to the department, on forms
supplied by the department, summaries of the affidavits filed pursuant
to RSA 170-B:19, V. The department shall publish an annual report
relative to general fees and other charges for adoption and related
services.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1. 2006, 200:8. 2011, 88:20, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 170-B:23

 **170-B:23 Confidentiality of Records. –** Notwithstanding any other
law concerning public hearings and records:
                                             
 I. All hearings held in adoptive proceedings shall be in closed
court without admittance of any person other than essential officers of
the court, the parties, their witnesses, counsel, and representatives of
the agencies present to perform their official duties.
                                             
 II. All papers and records, including birth certificates, pertaining
to the adoption, whether part of the permanent record of the court or of
a file in the division, in an agency or office of the town clerk or the
bureau of vital records and health statistics are subject to inspection
only upon written order of the court for good cause shown, except as
otherwise provided in RSA 170-B:24.
                                             
 III. Nothing contained in this section or RSA 170-B:24 shall prevent
the department or the licensed child-placing agency from sharing with
the adoptive parents all information it has available about the minor
child being placed for adoption. The department or the licensed
child-placing agency shall delete any information which would tend to
identify a birth parent.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:24

 **170-B:24 Requests for Identifying and Non-Identifying Information.
–**
                                             
 I. Requests for non-identifying social or medical information shall
be handled in the following manner:
                                             
 (a) Requests for non-identifying social or medical information
may be made by an adoptee over the age of 18; a parent of an adoptee
under the age of 18; or a birth parent of an adoptee.
                                             
 (b) When any of the above listed people submits a request for
non-identifying social or medical information, the department or agency
shall disclose such information relating to the adoptee, the birth
parents, or the blood relatives. The department or the agency shall
delete any information from the health history or background which would
tend to be identifying. Court approval is not required for information
disclosed under this paragraph.
                                             
 II. If the parties mutually agree to the release of identifying
information, it shall be released as provided in this paragraph.
                                             
 (a) Only the following people may sign a written release
authorizing the department or licensed child-placing agency to disclose
identifying information about an adoptee, a birth parent, or a blood
relative:
                                             
 (1) An adoptee over the age of 18 may sign a release to
authorize disclosure of identifying information as provided in this
section.
                                             
 (2) The adoptive parents of an adoptee under the age of 18 may
also sign a release to authorize disclosure of identifying information
as provided in this section. However, said release shall become void
when the adoptee reaches the age of 18.
                                             
 (3) A birth parent of an adoptee may sign a release
authorizing disclosure of identifying information as provided in this
section at the time of surrender or later. A separate release shall be
signed by each birth parent.
                                             
 (b) Any release made pursuant to this section may be revoked or
amended at any time.
                                             
 (c) The person signing the release of information or its
revocation shall file a copy of such release or revocation with the
department or licensed child-placing agency conducting the assessment
under RSA 170-B:18, if any. The department or licensed child-placing
agency shall then file a copy of the release with the court in which the
adoption petition was filed.
                                             
 (d) The release of information shall contain the social security
number of the person signing the release. The social security number
shall be used only for purposes of locating that person and shall not be
otherwise disclosed.
                                             
 (e) When the department or agency involved in the adoption
receives a request for identifying information where a release has been
signed and not previously revoked, the department or agency shall
attempt to contact the person who signed the release to reaffirm that
person's desire to be contacted. If the person reaffirms his or her
desire to be contacted or the department or agency cannot locate the
person who signed the release or if the person is deceased, the
department or agency shall disclose identifying information to the
person who requested it. Court approval is not required for information
disclosed under this paragraph.
                                             
 (f) When the department or agency involved in the adoption
receives a request for identifying information where no release has been
signed or the previously signed release has been revoked, the department
or agency may, after review of its records, attempt to contact the
person whose identity is sought, to ascertain if they desire to release
identifying information. If the person whose identity is sought, and the
person seeking identifying information agree to the release of
identifying information, the department or agency shall release it.
Court approval is not required for information released under this
subparagraph.
                                             
 III. Court approval shall be required prior to the release of
identifying information in the following cases:
                                             
 (a) If the parties do not agree, or if they cannot be contacted,
or if the department or agency questions the safety of releasing
information pursuant to paragraph II, the requesting party or the
department or agency may petition the court having jurisdiction for the
release of identifying information. The department or agency shall file
a report of the department or agency's action with the court. The court
shall on its own motion or on request of any party hold a hearing on the
issue of releasing identifying information. The department or agency
involved shall receive notice of the hearing and be entitled to
participate in any hearing under this section.
                                             
 (b) For all other requests for identifying information under this
section, court approval shall be required. The court shall request a
review of the record and the facts of the request from the department or
agency involved in the adoption. The court may hold a hearing on the
issue of releasing identifying information. The department or agency
involved shall receive notice of such hearings and be entitled to
participate in any hearing under this section.
                                             
 IV. Any person violating this section or RSA 170-B:23 shall, if a
natural person, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any other person shall
be guilty of a felony.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1. 2006, 200:9, eff. July 30, 2006.

### Section 170-B:25

 **170-B:25 Effect of Petition and Decree of Adoption; Inheritance.
–**
                                             
 I. Upon the issuance of the final decree of adoption, the adoptee
shall be considered the child of the adopting parent or parents,
entitled to the same rights and privileges and subject to the same
duties and obligations as if such adoptee had been born of the adopting
parent or parents.
                                             
 II. Until the issuance of the final decree of adoption, the adoptee
shall be considered the child of such adoptee's birth parent or parents
only with respect to inheritance rights or privileges; but, when a child
is adopted by a stepparent, the child's relationship to such child's
birth parent who is married to the stepparent shall in no way be altered
by reason of the adoption.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, upon the
issuance of a final decree of adoption in which only one spouse is
petitioner, the adopted child shall be the child of the adopting spouse.
Such child's relationship to the birth parent of the same sex as the
non-adopting spouse shall not be altered if the child and the birth
parent so agree. Such child shall no longer be deemed to be the child of
such child's birth parent of the same sex as the adopting spouse.
                                             
 IV. Until the issuance of a final decree of adoption, all reciprocal
rights of inheritance between the adoptee and the adoptee's birth
parents and their respective collateral or lineal relatives shall
continue to exist.
                                             
 V. Upon the issuance of a final decree of adoption, all reciprocal
rights of inheritance between the adoptee and the adoptive parents and
their respective collateral or lineal relatives shall contemporaneously
begin.
                                             
 VI. Nothing contained in this section shall limit in any way the
right of any person to provide for the disposition of his or her
property by will. The rights of a child adopted after the making of a
will by the adoptive parent or parents shall be the same as the rights
of an after-born child. When the adoptive parent is a stepparent,
married to a birth parent, nothing contained in this section shall
affect the rights of inheritance between the child and such child's
birth parent or their collateral or lineal relatives. In the absence of
specific language to the contrary, an adoptee shall be considered the
same as a birth child, issue or heir of the body.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1. 2006, 200:10, 11, eff. July 30, 2006.

### Section 170-B:26

 **170-B:26 Change of Name. –** If in a petition for the adoption of
a child a change of name is requested, the court, upon decreeing the
adoption, may also decree such change of name.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:27

 **170-B:27 Readoption. –**
                                             
 I. Any adoptee may be readopted in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. All provisions relating to the birth parent or parents
shall apply to the adoptive parent or parents except that in no case of
readoption shall a birth parent be made a party to the proceedings, nor
shall the surrender of parental rights by a birth parent be necessary.
For purposes of service of process, necessary parties and surrender, the
adoptive parent or parents shall be substituted for the birth parent.
                                             
 II. The court may validate and issue an adoption decree for an
adoption finalized in another jurisdiction, provided that evidence
satisfactory to the court is produced to demonstrate the validity of
such adoption. For the purposes of this paragraph, satisfactory evidence
includes documentation from the United States Department of Justice or
the United States Department of State that a legal adoption has been
completed in another country. Probate court rules shall specify such
acceptable documentation.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1. 2006, 200:12, eff. July 30, 2006.

### Section 170-B:28

 **170-B:28 Placement of a Child From Another State or Country. –**
Any person or any public or private agency, corporation, or
organization, before bringing or causing any child to be brought into
this state from any other state or country for the purpose of adoption,
or receiving such child in this state for such purpose, shall make
application to the commissioner of the department. Such application
shall be in the form prescribed by the commissioner and shall contain
such information as the commissioner may require, including any
information required to comply with the provisions of RSA 170-A. No
placement of the child shall occur until permission has been obtained
from the commissioner. No petition for adoption of a child from another
state or country shall be granted in the absence of compliance with this
section.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:29

 **170-B:29 Recognition of Foreign Decree Affecting Adoption. –** A
decree of court terminating the relationship of parent and child or
establishing the relation by adoption issued pursuant to due process of
law by a court of any other jurisdiction within or without the United
States shall be recognized in this state and the rights and obligations
of the parties as to matters within the jurisdiction of this state shall
be determined as though the decree was issued by a court of this state.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:30

 **170-B:30 Fees and Court Costs. –** All entry fees and court costs
shall be paid by the petitioner. The court, however, may waive entry
fees and court costs where payment would work a hardship on the
petitioner. The department is exempt from paying any entry fees and
court costs.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

### Section 170-B:31

 **170-B:31 Amended Birth Certificate. –** A birth certificate issued
for an adoptee shall make no reference to adoption and shall conform as
nearly as possible to any other birth certificate.

**Source.** 2004, 255:1, eff. Jan. 2, 2005.

Unauthorized Advertising for Adoption Purposes
----------------------------------------------

### Section 170-B:32

 **170-B:32 Unauthorized Advertising for Adoption Purposes;
Exceptions; Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Advertise through a public medium'' means to communicate by
any public medium, including by newspaper, periodical, telephone book
listing, outdoor advertising sign, radio, television, or by computerized
communication system, which includes an Internet site, an Internet
profile, or any similar medium of communication provided via the
Internet. "Advertising through a public medium'' does not include
communicating through personal or work electronic mail, text, or
telephone.
                                             
 (b) "Another jurisdiction'' means the District of Columbia, the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, any territory or insular possession subject
to the jurisdiction of the United States, an Indian tribe, or a state of
the United States other than New Hampshire.
                                             
 (c) "Child'' means a person less than 18 years of age.
                                             
 II. Except as described in paragraph III, it is unlawful to
advertise through a public medium for one of the following purposes:
                                             
 (a) To find a child to adopt or to otherwise take permanent
physical custody of a child;
                                             
 (b) To find an adoptive home or any other permanent physical
placement for a child or to arrange for or assist in the adoption,
adoptive placement, or any other permanent physical placement of a
child; or
                                             
 (c) To offer to place a child for adoption or in any other
permanent physical placement with another person.
                                             
 III. Paragraph II shall not apply to:
                                             
 (a) An employee of the department of health and human services or
a licensed child-placing agency, who is acting within the scope of his
or her employment to place a child for adoption or in foster care;
                                             
 (b) An adoption exchange whose membership includes licensed
child-placing agencies that provide information and referral services to
find adoptive homes and to promote adoption;
                                             
 (c) An individual or organization that has entered into an
agreement with or is actively working with any of the agencies or
entities described in paragraph (a) or (b) to place a child for
adoption;
                                             
 (d) A person who advertises fertility-related services;
                                             
 (e) An individual who has received a favorable recommendation
regarding his or her fitness to be an adoptive parent in this state from
the department of health and human services or a child-placing agency
licensed in this state or in another jurisdiction from an entity
authorized by that jurisdiction to conduct studies of potential adoptive
homes;
                                             
 (f) An individual who expresses a general interest in becoming an
adoptive parent; or
                                             
 (g) An attorney who is licensed to practice in New Hampshire who
advertises his or her availability to practice or provide services
relating to the adoption of children.
                                             
 IV. Unauthorized advertising of a child, as described in paragraph
II, is a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2016, 159:1, eff. July 1, 2016.

Unlawful Placement of a Child for Adoption
------------------------------------------

### Section 170-B:33

 **170-B:33 Unlawful Placement of a Child for Adoption. –** It shall
be unlawful for a child's parent or legal guardian to knowingly place a
child for adoption, or knowingly attempt to place a child for adoption
through the use of a power of attorney or other legal document in this
state unless such parent or legal guardian follows the procedures for
adoption set out in this chapter. If a parent or legal guardian
transfers physical custody of the child with the intent to permanently
transfer physical and legal custody of the child to another and does not
follow such procedures within 6 months of transferring physical custody
of the child to another, he or she shall be deemed to have abandoned the
child as described in RSA 170-C:5, I and shall be guilty of endangering
the welfare of a child under RSA 639:3.

**Source.** 2016, 159:1, eff. July 1, 2016.
