---
title: 'CHAPTER 171-A SERVICES FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 171-A
                                             
SERVICES FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED
-----------------------------------------

### Section 171-A:1

 **171-A:1 Purpose and Policy. –** The purpose of this chapter is to
enable the department of health and human services to establish,
maintain, implement and coordinate a comprehensive service delivery
system for developmentally disabled persons. The policy of this state is
that persons with developmental disabilities and their families be
provided services that emphasize community living and programs to
support individuals and families, beginning with early intervention, and
that such services and programs shall be based on the following:
                                             
 I. Participation of people with developmental disabilities and their
families in decisions concerning necessary, desirable, and appropriate
services, recognizing that they are best able to determine their own
needs.
                                             
 II. Services that offer comprehensive, responsive, and flexible
support as individual and family needs evolve over time.
                                             
 III. Individual and family services based on full participation in
the community, sharing ordinary places, developing meaningful
relationships, and learning things that are useful, as well as enhancing
the social and economic status of persons served.
                                             
 IV. Services that are relevant to the individual's age, abilities,
and life goals, including support for gainful employment that maximizes
the individual's potential for self-sufficiency and independence.
                                             
 V. Services based on individual choice, satisfaction, safety, and
positive outcomes.
                                             
 VI. Services provided by competent, appropriately trained and
compensated staff.

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1979, 322:2, I. 1987, 206:2. 1995, 310:181.
2006, 229:1, eff. July 31, 2006.

### Section 171-A:1-a

 **171-A:1-a Full Funding of Services Budget; Limits of Waiting
Lists. –**
                                             
 I. The department of health and human services and area agencies
shall provide services to eligible persons under this chapter and
persons eligible for the brain injury program under RSA 137-K in a
timely manner. The department and area agencies shall provide services
in such a manner that:
                                             
 (a) For persons in school and already eligible for services from
the area agencies, funds shall be allocated to them 90 days prior to
their graduating or exiting the school system or earlier so that any new
or modified services needed are available and provided upon such school
graduation or exit.
                                             
 (b) For newly found eligible adults, the period between the time
of completion of an individual service agreement pursuant to RSA
171-A:12 and the allocation by the department of the funds needed to
carry out the services required by the agreement shall not exceed 90
days.
                                             
 (c) For persons already receiving services who experience
significant life changes, such as a significant change in their medical
conditions, the period of time for initiation of new services shall not
exceed 90 days from the amendment of the individual service agreement
except by mutual agreement between the area agency and the person
specifying a time limited extension.
                                             
 (d) Notwithstanding subparagraphs I(a)-(c) of this section, for
fiscal years 2008 and 2009, the timelines set forth in each such
subparagraph may be exceeded, provided that best efforts shall be made
to meet the timelines for children graduating or exiting school and for
other individuals the department determines most in need and to minimize
delays with respect to others within the limits of available funding and
to provide them interim services when the timelines have been exceeded
by 60 days for fiscal year 2008 and 30 days for fiscal year 2009.
                                             
 II. Beginning with the fiscal year ending June 30, 2010, and
thereafter, the department of health and human services shall
incorporate the cost of fully funding services to eligible persons, in
accordance with the requirements of paragraph I, and as otherwise
required under RSA 171-A, and the legislature shall appropriate
sufficient funds to meet such costs and requirements.

**Source.** 1997, 151:2. 2007, 363:2, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section -1-b

 **171-A:1-b Oversight Committee; Establishment. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1998,
248:2, eff. July 1, 2002.
                                             ]

### Section 171-A:1-c

 **171-A:1-c Oversight Committee; Establishment. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010,
268:5, II, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.
                                             ]

### Section 171-A:1-d

 **171-A:1-d Improvements in Capacity of Service Delivery System. –**

                                             [Repealed 2010, 268:5, III, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.
                                             ]

### Section 171-A:2

 **171-A:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Administrator'' means the superintendent or chief administrative
officer of any facility or of any program or service for the
developmentally disabled conducted under the supervision of the
commissioner or any employee he so designates as his deputy.
                                             
 I-a. "Area'' means a geographic region established by rules adopted
by the commissioner for the purpose of providing services to
developmentally disabled persons.
                                             
 I-b. "Area agency'' means an entity established as a nonprofit
corporation in the state of New Hampshire which is established by rules
adopted by the commissioner to provide services to developmentally
disabled persons in the area.
                                             
 I-c. "Area board'' means the governing body or board of directors of
an area agency.
                                             
 I-d. "Assistive technology'' means assistive technology as defined
by 29 U.S.C. section 3002(3).
                                             
 II. "Client'' means any developmentally disabled person receiving
services provided under this chapter.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of health and human
services.
                                             
 IV. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 V. "Developmental disability'' means a disability:
                                             
 (a) Which is attributable to an intellectual disability, cerebral
palsy, epilepsy, autism, or a specific learning disability, or any other
condition of an individual found to be closely related to an
intellectual disability as it refers to general intellectual functioning
or impairment in adaptive behavior or requires treatment similar to that
required for persons with an intellectual disability; and
                                             
 (b) Which originates before such individual attains age 22, has
continued or can be expected to continue indefinitely, and constitutes a
severe disability to such individual's ability to function normally in
society.
                                             
 V-a. "Direct support staff'' means any person employed by an area
agency or contract provider in which at least 50 percent of the person's
time is providing direct care or support to a client.
                                             
 VI, VII. 
                                             [Omitted.
                                             ]
                                             
 VIII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IX. "Habilitation'' means the process by which program personnel
assist clients to acquire and maintain those life skills which enable
them to cope more effectively with the demands of their own persons and
of their environment, to be economically self-sufficient and to raise
the level of their physical, mental and social efficiency. Habilitation
includes but is not limited to programs of formal, structured education
and treatment.
                                             
 X. "Individual service agreement'' means a written document for a
client's services and supports which is specifically tailored to meet
the needs of each client.
                                             
 XI. "Informed decision'' means a choice made by a client or
potential client or, where appropriate, his legal guardian that is
reasonably certain to have been made subsequent to a rational
consideration on his part of the advantages and disadvantages of each
course of action open to him.
                                             
 XI-a. "Intellectual disability'' means significantly subaverage
general intellectual functioning existing concurrently with deficits in
adaptive behavior, and manifested during the developmental period. A
person with an intellectual disability may be considered mentally ill
provided that no person with an intellectual disability shall be
considered mentally ill solely by virtue of his or her intellectual
disability.
                                             
 XII. "Least restrictive environment'' means the program or service
which least inhibits a client's freedom of movement, informed decisions
and participation in the community, while achieving the purposes of
habilitation and treatment.
                                             
 XIII. "Mental illness'' means mental illness as defined in RSA
135-C:2, X.
                                             
 XIV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XV-a. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XV-aa. "Receiving facility'' means any facility designated by the
commissioner pursuant to RSA 171-A:20.
                                             
 XV-b. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XVI. "Service delivery system'' means a comprehensive array of
services for the diagnosis, evaluation, habilitation and rehabilitation
of developmentally disabled persons, including but not limited to,
service coordination, community living arrangements, employment and day
services and supports to families of individuals with developmental
disabilities.
                                             
 XVII. "Treatment'' means the prevention, amelioration and
improvement of a client's disabilities and illnesses.

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1979, 322:2-5, 9, IX, 19. 1981, 492:20. 1983,
291:1, I. 1987, 206:2, 3. 1988, 107:5. 1990, 140:2, XI. 1994, 248:4;
408:3. 1995, 310:128, 172. 2001, 101:1, 2, 18, I, II. 2007, 363:4, 5.
2008, 52:14, 15, 21, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 171-A:3

 **171-A:3 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of the department of
health and human services shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A to
implement this chapter.

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1981, 492:21. 1995, 310:172, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 171-A:4

 **171-A:4 State Service Delivery System. –** The department shall
maintain a state service delivery system for the care, habilitation,
rehabilitation, treatment and training of developmentally disabled
persons. Such service delivery system shall be under the supervision of
the commissioner.

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1979, 322:2, I. 1987, 206:2. 1988, 107:5. 1995,
310:172, 175. 2001, 101:3, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 171-A:5

 **171-A:5 Voluntary Entry Into Service Delivery System. –**
                                             
 I. Applications for service shall be made by the developmentally
disabled person seeking such service, and all placements shall be
voluntary. If the client is under the age of 18, the application for
service may be initiated by a parent or legal guardian. If the client is
over the age of 18 and has been found to be incapacitated by the probate
court, the application for service may be initiated by the
court-appointed guardian.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding paragraph I, a person may be involuntarily
admitted to the service delivery system pursuant to RSA 171-B.

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1979, 322:2, I, II. 1987, 206:2. 1994, 408:4.
1995, 310:175. 2001, 101:4, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 171-A:6

 **171-A:6 Entry Into the Service Delivery System. –**
                                             
 I. A person seeking service shall make application in accordance
with rules adopted by the commissioner to the area agency in his or her
appropriate geographic region as designated by rule pursuant to RSA
171-A:2, I-b.
                                             
 II. A comprehensive screening evaluation, coordinated by the staff
of the area agency, shall determine the scope of the person's disability
and the locus and nature of services to be provided and shall include an
assistive technology evaluation both as part of the person's initial
evaluation and at least on an annual basis thereafter when the person is
screened for an assistive technology evaluation. The commissioner shall
adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A relative to the evaluation. The
initial evaluation shall include, but not be limited to, a physical
examination and individual intellectual assessment and functional
behavior scales and shall take into account the provisions of and
services established under RSA 186-A.
                                             
 III. A recommendation for services by the area agency shall utilize
the criterion of the least restrictive environment for the client and
shall be made to the service which best meets the needs of the client.
Preliminary evaluations shall be completed and preliminary
recommendations for services made within 21 days after application for
service.
                                             
 IV. In an emergency situation and in the discretion of the
commissioner, temporary service arrangements may be made prior to the
completion of the screening evaluation.
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A
establishing hearing procedures to determine the appropriateness of a
service recommendation which is challenged by the client, his or her
attorney or family.

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1979, 322:2, II. 1981, 492:22, 23. 1995,
310:172. 2001, 101:5. 2007, 363:6, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 171-A:7

 **171-A:7 Withdrawal From Service Delivery System. –** Except for a
person admitted involuntarily pursuant to RSA 171-B, a client at any
time may seek a change in services or withdraw entirely from the service
delivery system. A parent or legal guardian may seek a change of
services for or withdraw entirely a minor or ward in his or her custody
at any time, unless such minor has reached the age of majority. The
administrator shall notify the area agency of any such withdrawal and
may, if appropriate, indicate in the client's record that such
withdrawal was against professional advice.

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1979, 322:2, II. 1994, 408:5. 2001, 101:6, eff.
Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 171-A:8

 **171-A:8 Termination of Service. –**
                                             
 I. The administrator may terminate service to a client at any time
that such termination is deemed in the best interest of the client or
when the client can function independently without such service or when
the client has received optimal benefit from such service.
                                             
 II. In every instance of termination, the administrator shall refer
the client to the area agency which, in turn, shall recommend an
appropriate service, or be responsible for contacting the client at
regular intervals after termination for as long as deemed necessary.
                                             
 III. Prior to any termination of service, the administrator shall
give 30 days' notice to the client, if over 18 years of age, or to the
parent or guardian, if the client is a minor or has been found to be
legally incapacitated. Consent of the parent or guardian is required
prior to termination if the client is a minor or has been declared
legally incapacitated. Service may be terminated sooner than 30 days
with the consent of the client, his or her parent or guardian.
                                             
 IV. The client or, where appropriate, his parent or legal guardian,
may seek review of the decision to terminate from the commissioner. The
decision of the commissioner shall be final.
                                             
 V. Notwithstanding this section, the administrator shall not
terminate service to a person involuntarily admitted pursuant to RSA
171-B without prior approval of the commissioner, except:
                                             
 (a) Upon transfer of the person to another receiving facility or
to the secure psychiatric unit; or
                                             
 (b) Upon expiration of the order of commitment.

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1979, 322:6. 1994, 408:6. 1995, 310:172. 2001,
101:7, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 171-A:8-a

 **171-A:8-a Transfer of Involuntary Admittees; Rules. –**
                                             
 I. A receiving facility to which a person is ordered for involuntary
admission or to which such person has been transferred may transfer the
person to another receiving facility if the receiving facility to which
the person is to be transferred can better provide the degree of
security or treatment required by the person. All transfers shall
require the approval of the chief administrator of the state
developmental services system. The commissioner shall adopt rules
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to transfer criteria and procedures for
the challenge of transfer decisions by the persons so transferred.
                                             
 II. Transfers to the secure psychiatric unit of involuntary
admittees may be made pursuant to RSA 171-B:15.

**Source.** 1994, 408:7. 1995, 310:129, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

Restraint and Seclusion
-----------------------

### Section 171-A:9

 **171-A:9 Residential Services. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A relative
to clients in residential services, including but not limited to such
matters as restraint and seclusion.
                                             
 II. Restraint or seclusion may be used only in cases of emergency
such as the occurrence or serious threat of extreme violence, personal
injury or attempted suicide.

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1981, 492:24. 1995, 310:172. 2001, 101:8, eff.
Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 171-A:10

 **171-A:10 Residential Services; Legal Counsel and Guardianship.
–**
                                             
 I. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. Whenever a client over the age of 18 years is considered
incapable of managing his or her own affairs and is at risk of
substantial harm to person or estate as a result, and the person does
not have a legal guardian, the administrator shall take such steps as
are appropriate to safeguard the person as may be consistent with RSA
464-A and 547-B, including the nomination of a guardian when no less
restrictive alternative is available.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1977, 587:1. 1979, 322:2, II, 20. 1983, 409:4.
1988, 107:5. 1995, 310:27. 2001, 101:9, 10, 18, III, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 171-A:11

 **171-A:11 Periodic Review. –**
                                             
 I. The needs and services of every client in the service delivery
system shall be subject to a periodic review under the supervision of
the administrator, which shall include but not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) A thorough clinical examination including an annual health
assessment;
                                             
 (b) An assessment of the client's capacity to make informed
decisions; and
                                             
 (c) Consideration of less restrictive alternatives for service,
particularly for those clients in residential services.
                                             
 II. Such periodic review shall take place at least once during the
first 6 months of service and annually thereafter. The administrator
shall give written notice to the client and his or her nearest relative
or legal guardian at least 10 days prior to a periodic review. The
results of each periodic review shall become part of the client's
clinical record, and recommendations resulting from such review shall be
shared with the client, and, where appropriate, with his or her
guardian, parent or nearest relative.
                                             
 III. Following any review or at any other time, the administrator
may recommend termination of service or may refer the client to a more
appropriate service pursuant to RSA 171-A:8.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A
relative to the conduct of the review and the personnel who shall carry
out the review.

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1981, 492:25. 1995, 310:172. 2001, 101:11, eff.
Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 171-A:12

 **171-A:12 Individual Service Agreement. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be an individual service agreement for every client
in the service delivery system who receives services. A service
coordinator designated by the area agency serving the client shall
develop a preliminary written individual service agreement based upon a
comprehensive screening evaluation established under RSA 171-A:6 for
such client within 14 days after the initial service planning meeting.
The individual service agreement shall be continually reviewed by the
area agency and shall be modified if necessary. The commissioner shall
adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A relative to the development of such
individual service agreements.
                                             
 II. Each individual service agreement shall include but not be
limited to:
                                             
 (a) A statement of the nature of the specific strengths,
interests, capacities, disabilities, and specific needs of the client;
                                             
 (b) A description of intermediate and long-range habilitation and
treatment goals chosen by the individual and his or her guardian with a
projected timetable for their attainment;
                                             
 (c) A statement of specific services to be provided and the
amount, frequency, and duration of each service;
                                             
 (d) Specification of the providers to furnish each service
identified in the agreement; and
                                             
 (e) Criteria for transfer to less restrictive settings for
habilitation, including criteria for termination of service and a
projected date for termination of service from the service.

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1981, 492:26. 1995, 310:172. 2001, 101:12, eff.
Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 171-A:13

 **171-A:13 Service Guarantees. –** Every developmentally disabled
client has a right to adequate and humane habilitation and treatment
including such psychological, medical, vocational, social, educational
or rehabilitative services as his condition requires to bring about an
improvement in condition within the limits of modern knowledge.

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1979, 322:2, I. 1987, 206:2, eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 171-A:14

 **171-A:14 Rights of Developmentally Disabled Persons. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall be deemed incompetent to manage his or her
affairs, to contract, to hold professional, occupational or vehicle
operator's licenses, to vote, to marry or to make a will solely by
reason of his or her developmental disability or of his or her
participation in the service delivery system, nor shall department rules
restrict such rights. The client's right to individual dignity shall be
respected at all times and upon all occasions.
                                             
 II. A client in a residential service shall be provided with
stationery and postage in reasonable amounts and shall have free and
unrestricted mailing privileges.
                                             
 III. A client shall have the right to be visited at all reasonable
times unless the administrator determines that such a visit would
adversely affect the client. Any denial of visiting rights and the
reasons for such denial shall be entered in the client's record and may
be subject to the review of the human rights committee established under
RSA 171-A:17.
                                             
 IV. A client in a residential service shall have the right to wear
his or her own clothes, to keep and use his or her own personal
possessions including toilet articles, to keep and be allowed to spend
his or her own money, to have access to individual storage space for
private use, to have reasonable access to telephones to make and receive
confidential calls and any other rights specified by rules of the
department; provided, however, that any of these rights may be denied
for good cause by the administrator or designee. Any denial of these
rights and the reasons for such denial shall be entered in the client's
record and may be subject to the review of the human rights committee
established under RSA 171-A:17.
                                             
 V. The commissioner may adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A relative
to the protection of the rights, dignity, autonomy and integrity of
clients, including specific procedures to protect the rights established
in this chapter.

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1979, 322:2, I. 1981, 492:27. 1987, 206:2.
1995, 310:172, 175. 2001, 101:13, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 171-A:15

 **171-A:15 Rights of Clients to be Provided. –** Written materials
describing the rights of clients as set forth in this chapter and in the
rules of the department shall be provided to each client and his or her
guardian, if any. Such materials shall be presented in clearly
understandable language and form.

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1995, 310:175. 2001, 101:14, eff. Aug. 20,
2001.

### Section 171-A:16

 **171-A:16. Client Employment. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2001, 101:18, IV, eff.
Aug. 20, 2001.
                                             ]

### Section 171-A:17

 **171-A:17 Human Rights Committee. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall establish, in each area agency, a human
rights committee of 5 or more persons. The majority of the members of
each human rights committee shall be persons who represent the interests
of developmentally disabled clients and who are not employees of the
department.
                                             
 II. The duties of the human rights committee shall include, but not
be limited to, the following for each program or service with which the
committee is concerned:
                                             
 (a) Evaluating the treatment and habilitation provided;
                                             
 (b) Regularly monitoring the implementation of individual service
agreements;
                                             
 (c) Monitoring the use of restrictive or intrusive interventions
designed to address challenging behavior;
                                             
 (d) Fostering the capacity of individuals served by the area
agency to exercise more choice and control in their lives; and
                                             
 (e) Promoting advocacy programs on behalf of the clients.

**Source.** 1975, 242:1. 1979, 322:8. 1981, 492:28. 1987, 206:2. 1995,
310:172. 2001, 101:15, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

Miscellaneous
-------------

### Section 171-A:18

 **171-A:18 Area Agency Responsibilities and Operations. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner may designate by rules adopted pursuant to RSA
541-A for each area one area agency which shall be responsible for
administering area-wide programs and services for developmentally
disabled persons. Each area agency so designated shall be the primary
recipient of funds that may be dispensed by the commissioner for use in
establishing, operating or administering such programs and services. The
programs and services for which an area agency is responsible include,
but are not limited to, diagnosis and evaluation, service coordination,
community living arrangements, employment and day services, and programs
designed to enhance personal and social competence.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may enter into contracts with, make grants to,
or otherwise make funds available to each area agency for the provision
of programs and services to developmentally disabled persons. Subject to
the written approval of the commissioner, an area agency may enter into
contracts with individuals or organizations for the expenditure of
portions of such funds on programs or services for developmentally
disabled persons.
                                             
 III. Each area board shall appoint an executive director who shall
be accountable to the board for administering the area-wide programs and
services for developmentally disabled persons. The executive director
shall serve at the pleasure of the area board and shall serve as a
full-time employee of the area board.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner shall, in accordance with RSA 541-A, adopt
rules establishing standards for the provision of services by area
agencies to developmentally disabled persons. The commissioner shall
further adopt rules establishing standards relating to the professional
qualifications of the executive director of the area board and to the
size and composition of area boards in order to assure that membership
is representative of the area as a whole and reflects the concerns and
interests of developmentally disabled persons and their families. The
commissioner shall also adopt rules establishing a reapproval process
and shall require area agencies to be subject to reapproval every 5
years.
                                             
 V. With such frequency as may be determined by the commissioner,
each area agency shall prepare and submit to the department for approval
a plan for provision of programs and services to developmentally
disabled persons who live in the area.
                                             
 VI. A community mental health program established pursuant to RSA
135-C may also be designated an area agency by the commissioner,
providing that the area agency is in full compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and with all standards and rules adopted
pursuant thereto.
                                             
 VII. The department of health and human services shall assume all or
any part of the responsibilities provided for in paragraphs I and II at
any time during which an area agency is not designated.

**Source.** 1979, 322:7. 1981, 492:29. 1987, 206:2. 1988, 107:5. 1995,
310:130, 172, 175, 181. 1998, 168:2. 2001, 101:16, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 171-A:19

 **171-A:19 Client and Legal Services Section. –** A client and legal
services section shall be established in the department. Its functions
and responsibilities shall include but not be limited to:
                                             
 I. Assisting the commissioner in responding to inquiries and
complaints by or on behalf of mentally ill or developmentally disabled
persons.
                                             
 II. Assisting the commissioner in securing needed services and
information for mentally ill persons, developmentally disabled persons,
or their respective families.
                                             
 III. Assisting the commissioner in assuring that the human rights of
mentally ill persons and of developmentally disabled clients in the
service delivery system are protected.

**Source.** 1979, 322:7. 1987, 206:2. 1995, 310:172, 181. 2001, 101:17,
eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 171-A:19-a

 **171-A:19-a Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established within the department an
institutional review board which shall be known as the committee for the
protection of human subjects. The committee shall oversee research
conducted in department-funded programs that serve people with mental
illness, developmental disabilities, and substance abuse or dependence
disorders. No research shall be conducted in these programs until it has
been reviewed and approved by the committee.
                                             
 II. The committee shall have, at a minimum, 7 members with varying
backgrounds to promote complete and adequate review of research
activities. The commissioner shall appoint the members. The committee
shall be sufficiently qualified through the experience, expertise, and
diversity of its members to promote respect for its advice and counsel
in protecting human subjects in research and safeguarding the privacy
and confidentiality of medical records information that is used for the
purposes of research. In addition to possessing the professional
competence necessary to review specific research activities, the
committee shall be able to ascertain the acceptability of proposed
research in terms of applicable laws and regulations and standards of
professional conduct and practice. The committee shall therefore include
persons knowledgeable in these areas. Members of the committee shall be
appointed to 3-year terms.
                                             
 III. The committee shall include at least one member whose primary
area of expertise is scientific and one member whose primary area of
expertise is non-scientific.
                                             
 IV. The committee shall include at least 2 members who are not
otherwise affiliated with the department and who are not part of the
immediate family of a person who is affiliated with the department.
                                             
 V. The committee shall include at least 2 members who are consumers
or family members of consumers.
                                             
 VI. No member of the committee shall participate in initial or
continuing review of any research project in which the member has a
conflicting interest, except to provide information requested by the
committee.
                                             
 VII. The committee may, in its discretion, invite individuals with
competence in special areas to assist in the review of issues that
require expertise beyond or in addition to that possessed by the members
of the committee. These individuals may only offer advice and guidance
and shall not participate in the decision as to whether or not to
approve the research.
                                             
 VIII. The committee shall choose a chairperson and vice-chairperson
from its membership. The commissioner may assign department staff to
assist the committee as needed.
                                             
 IX. The commissioner may establish fees, through rules adopted under
RSA 541-A, as deemed necessary, after consultation with the committee,
to offset departmental costs of providing assistance to the committee
pursuant to paragraph VIII. Fee revenue shall not be deposited into the
general fund, but may be used by the department to offset such costs.

**Source.** 2005, 183:1. 2007, 263:94, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 171-A:19-b

 **171-A:19-b Rulemaking. –** The commissioner may adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the operation of the committee for
the protection of human subjects, established in RSA 171-A:19-a, the
procedures, conditions, and criteria for the conduct and approval of
research, and fees charged by the committee.

**Source.** 2005, 183:1. 2007, 263:95, eff. July 1, 2007.

Involuntary Admission
---------------------

### Section 171-A:20

 **171-A:20 Receiving Facility; Rules. –** The commissioner shall
adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the criteria and
procedures for designation of receiving facilities which receive persons
for involuntary admissions under RSA 171-B. A receiving facility may be
designated by the commissioner for one or more purposes, including, but
not limited to:
                                             
 I. Receiving persons for involuntary admission directly pursuant to
a court order; and
                                             
 II. Receiving involuntarily admitted persons by transfer with the
approval of the commissioner or designee.

**Source.** 1994, 408:8. 1995, 310:172, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 171-A:21

 **171-A:21 Discharge by Administrator. –**
                                             
 I. When any person has been involuntarily admitted to a receiving
facility pursuant to RSA 171-B or conditionally discharged pursuant to
paragraph II of this section, the administrator of the receiving
facility most recently providing services to the person may grant an
absolute discharge to the person with the consent of the chief
administrator of the state developmental services system or designee who
has reviewed the person's situation, provided that the chief
administrator or designee determines that an absolute discharge shall
not create a potentially serious likelihood of danger to others or a
potentially serious likelihood of substantial damage to real property.
The administrator shall, in writing, immediately notify the court
entering the original order of commitment and the attorney general that
the person has been given an absolute discharge from the receiving
facility. Upon receipt of the notice, the court shall make the notice
part of the person's file and shall enter the discharge and date of
discharge upon the docket.
                                             
 II. The administrator of the facility may, with prior approval of
the chief administrator of the state developmental services system or
designee, grant a person, whose condition is not considered appropriate
for absolute discharge, a conditional discharge.

**Source.** 1994, 408:8. 1995, 310:131, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 171-A:22

 **171-A:22 Conditions of Conditional Discharge. –**
                                             
 I. The administrator of a receiving facility may, with prior
approval of the chief administrator of the state developmental services
system or designee, grant a conditional discharge to any person who
consents, by an informed decision, to participate in continuing services
from an area agency, who agrees to be subject to any rules adopted by
the chief administrator relative to conditional discharge, and who
agrees to comply with the conditions of the discharge. The administrator
of the facility or designee shall prepare, deliver a copy of, and read
and explain to the person being conditionally discharged a written
statement in clear and understandable language of the conditions of
conditional discharge and a warning that violation of those conditions
may result in revocation of the conditional discharge pursuant to RSA
171-A:23.
                                             
 II. A conditional discharge shall not exceed the period of time
remaining on the order of involuntary admission and shall become
absolute at the end of its term, unless extended by the court.

**Source.** 1994, 408:8. 1995, 310:132, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 171-A:23

 **171-A:23 Revocation of Conditional Discharge. –**
                                             
 I. If an administrator at an area agency providing continuing
services to a person conditionally discharged pursuant to RSA 171-A:22
or the administrator's designee reasonably believes that:
                                             
 (a) The person has violated a condition of the discharge; or
                                             
 (b) A condition or behavior exists as a result of which the
person may pose a potentially serious likelihood of danger to others or
a potentially serious threat of substantial damage to real property, the
administrator or designee may conduct a review of the acts, behavior or
condition of the person to determine if the conditional discharge shall
be revoked. The review may be conducted only after the person has been
given written and verbal notice of the belief, and the reasons for such
belief, that a violation of the conditional discharge has occurred or
other circumstance or condition exists which may result in a potentially
serious likelihood of danger to others or a potentially serious threat
of substantial damage to real property, and the person has been given an
opportunity to provide information to the administrator or designee as
to why the revocation should not occur.
                                             
 II. If the person refuses or is otherwise unavailable for the review
under paragraph I, the administrator or other representative of the area
agency may sign a complaint for delivery of the person for the review.
The complaint and the written notice required by paragraph I shall be
provided to a law enforcement officer who shall take custody of the
person and immediately deliver such person to the place specified in the
complaint.
                                             
 III. If the administrator or designee, following the review, finds
that either the person has violated a condition of the discharge or a
condition or behavior exists as a result of which the person may pose a
potentially serious likelihood of danger to others or a potentially
serious threat of substantial damage to real property, he or she may
temporarily revoke the conditional discharge. If the conditional
discharge is temporarily revoked, the administrator or designee shall
inform the person affected verbally and in writing, giving the reasons
for the revocation and shall identify the receiving facility to which
the person is to be delivered.
                                             
 IV. A law enforcement officer shall take custody of the person whose
conditional discharge was temporarily revoked under paragraph II and
deliver the person, together with a copy of the notice and the reasons
for the temporary revocation, to the receiving facility identified by
the administrator or designee where the reasons for temporary revocation
of the discharge shall be reviewed. Following such review, if the
administrator of the receiving facility or designee finds that either
the person conditionally discharged has violated a condition of the
discharge or a condition or behavior exists as a result of which the
person may pose a potentially serious likelihood of danger to others or
a potentially serious threat of substantial damage to real property, the
administrator or designee may revoke absolutely the conditional
discharge and shall provide to the person written and verbal notice of
the reasons for the absolute revocation. Following such revocation the
person shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the order of
involuntary admission from which conditional discharge was granted as if
the conditional discharge had not been granted.
                                             
 V. If the administrator or designee performing a review under
paragraph III or paragraph IV finds no basis for temporary or absolute
revocation of the discharge, the person shall be returned by the program
or facility which has custody of the person to the location where the
person was initially taken into custody or to another location agreed to
by the person.

**Source.** 1994, 408:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 171-A:24

 **171-A:24 Review by Chief Administrator; Appeal; Rules. –** A
person whose conditional discharge is revoked pursuant to RSA 171-A:23
may appeal the decision to the chief administrator of the state
developmental services system. The person shall be entitled to a hearing
on the appeal, before the chief administrator of the state developmental
services system or designee, within 5 days, excluding weekends and
holidays, of the receipt of request for the hearing in accordance with
rules adopted by the chief administrator pursuant to RSA 541-A. Such
rules shall include provision for legal counsel and for waiver of the
hearing.

**Source.** 1994, 408:8. 1995, 310:133, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 171-A:25

 **171-A:25 Action for Discharge. –** Any person subject to an order
for involuntary admission pursuant to RSA 171-B:12 may file in probate
court a petition setting forth such person's name, the underlying
circumstances and date of the prior order of the court ordering such
person's involuntary admission, a request for discharge from involuntary
admission, and the reasons for such request. The petition shall be
accompanied by the certificate of a physician, psychiatrist, or
psychologist with experience and training in developmental and
intellectual disabilities stating that the person is no longer in need
of involuntary admission and setting forth the facts upon which such
opinion is based. Upon receipt of the petition and the certificate, the
court shall conduct a hearing pursuant to RSA 171-B.

**Source.** 1994, 408:8. 2008, 52:16, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 171-A:26

 **171-A:26 Habeas Corpus. –** RSA 171-A:25 shall not be construed to
deprive any person of the benefits of the writ of habeas corpus. If the
court issuing the writ of habeas corpus grants relief, the court shall
enter an order discharging the person and shall transmit a certified
copy of it to the probate court entering the original order of
involuntary admission. Upon receipt of the certified copy, the probate
court shall enter an order finding that such person has been discharged
by order of the court.

**Source.** 1994, 408:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 171-A:27

 **171-A:27 Custody and Transportation. –**
                                             
 I. Any law enforcement officer shall take custody of persons who are
subject to proceedings for involuntary admission under the following
circumstances:
                                             
 (a) Upon issuance by an administrator or designee of a complaint
for delivery for review pursuant to RSA 171-A:23, II;
                                             
 (b) Upon a determination to revoke a conditional discharge
temporarily pursuant to RSA 171-A:23, III; or
                                             
 (c) As necessary to ensure the presence of the person at hearings
or examinations conducted under RSA 171-A or 171-B, to effect a transfer
between receiving facilities, or to carry out any other lawful order of
a court.
                                             
 II. A law enforcement officer shall also transport any person taken
into custody to the appropriate receiving facility, court, place of
examination, or other location.

**Source.** 1994, 408:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 171-A:28

 **171-A:28 Duty to Transport. –** Upon request, the office of the
sheriff of the county in which any person is located who is to be taken
into custody in accordance with RSA 171-A:27 shall take such person into
custody and transport that person to the appropriate destination.

**Source.** 1994, 408:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 171-A:29

 **171-A:29 Rights Guaranteed. –** All rights guaranteed by RSA 171-A
to persons with developmental disabilities shall be retained by persons
involuntarily admitted under RSA 171-B except where safety or security
mandates restriction of such rights. Any restriction of rights under
this section may be appealed to the commissioner pursuant to rules
adopted by the commissioner under RSA 171-A:3.

**Source.** 1994, 408:8. 1995, 310:172, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

Autism Registry
---------------

### Section 171-A:30

 **171-A:30 Autism Registry. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be established a state registry in the department
which shall include a record of all reported cases of autism spectrum
disorder (ASD) that occur in New Hampshire and other information
relevant and appropriate to conduct thorough and complete epidemiologic
surveys of ASD, to enable analysis of this problem, and to facilitate
planning for services to children with ASD and their families. The
department may enter into an agreement with an appropriate entity for
the management of the registry; provided, that any records and data
submitted to the department pursuant to this subdivision shall be the
property of the department.
                                             
 II. Physicians, psychologists, and any other licensed or certified
health care provider who is qualified by training to make the diagnosis
and who then makes the diagnosis that a child is affected with ASD shall
report all new cases of this diagnosis to the department in a form and
manner prescribed by the commissioner. The report shall be in writing
and shall include the name and address of the person submitting the
report and the child's date of birth, gender, and zip code at birth
residence, and the specific diagnosis of the child diagnosed as having
ASD. The department shall assign a unique identification code to
identify the child diagnosed as having ASD. The code shall not include
the name or address of the child.
                                             
 III. All information required to be reported under this subdivision
shall be confidential. A physician, psychologist, or health care
provider providing information to the department in accordance with this
section shall not be deemed to be, or held liable for, divulging
confidential information.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section shall be construed to compel a child who
has been reported as affected with ASD to submit to medical or health
examination or supervision by the department.

**Source.** 2006, 106:2, eff. Aug. 7, 2006.

### Section 171-A:31

 **171-A:31 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Procedures for reporting cases of ASD under RSA 171-A:30.
                                             
 II. Content of all forms required under this subdivision.
                                             
 III. Confidentiality of records and information reported pursuant to
this subdivision.

**Source.** 2006, 106:2, eff. Aug. 7, 2006.

New Hampshire Council on Autism Spectrum Disorders
--------------------------------------------------

### Section 171-A:32

 **171-A:32 New Hampshire Council on Autism Spectrum Disorders
Established; Duties. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a council on autism spectrum disorders to
provide leadership in promoting comprehensive and quality education,
health care, and services for individuals with autism spectrum disorders
and their families. The members of the council shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) The governor, or designee.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner of the department of education, or
designee.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (d) The director of the division of public health services,
department of health and human services, or designee.
                                             
 (e) The bureau chief of the bureau of developmental services,
department of health and human services, or designee.
                                             
 (f) The bureau chief of the bureau of behavioral health,
department of health and human services, or designee.
                                             
 (g) The director of the division of instruction, department of
education, or designee.
                                             
 (h) The director of the division of career technology and adult
learning, department of education, or designee.
                                             
 (i) The director of the Institute on Disability, University of
New Hampshire, or designee.
                                             
 (j) A special education director, appointed by the New Hampshire
Association of Special Education Administrators, Inc.
                                             
 (k) The president of the New Hampshire Medical Society, or
designee.
                                             
 (l) A representative of the New Hampshire Developmental
Disabilities Council, appointed by the council.
                                             
 (m) A representative of the New Hampshire chapter of the national
Autism Society, appointed by the chapter.
                                             
 (n) An individual who has an autism spectrum disorder, appointed
by the governor.
                                             
 (o) A family member of a person who has an autism spectrum
disorder, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (p) A representative of the Community Support Network, Inc.,
appointed by such organization.
                                             
 (q) A representative of the New Hampshire Psychological
Association, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (r) The director of the office of Medicaid business and policy,
department of health and human services, or designee.
                                             
 (s) A representative of the Autistic Self Advocacy Network who is
a New Hampshire stakeholder, appointed by the network.
                                             
 (t) One additional member, appointed by the council.
                                             
 (u) A person who has an autism spectrum disorder, appointed by
the council.
                                             
 (v) A representative of the New Hampshire Nurses' Association,
appointed by the association.
                                             
 (w) A licensed speech-language pathologist, appointed by the New
Hampshire Speech-Language-Hearing Association, Inc.
                                             
 II. The council shall:
                                             
 (a) Provide leadership on training, policy, research, and
coordination of supports and services for individuals and their
families.
                                             
 (b) Provide information to families and individuals with autism
spectrum disorder about evidenced-based and promising practices for
community-based education, support, and treatment.
                                             
 (c) Collaborate with schools and other service systems to
identify exemplary supports and services and promote successful
practices throughout New Hampshire.
                                             
 (d) Increase resources for individuals with autism spectrum
disorders and their families by accessing federal and state grants and
pursuing development opportunities through foundations, corporations,
and planned giving.
                                             
 (e) Serve as an information clearinghouse for individuals,
families, and providers seeking diagnosticians, behavioral specialists,
speech pathologists, occupational therapists, psychologists, and others
who have expertise in working with individuals with autism spectrum
disorders.
                                             
 (f) Encourage the establishment of regional collaboratives with
representation from educational, health care, and community service
providers to ensure that individuals with autism spectrum disorders and
their families receive necessary services.
                                             
 (g) Make an annual report beginning on April 1, 2009 to the
governor, the speaker of the house of representatives, the president of
the senate, the commissioners of the department of health and human
services and department of education, the members of the house
committees on education, health, human services and elderly affairs, and
finance, and the members of the senate committees on education, health
and human services, and finance.
                                             
 III. The department of health and human services shall provide
administrative support to the council.

**Source.** 2008, 190:1. 2013, 11:1-3, eff. July 6, 2013.

Developmental Services Quality Council
--------------------------------------

### Section 171-A:33

 **171-A:33 Developmental Services Quality Council Established;
Membership; Duties. –**
                                             
 I. There is established the developmental services quality council
to provide leadership for consistent, systemic review and improvement of
the quality of the developmental disability and acquired brain disorder
services provided within New Hampshire's developmental services system.
At least 51 percent of the members of the council shall be individuals
with disabilities served by the system or parents of individuals served
by the system. The members of the council shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (b) A representative of People First of New Hampshire, appointed
by such organization.
                                             
 (c) A representative of Advocates Building Lasting Equality in
New Hampshire (ABLE NH), appointed by such organization.
                                             
 (d) A representative of the New Hampshire council on autism
spectrum disorders who shall be either the individual who has an autism
spectrum disorder or the family member of a person who has an autism
spectrum disorder, appointed by the council.
                                             
 (e) A representative of the Brain Injury Association of New
Hampshire, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (f) Two representatives of the New Hampshire Developmental
Disabilities Council, at least one of whom shall be a person with a
developmental disability, appointed by the council.
                                             
 (g) Three representatives of local Family Support Councils,
appointed by the state Family Support Council.
                                             
 (h) One direct support professional and one enhanced family care
provider, appointed by the New Hampshire Developmental Disabilities
Council.
                                             
 (i) Three representatives of area agency boards of directors
including at least 2 persons with a developmental disability or family
members of such persons, appointed by the Community Support Network
Incorporated.
                                             
 (j) A representative of the Community Support Network
Incorporated, appointed by such organization.
                                             
 (k) A representative of the Private Provider Network, appointed
by such organization.
                                             
 (l) The director of the Institute on Disability, University of
New Hampshire, or designee.
                                             
 (m) A representative of the Disabilities Rights Center, appointed
by the center.
                                             
 II. The groups represented under paragraph I are encouraged to
provide, according to their ability, the in-kind and other resources
necessary for the council to succeed. The council may request
information and analysis on quality from the department of health and
human services, area agencies, and providers. The council shall have
access to all non-confidential information on quality for services
funded all or in part by public funds.
                                             
 III. The council shall regularly review information on the quality
of developmental services in New Hampshire and make recommendations for
improving service quality and the quality assurance and continuous
improvement systems, including but not limited to:
                                             
 (a) Standards of quality and performance expected of area
agencies and provider agencies.
                                             
 (b) Types of data to be collected, analyzed, and disseminated to
determine whether standards are being met.
                                             
 (c) Quality assurance and oversight mechanisms to be used to
gather data and information.
                                             
 (d) Content, frequency, and recipients of quality evaluation and
improvement reports.
                                             
 (e) Expectations and procedures for following up on identified
areas where improvements are needed.
                                             
 (f) Structures, policies, rules, and practices, including
staffing or organizational changes, to ensure that the developmental
services system works as intended in RSA 171-A:1, including:
                                             
 (1) Ways of supporting values-based and person-centered
service planning and provision, as well as problem solving, innovation,
and learning;
                                             
 (2) Recognizing and disseminating what is working well
(best/model practices); and
                                             
 (3) Reviewing, interpreting, and disseminating data and
information on a regular basis to bring about transparency for all
stakeholders and the public.
                                             
 IV. The council shall make an annual report beginning on November 1,
2010 that includes its recommendations and an assessment of the actions
taken in response to previous recommendations to the governor, the
speaker of the house of representatives, the president of the senate,
the members of the house committee on health, human services and elderly
affairs and the members of the senate committee on health and human
services.
                                             
 V. The meetings shall be convened by the commissioner of the
department of health and human services, or designee, and shall meet
regularly as determined by the council. The meetings shall be open to
the public and subject to the provisions of RSA 91-A, the right-to-know
law. The council may establish bylaws for governing its meetings,
decisions, and other operations.

**Source.** 2009, 104:1, eff. Aug. 14, 2009. 2014, 102:1, eff. Aug. 10,
2014.
