---
title: 'CHAPTER 173-C CONFIDENTIAL COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN VICTIMS AND COUNSELORS'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 173-C
                                             
CONFIDENTIAL COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN VICTIMS AND COUNSELORS
----------------------------------------------------------

### Section 173-C:1

 **173-C:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Confidential communication'' means information transmitted
between a victim, as defined in paragraph VI, of an alleged sexual
assault, alleged domestic abuse, alleged sexual harassment, or alleged
stalking, and a sexual assault or domestic violence counselor in the
course of that relationship and in confidence by means which, so far as
the victim is aware, does not disclose the information to a third
person. The presence of an interpreter for the hearing impaired, a
foreign language interpreter, or any other interpreter necessary for
that communication to take place shall not affect the confidentiality of
the communication nor shall it be deemed a waiver of the privilege. The
term includes all information received by the sexual assault or domestic
violence counselor in the course of that relationship.
                                             
 II. "Domestic violence center'' means any organization or agency
which would qualify as a direct service grantee under RSA 173-B:21.
                                             
 III. "Domestic violence counselor'' means any person who is employed
or appointed or who volunteers in a domestic violence center who renders
support, counseling, or assistance to victims of domestic abuse or
attempted domestic abuse, who has satisfactorily completed 30 hours of
training in a bona fide program which has been developed by a center as
defined in RSA 173-C:1, II.
                                             
 IV. "Rape crisis center'' means any public or private agency,
office, or center that primarily offers assistance to victims of sexual
assault and their families and provides all the following services:
                                             
 (a) Crisis intervention to victims of sexual assault 24 hours per
day.
                                             
 (b) Support services to victims of sexual assault by trained
volunteers during the hospital examination, police investigation, and
court proceedings.
                                             
 (c) Referral of victims of sexual assault to public and private
agencies offering needed services.
                                             
 (d) The establishment of peer counseling services for the victims
of sexual assault.
                                             
 (e) The development of training programs and the standardization
of procedures for law enforcement, hospital, legal and social service
personnel to enable them to respond appropriately to the needs of
victims.
                                             
 (f) The coordination of services which are being provided by
existing agencies.
                                             
 (g) Education of the public about the nature and scope of sexual
assault and the services which are available.
                                             
 (h) Development of services to meet the needs of special
populations, for example, children, the elderly, and minorities.
                                             
 (i) Court advocacy through the criminal justice system.
                                             
 V. "Sexual assault counselor'' means any person who is employed or
appointed or who volunteers in a rape crisis center who renders support,
counseling, or assistance to victims of sexual assault or attempted
sexual assault, who has satisfactorily completed 30 hours of training in
a bona fide program which has been developed by a rape crisis center as
defined in RSA 173-C:1, IV.
                                             
 VI. "Victim'' means any person alleging sexual assault under RSA
632-A, domestic abuse as defined in RSA 173-B:1, stalking under RSA
633:3-a, or sexual harassment as defined under state or federal law, who
consults a sexual assault counselor or a domestic violence counselor for
the purpose of securing support, counseling or assistance concerning a
mental, physical, emotional, legal, housing, medical, or financial
problem caused by an alleged act of sexual assault or domestic abuse,
stalking, or sexual harassment, or an alleged attempted sexual assault
or domestic abuse.

**Source.** 1985, 98:1. 1990, 241:7. 1998, 345:1, 2. 1999, 240:4, eff.
Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-C:2

 **173-C:2 Privilege. –**
                                             
 I. A victim has the privilege to refuse to disclose and to prevent
any other person from disclosing a confidential communication made by
the victim to a sexual assault counselor or a domestic violence
counselor, including any record made in the course of support,
counseling, or assistance of the victim. Any confidential communication
or record may be disclosed only with the prior written consent of the
victim. This privilege terminates upon the death of the victim.
                                             
 I-a. The privilege and confidentiality under paragraph I shall
extend to:
                                             
 (a) A third person present to assist communication with the
victim.
                                             
 (b) A third person present to assist a victim who is physically
challenged.
                                             
 (c) Co-participants in support group counseling of the victim.
                                             
 II. Persons prevented from disclosing a confidential communication
or record pursuant to paragraph I shall be exempt from the provisions of
RSA 631:6.

**Source.** 1985, 98:1. 1990, 241:8. 1994, 259:10, eff. June 2, 1994.

### Section 173-C:3

 **173-C:3 Assertion or Waiver of Privilege. –** The privilege may be
claimed or waived in all civil, administrative, and criminal legal
proceedings, including discovery proceedings, by the following persons:
                                             
 I. The victim or an attorney on the victim's behalf.
                                             
 II. The guardian of the victim, if the victim has been found
incompetent by a court of competent jurisdiction.
                                             
 III. A minor victim who is emancipated, married, or over the age of
15, unless, in the opinion of the court, the minor is incapable of
knowingly waiving the privilege. A guardian ad litem shall be appointed
in all cases in which there is a potential conflict of interest between
a victim under the age of 18 and his parent or guardian.

**Source.** 1985, 98:1, eff. May 10, 1985.

### Section 173-C:4

 **173-C:4 Partial Waiver. –** Waiver as to a specific portion of
communication between the victim and the counselor shall not constitute
a waiver of the privilege as to other portions of the confidential
communication between victim and counselor, relating to the alleged
crime.

**Source.** 1985, 98:1, eff. May 10, 1985.

### Section 173-C:5

 **173-C:5 Limitation on the Privilege; Criminal Proceedings. –** In
criminal proceedings when a defendant seeks information privileged under
this chapter in discovery or at trial, the procedure below shall be
followed:
                                             
 I. A written pretrial motion shall be made by the defendant to the
court stating that the defendant seeks discovery of records of a rape
crisis center or domestic violence center or testimony of a sexual
assault counselor or domestic violence counselor. The written motion
shall be accompanied by an affidavit setting forth specific grounds as
to why discovery is requested and showing that there is a substantial
likelihood that favorable and admissible information would be obtained
through discovery or testimony. No discovery or hearing shall occur
pursuant to the information sought to be disclosed for at least 3
business days after the filing of a motion for disclosure.
                                             
 II. The only information subject to discovery from the records of a
rape crisis center or a domestic violence center or which may be
elicited during the testimony of a sexual assault or domestic violence
counselor are those statements of the victim which relate to the alleged
crime being prosecuted in the instant trial.
                                             
 III. Prior to admission of information at deposition, trial, or
other legal proceeding, when a claim of privilege has been asserted and
whether or not the information was obtained through discovery, the
burden of proof shall be upon the defendant to establish by a
preponderance of the evidence that:
                                             
 (a) The probative value of the information, in the context of the
particular case, outweighs its prejudicial effect on the victim's
emotional or physical recovery, privacy, or relationship with the
counselor or the rape crisis or domestic violence center.
                                             
 (b) That the information sought is unavailable from any other
source.
                                             
 (c) That there is a substantial probability that the failure to
disclose that information will interfere with the defendant's right to
confront the witnesses against him and his right to a fair trial.
                                             
 IV. The trial court shall review each motion for disclosure of
information on a case by case basis and determine on the totality of the
circumstances that the information sought is or is not subject to the
privilege established in RSA 173-C:2. In finding that the privilege
shall not apply in a particular case, the trial court shall make written
findings as to its reasons therefor.
                                             
 V. The records and testimony of a rape crisis center or domestic
violence center shall be disclosed solely to the trial judge to
determine, as a matter of law, whether the information contained in the
records or testimony is admissible under this chapter.
                                             
 VI. That portion of any record and testimony of a rape crisis center
or domestic violence center which is not disclosed to the defendant
shall be preserved by the court under seal for appeal. For the purpose
of preservation, a copy of the record shall be retained with the
original released to the center. Costs of duplication shall be borne by
the defendant.
                                             
 VII. If, after disclosure of privileged information, the court
upholds the privilege claim, the court shall impose a protective order
against revealing any of the information without the consent of the
person authorized to permit disclosure.

**Source.** 1985, 98:1, eff. May 10, 1985.

### Section 173-C:6

 **173-C:6 Locations of Centers Privileged. –** Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this chapter, the location and the street address of
a rape crisis center or domestic violence center are absolutely
privileged.

**Source.** 1985, 98:1, eff. May 10, 1985.

### Section 173-C:7

 **173-C:7 Involuntary Waiver. –** The privilege established by this
chapter shall not apply when the sexual assault counselor or the
domestic violence counselor has knowledge that the victim has given
perjured testimony and when the defendant has made an offer of proof
that there is probable cause to believe that perjury has been committed.

**Source.** 1985, 98:1, eff. May 10, 1985.

### Section 173-C:8

 **173-C:8 Failure to Testify. –** Failure of any person to testify
as a witness pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not give
rise to an inference unfavorable to the prosecution or the defense.

**Source.** 1985, 98:1, eff. May 10, 1985.

### Section 173-C:9

 **173-C:9 Appeal. –** The victim shall have a right to interlocutory
appeal to the supreme court from any decision by a court to require the
disclosure of records or testimony of a rape crisis or domestic violence
center or sexual assault or domestic violence counselor.

**Source.** 1985, 98:1, eff. May 10, 1985.

### Section 173-C:10

 **173-C:10 Counselor's Duty to Report Child Abuse. –** The domestic
violence or sexual assault counselor shall have the same reporting
duties under RSA 169-C:29 as other professionals, providing that this
duty shall not apply where a minor is seeking relief pursuant to RSA
173-B:3 for abuse by a spouse or former spouse of the minor, or by an
intimate partner who is not related to the minor by consanguinity or
affinity. As used in this section, "abuse'' and "intimate partners''
shall be as defined in RSA 173-B:1.

**Source.** 1985, 98:1. 1994, 259:11, eff. June 2, 1994.
