---
title: 'CHAPTER 173-B PROTECTION OF PERSONS FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE'
---

TITLE XII
                                             
PUBLIC SAFETY AND WELFARE
=========================

CHAPTER 173-B
                                             
PROTECTION OF PERSONS FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
--------------------------------------------

### Section 173-B:1

 **173-B:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Abuse'' means the commission or attempted commission of one or
more of the acts described in subparagraphs (a) through (h) by a family
or household member or by a current or former sexual or intimate
partner, where such conduct is determined to constitute a credible
present threat to the petitioner's safety. The court may consider
evidence of such acts, regardless of their proximity in time to the
filing of the petition, which, in combination with recent conduct,
reflects an ongoing pattern of behavior which reasonably causes or has
caused the petitioner to fear for his or her safety or well-being:
                                             
 (a) Assault or reckless conduct as defined in RSA 631:1 through
RSA 631:3.
                                             
 (b) Criminal threatening as defined in RSA 631:4.
                                             
 (c) Sexual assault as defined in RSA 632-A:2 through RSA
632-A:5.
                                             
 (d) Interference with freedom as defined in RSA 633:1 through RSA
633:3-a.
                                             
 (e) Destruction of property as defined in RSA 634:1 and RSA
634:2.
                                             
 (f) Unauthorized entry as defined in RSA 635:1 and RSA 635:2.
                                             
 (g) Harassment as defined in RSA 644:4.
                                             
 (h) Cruelty to animals as defined in RSA 644:8.
                                             
 II. "Applicant'' means any private, town, city, or regional agency
or organization applying for funds under RSA 173-B:16.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 IV. "Contact'' means any action to communicate with another either
directly or indirectly, including, but not limited to, using any form of
electronic communication, leaving items, or causing another to
communicate in such fashion.
                                             
 V. "Coordinator'' means the agency or organization appointed by the
commissioner to administer the domestic violence grant program.
                                             
 VI. "Cross orders for relief'' means separate orders granted to
parties in a domestic violence situation where each of the parties has
filed a petition pursuant to this chapter on allegations arising from
the same incident or incidents of domestic violence.
                                             
 VII. "Deadly weapon'' means "deadly weapon'' as defined in RSA
625:11, V.
                                             
 VIII. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 IX. "Domestic violence'' means abuse as defined in RSA 173-B:1, I.
                                             
 X. "Family or household member'' means:
                                             
 (a) Spouses, ex-spouses, persons cohabiting with each other, and
persons who cohabited with each other but who no longer share the same
residence.
                                             
 (b) Parents and other persons related by consanguinity or
affinity, other than minor children who reside with the defendant.
                                             
 XI. "Firearm'' means any weapon, including a starter gun, which will
or is designed to or may readily be converted to expel a projectile by
force of gunpowder.
                                             
 XII. "Foreign protective order'' means an order enforceable under
RSA 173-B:13.
                                             
 XIII. "Fund'' means the special fund for domestic violence programs
established by RSA 173-B:15.
                                             
 XIV. "Grantee'' means any private, town, city, or regional agency or
organization receiving funds under RSA 173-B:16.
                                             
 XV. "Intimate partners'' means persons currently or formerly
involved in a romantic relationship, whether or not such relationship
was ever sexually consummated.
                                             
 XVI. "Mutual order for relief'' means an order restraining both
parties from abusing the other originating from a petition filed by one
of the parties and arising from the same incident or incidents of
domestic violence.
                                             
 XVII. "Program'' means services or facilities provided to domestic
violence victims.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3. 2010, 289:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2011. 2014, 238:1, 2,
eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 173-B:2

 **173-B:2 Jurisdiction and Venue. –**
                                             
 I. The district division and the judicial branch family division of
the circuit courts shall have concurrent jurisdiction over all
proceedings under this chapter.
                                             
 II. If the plaintiff has left the household or premises to avoid
further abuse, the plaintiff shall have the option to commence
proceedings pursuant to RSA 173-B:3 in the county or district where the
plaintiff temporarily resides.
                                             
 III. Proceedings under this chapter may be transferred to another
court upon the motion of any party or of the court as the interests of
justice or the convenience of the parties may require.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1999, 240:3. 2013, 62:1, 10, I, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 173-B:3

 **173-B:3 Commencement of Proceedings; Hearing. –**
                                             
 I. Any person may seek relief pursuant to RSA 173-B:5 by filing a
petition, in the county or district where the plaintiff or defendant
resides, alleging abuse by the defendant. Any person filing a petition
containing false allegations of abuse shall be subject to criminal
penalties. Notice of the pendency of the action and of the facts alleged
against the defendant shall be given to the defendant, either personally
or as provided in paragraph III. The plaintiff shall be permitted to
supplement or amend the petition only if the defendant is provided an
opportunity prior to the hearing to respond to the supplemental or
amended petition. All petitions filed under this section shall include
the home and work telephone numbers of the defendant, if known. Notice
of the whereabouts of the plaintiff shall not be revealed except by
order of the court for good cause shown. Any answer by the defendant
shall be filed with the court and a copy shall be provided to the
plaintiff by the court.
                                             
 II. (a) The minority of the plaintiff shall not preclude the court
from issuing protective orders against a present or former intimate
partner, spouse, or ex-spouse under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) A minor plaintiff need not be accompanied by a parent or
guardian to receive relief or services under this chapter.
                                             
 III. No filing fee or fee for service of process shall be charged
for a petition or response under this section, and the plaintiff or
defendant may proceed without legal counsel. Either a peace officer or
the sheriff's department shall serve process under this section. Any
proceeding under this chapter shall not preclude any other available
civil or criminal remedy.
                                             
 IV. The clerks of the circuit courts shall supply forms for
petitions and for relief under this chapter designed to facilitate pro
se proceedings. All such petitions shall contain the following words: I
swear that the foregoing information is true and correct to the best of
my knowledge. I understand that making a false statement on this
petition will subject me to criminal penalties.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. The findings of facts shall be final, but questions of law may
be transferred from the circuit court to the supreme court.
                                             
 VII. (a) The court shall hold a hearing within 30 days of the filing
of a petition under this section or within 10 days of service of process
upon the defendant, whichever occurs later.
                                             
 (b) The time frame established in this paragraph may be extended
for an additional 10 days upon motion by either party for good cause
shown. A recusal by the judge or any act of God or closing of the court
that interferes with the originally scheduled hearing shall not be cause
for the dismissal of the petition. The court shall reschedule any
hearing under this section in an expeditious manner.
                                             
 VIII. In any proceeding under this chapter, the court shall not be
bound by the technical rules of evidence and may admit evidence which it
considers relevant and material.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3. 2007, 284:1. 2013, 62:2, 3, 10, II, eff. Jan.
1, 2014.

### Section 173-B:4

 **173-B:4 Temporary Relief. –**
                                             
 I. Upon a showing of an immediate and present danger of abuse, the
court may enter temporary orders to protect the plaintiff with or
without actual notice to defendant. The court may issue such temporary
orders by telephone or facsimile. Such telephonically issued orders
shall be made by a circuit court judge to a law enforcement officer,
shall be valid in any jurisdiction in the state, and shall be effective
until the close of the next regular court business day. Such orders
shall be returnable to the circuit court where the plaintiff resides or
to which the plaintiff has fled, unless otherwise ordered by the issuing
judge. If non-telephonic temporary orders are made ex parte, the party
against whom such relief is issued may file a written request with the
clerk of the court and request a hearing on such orders. Such hearing
shall be held no less than 3 business days and no more than 5 business
days after the request is received by the clerk. Such hearings may
constitute the final hearing described in RSA 173-B:3, VII. Such
temporary relief may direct the defendant to relinquish to a peace
officer any and all firearms and ammunition in the control, ownership,
or possession of the defendant, or any other person on behalf of the
defendant for the duration of the protective order. Other temporary
relief may include:
                                             
 (a) Protective orders:
                                             
 (1) Restraining the defendant from abusing the plaintiff.
                                             
 (2) Restraining the defendant from entering the premises and
curtilage where the plaintiff resides, except when the defendant is
accompanied by a peace officer and, upon reasonable notice to the
plaintiff, is allowed entry by the plaintiff for the sole purpose of
retrieving toiletries, medication, clothing, business equipment, and any
other items as determined by the court.
                                             
 (3) Restraining the defendant from withholding items of the
plaintiff's personal property which are specified in the order. A peace
officer shall accompany the plaintiff in retrieving such property to
protect the plaintiff.
                                             
 (4) Awarding custody of minor children to either party or,
upon actual notice, to the department when it is in the best interest of
a child.
                                             
 (5) Denying the defendant visitation, ordering that visitation
shall take place only at a supervised visitation center that uses a
metal detection device and has trained security personnel on-site,
ordering that visitation shall be supervised, or ordering a specific
visitation schedule. Visitation shall only be ordered on an ex parte
basis where such order can be entered consistent with the following
requirements. In determining whether visitation can be safely ordered,
the court shall consider the following factors:
                                             
 (A) The degree to which visitation exposes the plaintiff or
the children to physical or psychological harm.
                                             
 (B) Whether the risk of physical or psychological harm can
be removed by ordering supervised visitation or by ordering supervised
visitation at a center that uses a metal detection device and has
trained security personnel on-site.
                                             
 (C) Whether visitation can be ordered without requiring the
plaintiff and defendant to have contact regarding the exchange of
children.
                                             
 (6) Restraining the defendant from contacting the plaintiff or
entering the plaintiff's place of employment, school, or any specified
place frequented regularly by the plaintiff or by any family or
household member.
                                             
 (7) Restraining the defendant from abusing the plaintiff,
plaintiff's relatives, regardless of their place of residence, or
plaintiff's household members in any way.
                                             
 (8) Restraining the defendant from taking, converting, or
damaging property in which the plaintiff may have a legal or equitable
interest.
                                             
 (9) Directing the defendant to relinquish to the peace
officer, in addition to the relief specified in RSA 173-B:4, I, any and
all deadly weapons specified in the protective order that are in the
control, ownership, or possession of the defendant, or any other person
on behalf of the defendant, for the duration of the protective order.
                                             
 (10) Granting the petitioner exclusive care, custody, or
control of any animal owned, possessed, leased, kept, or held by the
petitioner, defendant, or a minor child in either household, and
ordering the defendant to stay away from the animal and forbidding the
defendant from taking, transferring, encumbering, concealing, committing
an act of cruelty or neglect, or disposing of the animal.
                                             
 (b) Other relief, including but not limited to:
                                             
 (1) Awarding to the plaintiff the exclusive use and possession
of an automobile, home, and household furniture, if the defendant has
the legal duty to support the plaintiff or the plaintiff's minor
children, or the plaintiff has contributed to the household expenses.
The court shall consider the type and amount of contribution to be a
factor.
                                             
 (2) Restraining the defendant from taking any action which
would lead to the disconnection of any and all utilities and services to
the parties' household, or the discontinuance of existing business or
service contracts, including, but not limited to, mortgage or rental
agreements.
                                             
 II. The defendant may be prohibited from purchasing, receiving, or
possessing any deadly weapons and any and all firearms and ammunition
for the duration of the order. The court may subsequently issue a search
warrant authorizing the peace officer to seize any deadly weapons
specified in the protective order and any and all firearms and
ammunition, if there is probable cause to believe such firearms and
ammunition and specified deadly weapons are kept on the premises or
curtilage of the defendant and if the court has reason to believe that
all such firearms and ammunition and specified deadly weapons have not
been relinquished by the defendant.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3. 2013, 62:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2014. 2014, 107:1,
eff. June 11, 2014; 238:3, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 173-B:5

 **173-B:5 Relief. –**
                                             
 I. A finding of abuse shall mean the defendant represents a credible
threat to the safety of the plaintiff. Upon a showing of abuse of the
plaintiff by a preponderance of the evidence, the court shall grant such
relief as is necessary to bring about a cessation of abuse. Such relief
shall direct the defendant to relinquish to the peace officer any and
all firearms and ammunition in the control, ownership, or possession of
the defendant, or any other person on behalf of the defendant for the
duration of the protective order. Other relief may include:
                                             
 (a) Protective orders:
                                             
 (1) Restraining the defendant from abusing the plaintiff.
                                             
 (2) Restraining the defendant from entering the premises and
curtilage where the plaintiff resides, except when the defendant is
accompanied by a peace officer and is allowed entry by the plaintiff for
the sole purpose of retrieving personal property specified by the
court.
                                             
 (3) Restraining the defendant from contacting the plaintiff or
entering the plaintiff's place of employment, school, or any specified
place frequented regularly by the plaintiff or by any family or
household member.
                                             
 (4) Restraining the defendant from abusing the plaintiff,
plaintiff's relatives, regardless of their place of residence, or
plaintiff's household members in any way.
                                             
 (5) Restraining the defendant from taking, converting, or
damaging property in which the plaintiff may have a legal or equitable
interest.
                                             
 (6) Directing the defendant to relinquish to the peace
officer, in addition to the relief specified in RSA 173-B:5, I, any and
all deadly weapons specified in the protective order that are in the
control, ownership, or possession of the defendant, or any other person
on behalf of the defendant.
                                             
 (7) Granting the petitioner exclusive care, custody, or
control of any animal owned, possessed, leased, kept, or held by the
petitioner, defendant, or a minor child in either household, and
ordering the defendant to stay away from the animal and forbidding the
defendant from taking, transferring, encumbering, concealing, committing
an act of cruelty or neglect, or disposing of the animal.
                                             
 (b) Other relief including, but not limited to:
                                             
 (1) Granting the plaintiff the exclusive use and possession of
the premises and curtilage of the plaintiff's place of residence, unless
the defendant exclusively owns or leases and pays for the premises and
the defendant has no legal duty to support the plaintiff or minor
children on the premises.
                                             
 (2) Restraining the defendant from withholding items of the
plaintiff's personal property specified by the court. A peace officer
shall accompany the plaintiff in retrieving such property to protect the
plaintiff.
                                             
 (3) Granting to the plaintiff the exclusive right of use and
possession of the household furniture, furnishings, or a specific
automobile, unless the defendant exclusively owns such personal property
and the defendant has no legal duty to support the plaintiff or minor
children.
                                             
 (4) Ordering the defendant to make automobile, insurance,
health care, utilities, rent, or mortgage payments.
                                             
 (5) Awarding temporary custody of the parties' minor children
to either party or, where appropriate, to the department, provided
that:
                                             
 (A) Where custody of the parties' minor children with the
department may be appropriate, the department shall receive actual
notice of the hearing 10 days prior to such hearing provided that, if
necessary, such hearing may be continued 10 days to provide the
department adequate notice.
                                             
 (B) The department may move at any time to rescind its
custody of the parties' minor children.
                                             
 (6) Establishing visitation rights with regard to the parties'
minor children. The court shall consider, and may impose on a custody
award, conditions necessary to assure the safety of the plaintiff and
minor children. This may include orders denying visitation, requiring
supervised visitation that shall take place only at a visitation center
that uses a metal detection device and has trained security personnel
on-site, or requiring supervised visitation, where such order can be
entered consistent with the following requirements. In determining
whether visitation shall be granted, the court shall consider whether
visitation can be exercised by the non-custodial parent without risk to
the plaintiff's or children's safety. In making such determination, the
court shall consider, in addition to any other relevant factors, the
following:
                                             
 (A) The degree to which visitation exposes the plaintiff or
the children to physical or psychological harm.
                                             
 (B) Whether the risk of physical or psychological harm can
be removed by ordering supervised visitation or by ordering supervised
visitation at a center that uses a metal detection device and has
trained security personnel on-site.
                                             
 (C) Whether visitation can be ordered without requiring the
plaintiff and defendant to have contact regarding the exchange of
children.
                                             
 (7) Directing the defendant to pay financial support to the
plaintiff or minor children, unless the defendant has no legal duty to
support the plaintiff or minor children.
                                             
 (8) Directing the abuser to engage in a batterer's
intervention program or personal counseling. If available, such
intervention and counseling program shall focus on alternatives to
aggression. The court shall not direct the plaintiff to engage in joint
counseling services with the defendant. Court-ordered and court-referred
mediation of cases involving domestic violence shall be prohibited.
                                             
 (9) Ordering the defendant to pay the plaintiff monetary
compensation for losses suffered as a direct result of the abuse which
may include, but not be limited to, loss of earnings or support, medical
and dental expenses, damage to property, out-of-pocket losses for
injuries sustained, and moving and shelter expenses.
                                             
 (10) Ordering the defendant to pay reasonable attorney's
fees.
                                             
 II. The defendant shall be prohibited from purchasing, receiving, or
possessing any deadly weapons and any and all firearms and ammunition
for the duration of the order. The court may subsequently issue a search
warrant authorizing a peace officer to seize any deadly weapons
specified in the protective order and any and all firearms and
ammunition, if there is probable cause to believe such firearms and
ammunition and specified deadly weapons are kept on the premises or
curtilage of the defendant.
                                             
 III. Reconciliation after a previous order, prior to filing the
current action, shall not be grounds for denying or terminating a new or
existing protective order. Furthermore, the court shall not deny the
plaintiff protective orders based solely on a lapse of time between an
act of domestic violence and the filing of a petition, provided that the
underlying act presents a credible threat to the plaintiff's current
safety.
                                             
 IV. No order made under this section shall supersede or affect any
court order pertaining to the possession of a residence; household
furniture; custody of children pursuant to RSA 169-B, 169-C, or 169-D;
support or custody made under RSA 458; or custody of children of unwed
parents as determined by a circuit court, or title to real or personal
property.
                                             
 V. (a) Mutual orders for relief shall not be granted. A foreign
mutual order for relief shall only be granted full faith and credit in
New Hampshire if it meets the requirements set out in RSA 173-B:13,
VII.
                                             
 (b) Cross orders for relief may be granted only if:
                                             
 (1) The court has made specific findings that each party has
committed abuse against the other; and
                                             
 (2) The court cannot determine who is the primary physical
aggressor.
                                             
 VI. Any order under this section shall be for a fixed period of time
not to exceed one year, but may be extended by order of the court upon a
motion by the plaintiff, showing good cause, with notice to the
defendant, for one year after the expiration of the first order and
thereafter each extension may be for up to 5 years, upon the request of
the plaintiff and at the discretion of the court. The court shall review
the order, and each renewal thereof and shall grant such relief as may
be necessary to provide for the safety and well-being of the plaintiff.
A defendant shall have the right to a hearing on the extension of any
order under this paragraph to be held within 30 days of the extension.
The court shall state in writing, at the respondent's request, its
reason or reasons for granting the extension. The court shall retain
jurisdiction to enforce and collect the financial support obligation
which accrued prior to the expiration of the protective order.
                                             
 VII. Both parties shall be issued written copies of any orders
issued by the court, and all orders shall bear the following language:
"A willful violation of this order is a crime, as well as contempt of
court. Violations of the protective provisions shall result in arrest
and may result in imprisonment.'' Orders shall clearly state how any
party can request a further hearing and how the plaintiff may bring a
criminal complaint or a petition for contempt if there is a violation of
any court order.
                                             
 VIII. (a) No order issued under this chapter shall be modified other
than by the court. Temporary reconciliations shall not revoke an order.
                                             
 (b) If either party wishes the defendant to be excused from any
provisions of an order of protection, the remedy is to petition the
court for modification of such order.
                                             
 (c) A defendant who is restrained from contacting the plaintiff
or entering the premises of the plaintiff is prohibited from doing so
even if invited by the plaintiff unless the restraining order has been
modified by the court.
                                             
 (d) This paragraph shall give unequivocal direction to peace
officers that orders for protection are to be enforced as written and
that no action by a party relieves them of the duty to enforce the
order.
                                             
 VIII-a. Upon issuing an order against a defendant, in which a
defendant is restrained from having any contact with the plaintiff, the
court shall advise the plaintiff that it would be unwise and possibly
unsafe for the plaintiff to contact the defendant. If the plaintiff
wishes to contact the defendant for any reason, the court shall advise
the plaintiff that such contact be made only after petitioning the court
for a modification of the order. In an emergency situation, the
plaintiff or plaintiff's family may request that the local police
department notify the defendant and the local police may accompany the
defendant to a designated location, such as a hospital, if appropriate.
                                             
 IX. (a) A copy of each protective order issued under this chapter
shall be transmitted to the administrative office of the courts by
facsimile or computer. An emergency protective order issued
telephonically shall be transmitted by telephone or facsimile to the
department of safety.
                                             
 (b) The administrative office of the courts shall enter
information regarding the protective orders into the state database
which shall be made available to police and sheriff departments
statewide. The department of safety shall make available information
regarding emergency protective orders issued telephonically to police
and sheriff departments statewide.
                                             
 (c) The administrative office of the courts shall update the
database upon expiration or termination of a protective order.
                                             
 (d) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the
administrative office of the courts or the department of safety, its
employees and agents, and law enforcement officials shall not be held
criminally or civilly liable for action taken under this chapter or RSA
458:16, provided they are acting in good faith and without gross
negligence, and within the scope of their duties and authority.
                                             
 IX-a. If a criminal records check conducted by the department of
safety indicates that a potential buyer or transferee is prohibited from
receipt or possession of a firearm pursuant to a protective order issued
under this chapter, the department of safety shall notify the
administrative office of the courts of the denial. The administrative
office of the courts shall immediately notify the plaintiff that the
defendant has attempted to purchase or obtain a firearm in violation of
the protective order.
                                             
 X. (a) Within 15 days prior to the expiration of the protective
orders, the defendant may request, by motion to the court, the return of
any and all firearms and ammunition and specified deadly weapons held by
the law enforcement agency while the protective order was in effect.
Upon receipt of such a motion, the court shall schedule a hearing no
later than 15 days after the expiration of the order. The court shall
provide written notice to the plaintiff who shall have the right to
appear and be heard, and to the law enforcement agency which has control
of the firearms, ammunition, and specified deadly weapons. The scope of
the hearing shall be limited to:
                                             
 (1) Establishing whether the defendant is subject to any state
or federal law or court order that precludes the defendant from owning
or possessing a firearm; and
                                             
 (2) Under circumstances where the plaintiff has requested an
extension of the protective order, whether the plaintiff has established
by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant continues to
represent a credible threat to the safety of the plaintiff.
                                             
 (b) If the court finds that the defendant is not subject to any
state or federal law or court order precluding the ownership or
possession of firearms, or if the court denies the plaintiff's request
to extend the protective order, the court shall issue a written order
directing the law enforcement agency to return the requested firearms,
ammunition, or deadly weapon to the defendant.
                                             
 (c) Law enforcement agencies shall not release firearms and
ammunition and specified deadly weapons without a court order granting
such release. The law enforcement agency may charge the defendant a
reasonable fee for the storage of any firearms and ammunition and
specified deadly weapons taken pursuant to a protective order. The fee
shall not exceed the actual cost incurred by the law enforcement agency
for the storage of the firearms and ammunition and specified deadly
weapons. The defendant may make alternative arrangements with a
federally licensed firearms dealer for the storage of firearms, at the
defendant's own expense, upon approval of the court. Such firearms shall
be turned over to the appropriate law enforcement agency for transfer to
the storage facility. Retrieval of such firearms shall be through the
law enforcement agency responsible for their transfer to the storage
facility pursuant to a court order as prescribed in this paragraph.
                                             
 (d) No law enforcement agency shall be held liable for alleged
damage or deterioration due to storage or transportation to any firearms
and ammunition and specified deadly weapons held by a law enforcement
agency, so long as due care is used.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3. 2000, 230:1. 2001, 189:2. 2004, 206:1. 2005,
284:1. 2006, 214:4. 2013, 62:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2014. 2014, 107:2, eff.
June 11, 2014; 238:4, eff. July 21, 2014.

### Section 173-B:5-a

 **173-B:5-a Permissible Contact. –**
                                             
 I. A protective order issued pursuant to RSA 173-B:4 or RSA 173-B:5
shall not be construed to prohibit an attorney, or any person acting on
the attorney's behalf, who is representing the defendant in an action
brought under this chapter, or in any criminal proceeding concerning the
abuse alleged under this chapter, from contacting the plaintiff for a
legitimate purpose within the scope of the civil or criminal proceeding;
provided, that the attorney or person acting on behalf of the attorney:
identifies himself or herself as a representative of the defendant;
acknowledges the existence of the protective order and informs the
plaintiff that he or she has no obligation to speak; terminates contact
with the plaintiff if the plaintiff expresses an unwillingness to talk;
and ensures that any personal contact with the plaintiff occurs outside
of the defendant's presence, unless the court has modified the
protective order to permit such contact.
                                             
 II. A no-contact provision in a protective order issued pursuant to
RSA 173-B:4 or RSA 173-B:5 shall not be construed to:
                                             
 (a) Prevent contact between counsel for represented parties; or
                                             
 (b) Prevent a party from appearing at a scheduled court or
administrative hearing; or
                                             
 (c) Prevent a defendant or defendant's counsel from sending the
plaintiff copies of any legal pleadings filed in court relating to the
domestic violence petition or related civil or criminal matters.
                                             
 III. A violation of this section may result in a finding of contempt
of court.

**Source.** 2006, 214:1, eff. July 31, 2006.

### Section 173-B:6

 **173-B:6 Guardian Ad Litem. –** In all proceedings under this
chapter, the court may appoint a guardian ad litem to represent the
interests of the children of either or both parties. The guardian ad
litem may continue to serve after the final disposition of the case.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:7

 **173-B:7 Minority Not a Preclusion for Services. –** The minority
of any individual seeking assistance from any domestic violence program,
as defined by RSA 173-B:1, shall not preclude provision of such
requested services.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:8

 **173-B:8 Notification. –**
                                             
 I. A copy of any order made under this chapter which prohibits any
person from abusing another shall be promptly transmitted to the local
law enforcement agency having jurisdiction to enforce such order.
                                             
 II. Temporary orders shall be promptly served on the defendant by a
peace officer. Subsequent orders shall be sent to the defendant's last
address of record. The defendant shall be responsible for informing the
court of any changes of address. Law enforcement agencies shall
establish procedures whereby a peace officer at the scene of an alleged
violation of such an order may be informed of the existence and terms of
such order.
                                             
 III. Any court-ordered changes or modifications of the order shall
be effective upon issuance of such changes or modifications, and shall
be mailed or otherwise provided to the appropriate local law enforcement
agency and transmitted to the department of safety within 24 hours of
the entry of such changes or modifications.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:9

 **173-B:9 Violation of Protective Order; Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. (a) When the defendant violates either a temporary or permanent
protective order issued or enforced under this chapter, peace officers
shall arrest the defendant and ensure that the defendant is detained
until arraignment, provided that in extreme circumstances, such as when
the health of the defendant would be jeopardized by the temporary
detention, a judge in response to a request by the arresting law
enforcement officer or agency, may order an alternative to detention
pending arraignment. Such arrests may be made within 12 hours without a
warrant upon probable cause, whether or not the violation is committed
in the presence of a peace officer.
                                             
 (b) Subsequent to an arrest, the peace officer shall seize any
firearms and ammunition in the control, ownership, or possession of the
defendant and any deadly weapons which may have been used, or were
threatened to be used, during the violation of the protective order. The
law enforcement agency shall maintain possession of the firearms,
ammunition, or deadly weapons until the court issues an order directing
that the firearms, ammunition, or deadly weapons be relinquished and
specifying the person to whom the firearms and ammunition or deadly
weapons will be relinquished.
                                             
 II. The prosecution and sentencing for criminal contempt for a
violation of a protective order shall not preclude the prosecution of or
sentencing for other criminal charges underlying the contempt.
                                             
 III. A person shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor if such
person knowingly violates a protective order issued under this chapter,
or RSA 458:16, III, or any foreign protective order enforceable under
the laws of this state. Charges made under this chapter shall not be
reduced to a lesser charge, as permitted in other instances under RSA
625:9.
                                             
 IV. Any person convicted under RSA 173-B:9, III, or who has been
convicted in another jurisdiction of violating a protective order
enforceable under the laws of this state, who, within 6 years of such
conviction or the completion of the sentence imposed for such
conviction, whichever is later, subsequently commits and is convicted of
one or more offenses involving abuse may be charged with an enhanced
penalty for each subsequent offense as follows:
                                             
 (a) There shall be no enhanced charge under this section if the
subsequent offense is a class A felony or an unclassified felony;
                                             
 (b) If the subsequent offense would otherwise constitute a class
B felony, it may be charged as a class A felony;
                                             
 (c) If the subsequent offense would otherwise constitute a class
A misdemeanor, it may be charged as a class B felony;
                                             
 (d) If the subsequent offense would otherwise constitute a class
B misdemeanor, it may be charged as a class A misdemeanor;
                                             
 (e) If the subsequent offense would otherwise constitute a
violation, it may be charged as a class B misdemeanor.
                                             
 V. A victim of domestic violence shall be entitled to all rights
granted to victims of crime under RSA 21-M:8-k.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3. 2002, 79:1. 2003, 219:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 173-B:10

 **173-B:10 Protection by Peace Officers. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever any peace officer has probable cause to believe that a
person has been abused, as defined in RSA 173-B:1, that officer shall
use all means within reason to prevent further abuse including, but not
limited to:
                                             
 (a) Confiscating any deadly weapons involved in the alleged
domestic abuse and any firearms and ammunition in the defendant's
control, ownership, or possession.
                                             
 (b) Transporting or obtaining transportation for the victim and
any child, to a designated place to meet with a domestic violence
counselor, local family member, or friend.
                                             
 (c) Assisting the victim in removing toiletries, medication,
clothing, business equipment, and any other items determined by the
court.
                                             
 (d) Giving the victim immediate and written notice of the rights
of victims and of the remedies and services available to victims of
domestic violence. The written notice shall include a statement
substantially as follows:
                                             
"If you are the victim of domestic violence and you believe that law
enforcement protection is needed for your physical safety, you have the
right to request that the officer assist in providing for your safety,
including asking for an emergency telephonic order for protection. You
may also request that the officer assist you in obtaining from your
premises and curtilage, toiletries, medication, clothing, business
equipment, and any other items as determined by the court, and in
locating and taking you to a local safe place including, but not limited
to, a designated meeting place to be used as a crisis center, a family
member's or friend's residence, or a similar place of safety. If you are
in need of medical treatment, you have the right to request that the
officer assist you in obtaining an ambulance. You may request a copy of
the report filed by the peace officer, at no cost, from the law
enforcement department.''
                                             
 II. Pursuant to RSA 594:10, an arrest for abuse may be made without
a warrant upon probable cause, whether or not the abuse is committed in
the presence of the peace officer. When the peace officer has probable
cause to believe that the persons are committing or have committed abuse
against each other, the officer need not arrest both persons, but should
arrest the person the officer believes to be the primary physical
aggressor. In determining who is the primary physical aggressor, an
officer shall consider the intent of this chapter to protect the victims
of domestic violence, the relative degree of injury or fear inflicted on
the persons involved, and any history of domestic abuse between these
persons if that history can reasonably be obtained by the officer.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:11

 **173-B:11 Notice to the Victim. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding the peace officer's obligations in RSA 173-B:9
and RSA 173-B:10, all peace officers shall give victims of abuse
immediate and adequate notice of their right to go to the circuit court
of their county to file a petition asking for protective orders against
the abusive person and to seek a private criminal complaint.
                                             
 II. The clerk of the court shall be responsible for advising victims
of their right to request that the judge issue an order which may
include removing any and all firearms and ammunition in the control,
ownership, or possession of the defendant and may include:
                                             
 (a) Restraining the defendant from abusing the victim.
                                             
 (b) Directing the defendant to leave and stay away from the
victim's premises and curtilage.
                                             
 (c) Giving the victim custody of any minor children, denying the
defendant visitation, or requiring that visitation be supervised to
ensure safety for the victim and minor children.
                                             
 (d) Directing the defendant to support the victim and any minor
children if the defendant has the legal responsibility to support either
or both.
                                             
 (e) Restraining the defendant from contacting the victim, or
entering the victim's place of employment, school, or any specified
place frequented regularly by the victim or by any family or household
member.
                                             
 (f) Restraining the defendant from abusing, in any way, the
victim, household members, or victim's relatives, regardless of their
place of residence.
                                             
 (g) Restraining the defendant from taking, converting, or
damaging property in which the victim may have a legal or equitable
interest.
                                             
 (h) Directing the defendant to temporarily relinquish to the
peace officer specific deadly weapons in the control, ownership, or
possession of the defendant which may have been used, or were threatened
to be used, in an incident of abuse against the victim or any member of
the victim's household.
                                             
 (i) Ordering the defendant to pay the victim monetary
compensation for losses suffered as a direct result of the abuse which
may include, but not be limited to, loss of earnings or support, medical
and dental expenses, damage to property, out-of-pocket losses for
injuries sustained, and moving and shelter expenses.
                                             
 (j) Ordering the defendant to pay reasonable attorney's fees.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3. 2013, 62:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 173-B:12

 **173-B:12 Emergency Care; Limitation and Liability. –** Any act or
omission of any peace officer rendering emergency care or assistance to
a victim of domestic violence including, but not limited to
transportation, shall not impose civil liability upon the peace officer
or the peace officer's supervisors or employer if the care or assistance
is rendered in good faith, unless the act or omission is a result of
gross negligence or willful misconduct.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:13

 **173-B:13 Orders Enforceable. –**
                                             
 I. Any protective order issued under this chapter shall be effective
throughout the state.
                                             
 II. Any protective order issued by any other state, tribal, or
territorial court related to domestic or family violence, including an
ex parte order, shall be deemed valid if the issuing court had
jurisdiction over the parties and matter under the law of the state,
tribe, or territory, and the person against whom the order was made was
given reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard. There shall be a
presumption of validity where an order appears facially valid.
                                             
 III. Any valid protective order, as defined in paragraph II, shall
be accorded full faith and credit throughout the state.
                                             
 IV. A person entitled to protection under a foreign protective
order, as defined in paragraph II, may file such order in any circuit
court by filing with the court a certified copy of the order. Such
person shall swear under oath in an affidavit to the best of such
person's knowledge that the order is presently in effect as written.
Such filing shall be without fee or cost. The clerk of the circuit court
shall forward such order to the administrative office of the courts
which shall enter such order in the state database. Such filing shall
not be a precondition to arrest or enforcement of a foreign order.
                                             
 V. A peace officer may rely upon a copy of any protective order
issued under this chapter, or under RSA 458, or upon a copy of a foreign
protective order, as defined in this section, which has been provided to
the peace officer by any source.
                                             
 VI. Law enforcement personnel may rely on the statement of the
person protected by the order that the order remains in effect as
written.
                                             
 VII. A mutual protective order issued by any other state, tribal, or
territorial court against one who has petitioned, filed a complaint, or
otherwise filed a written pleading for protection relating to domestic
or family violence shall be accorded full faith and credit only if:
                                             
 (a) A cross or counter petition, complaint, or other written
pleading was filed seeking such protection order; and
                                             
 (b) The court made specific findings of domestic or family
violence by both parties and that each party was entitled to such order.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3. 2001, 189:3. 2013, 62:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 173-B:14

 **173-B:14 Orders of Support. –**
                                             
 I. In any action determining the obligation of the obligor to
support the obligee or the parties' minor children including, but not
limited to, actions for divorce pursuant to RSA 458; determination of
parental rights and responsibilities pursuant to RSA 461-A; paternity
pursuant to RSA 168-A; child support pursuant to RSA 161-B, RSA 161-C,
and RSA 458; reimbursement of public assistance pursuant to RSA 161-C;
and the uniform interstate family support act pursuant to RSA 546-B; the
court shall take judicial notice of any support obligation established
pursuant to this chapter upon the filing of a certified copy of the
order by:
                                             
 (a) Either party to the domestic violence proceeding.
                                             
 (b) The department.
                                             
 (c) Any other agency or person legally entitled to enforce the
obligation of support for the minor children.
                                             
 II. Any circuit court order for financial support shall include
enforcement of any duly filed circuit court order from the date of
filing forward, and shall include enforcement of any arrears which have
been:
                                             
 (a) Reduced to judgment by the circuit court;
                                             
 (b) Documented by the department pursuant to an order to make
payable through the department; or
                                             
 (c) Documented by the obligee in a notarized statement, provided
that the obligor shall have 30 days to object and request a hearing on
the issue of arrears.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3. 2005, 273:13. 2013, 62:8, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 173-B:15

 **173-B:15 Fund for Domestic Violence Grant Program. –** A special
fund for domestic violence programs is established. The sole purpose of
the fund shall be to provide revenues for the domestic violence program
established in RSA 173-B:16, and shall not be available for any other
purpose. The state treasurer shall deposit all fees received by the
department under RSA 457:29 in the fund. All moneys deposited in the
fund shall be continually appropriated for the purposes of the domestic
violence grant program and shall not lapse.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:16

 **173-B:16 Grant Program Established. –** A grant program is
established within the department for the allocation of grant money to
New Hampshire programs which provide aid and assistance to victims of
domestic violence. The grant program shall be funded by the fund
established under RSA 173-B:15.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:17

 **173-B:17 Duties of the Commissioner. –** The commissioner shall:
                                             
 I. Administer the grant program established in RSA 173-B:16 through
a coordinator. The costs of administration shall be covered by the fund,
and shall not exceed 2 percent.
                                             
 II. Adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to procedures under which
interested New Hampshire programs may apply for funding.
                                             
 III. Appoint the coordinator.
                                             
 IV. Enter into a contract with the coordinator, subject to the
approval of the governor and council.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:18

 **173-B:18 Selection of Coordinator. –** The commissioner shall be
satisfied that the organization or agency chosen as the coordinator
shall be qualified to provide at least those services listed in RSA
173-B:20.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:19

 **173-B:19 Compensation for Coordinating Domestic Violence Grant
Program. –** Compensation for the functions and duties of coordinating
the program shall not exceed 30 percent of the total revenues of the
fund.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:20

 **173-B:20 Duties of Coordinator. –** The coordinator shall be a
statewide organization or agency which has demonstrated its ability, at
a minimum, to:
                                             
 I. Serve as a clearinghouse for information relating to domestic
violence.
                                             
 II. Conduct educational programs on domestic violence, both for the
general public and for specialized interest groups, such as law
enforcement and medical personnel.
                                             
 III. Provide technical assistance to local domestic violence
programs in the areas of budget, management, and other such skills.
                                             
 IV. Enlist the assistance of public and voluntary health, education,
welfare, legal, and rehabilitation agencies in a concerted effort to
prevent domestic violence.
                                             
 V. Provide coordination and supervision of programs.
                                             
 VI. Assist the commissioner in the administration of the fund.
                                             
 VII. Publicize the availability of the fund and the date by which
applications must be received, and act on all applications within 45
days of the application deadline.
                                             
 VIII. Notify each appropriate agency or organization in writing
whether or not it is eligible for funds, and specify the amount
available.
                                             
 IX. Publicize the availability of domestic violence programs to the
public.
                                             
 X. Provide training for court advocates and social services agency
advocates to accompany domestic violence victims.
                                             
 XI. Apply for and receive any federal funds for which this program
may be eligible.
                                             
 XII. Ensure, as far as possible, that grants are awarded on a
reasonable geographical basis throughout the state.
                                             
 XIII. Obtain and evaluate reports from each grantee, at least
annually, on its operations under this chapter.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:21

 **173-B:21 Criteria for Selection of Direct Service Grantees. –**
The coordinator shall use all of the following criteria for selecting
grantees:
                                             
 I. A grantee's ability to provide direct services to victims of
domestic violence as follows:
                                             
 (a) Shelter or safe homes on a 24-hours-a-day, 7-days-a-week
basis.
                                             
 (b) A 24-hours-a-day, 7-days-a-week switchboard for crisis
calls.
                                             
 (c) Temporary housing and food facilities.
                                             
 (d) Psychological support and peer counseling.
                                             
 (e) Referrals to existing services in the community and follow-up
on the outcome of the referrals.
                                             
 (f) A drop-in center to assist victims of domestic violence who
have not yet made the decision to leave their homes, or who have found
other shelter but who have a need for support services.
                                             
 (g) Arrangements for school-aged children to continue their
education during their stay at the center.
                                             
 (h) Emergency transportation to a shelter and, when appropriate,
arrangements with local law enforcement for assistance in providing such
transportation.
                                             
 (i) Trained court advocates and social service agency advocates
to accompany domestic violence victims.
                                             
 II. A grantee shall be a private or private nonprofit organization,
or a public agency.
                                             
 III. A grantee shall demonstrate the need for the services proposed
by the program.
                                             
 IV. A grantee shall establish its ability to secure community
support and its efficiency of administration.
                                             
 V. A grantee shall receive at least 50 percent of its funding from
sources other than the fund, including town, city, county, federal, or
private sources. Contributions in kind, whether material, commodities,
transportation, office space, or personal services, may be evaluated and
counted as part of the required non-state funding.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:22

 **173-B:22 Confidentiality. –** All persons who are employed,
appointed, or who volunteer under this chapter shall maintain
confidentiality with regard to persons served by the coordinator and
grantees and files kept by the coordinator and grantees, except for
reasons of safety for other shelter residents or staff.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:23

 **173-B:23 Referral. –** Where centers are available, any law
enforcement officer who investigates an alleged incident of domestic
violence shall advise the person subject to such violence of the
availability of programs from which that person may receive services.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:24

 **173-B:24 Rights Reserved. –** A person shall not be prejudiced by
the court having jurisdiction under RSA 173-B for having left the
residence or household with or without the children to avoid further
domestic violence.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:25

 **173-B:25 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application of such provision to any person or circumstance is held
invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications
of the chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions
or applications, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.

**Source.** 1999, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 173-B:26

 **173-B:26 Commission to Study Supervised Visitation Centers. –**

                                             [Repealed 2014, 107:5, eff. Nov. 1, 2014.
                                             ]
