---
title: 'CHAPTER 205-D MANUFACTURED HOUSING INSTALLATION STANDARDS'
---

TITLE XVII
                                             
HOUSING AND REDEVELOPMENT
=========================

CHAPTER 205-D
                                             
MANUFACTURED HOUSING INSTALLATION STANDARDS
-------------------------------------------

### Section 205-D:1

 **205-D:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Anchoring system'' means a method of construction which when
properly designed and installed will resist overturning and lateral
movement of the manufactured house.
                                             
 II. "Board'' means the installation standards board.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
safety.
                                             
 IV. "Dealer'' or "retailer'' means any person engaged in the retail
selling or offering for sale, brokering, or distribution of manufactured
houses, primarily to a person who purchases these houses for residential
use.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. "Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standard''
means a standard for the construction, design, and performance of a
manufactured house which meets the needs of the public including the
need for quality, durability, and safety which has been duly adopted by
the federal government pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Acts of 1974, 42 United States Code,
section 5401, et seq.
                                             
 VII. "Installation'' means the placement of a manufactured house on
a permanent or temporary system. This term includes, but is not limited
to, supporting, restraining, blocking, leveling, securing, anchoring,
and connection of plumbing, heating, cooling, and electrical systems and
the multiple or expandable sections of the house. Installation shall
include site preparation.
                                             
 VIII. "Installation standards'' means reasonable specifications for
the installation of a manufactured house, at the place of occupancy, to
ensure proper siting, the joining of all sections of the house, and the
installation of stabilization, support, or anchoring systems.
                                             
 IX. "Installer'' means any person who performs the installation of
manufactured houses as prescribed under this chapter.
                                             
 X. "Local enforcement agency'' means the building inspector or other
local government official with authority to issue permits or enforce
building codes.
                                             
 XI. "Manufactured housing'' means any structure, transportable in
one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or
more in width and 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on
site, is 320 square feet or more, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, which include
plumbing, heating, and electrical heating systems contained therein.
Manufactured housing as defined in this section shall not include
campers or recreation vehicles as defined in RSA 216-I:1 or RSA
259:84-a; presite built housing as defined in RSA 674:31-a; or modular
buildings as defined in RSA 205-C:1, XI*.*
                                             
 XII. "Manufacturer'' means any person engaged in manufacturing or
assembling manufactured housing.
                                             
 XIII. "Site'' means a designated lot or parcel of land designed for
the accommodation of a manufactured house.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004. 2011, 224:100, I, eff. July
1, 2011.

### Section 205-D:2

 **205-D:2 Board Established; Members; Terms; Chairperson. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby created an installation standards board
consisting of 9 members appointed by the governor and council as
follows:
                                             
 (a) One installer of manufactured housing, nominated by the New
Hampshire Manufactured Housing Association.
                                             
 (b) One structural engineer or architect licensed in this state
for a minimum of 5 years, nominated by the board of professional
engineers established under RSA 310-A:3.
                                             
 (c) One dealer or retailer, nominated by the New Hampshire
Manufactured Housing Association.
                                             
 (d) Two owners or operators of a manufactured housing park with
100 or fewer lots, nominated by the New Hampshire Manufactured Housing
Association.
                                             
 (e) One owner or operator of a manufactured housing park with
more than 100 lots, nominated by the New Hampshire Manufactured Housing
Association.
                                             
 (f) One member of a cooperative manufactured housing park,
nominated by the Mobile/Manufactured Homeowner and Tenants Association
of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (g) One municipal building code official, nominated by the New
Hampshire Building Officials Association.
                                             
 (h) One municipal fire chief, nominated by the New Hampshire
Association of Fire Chiefs.
                                             
 II. Each member shall serve a 3-year term and until a successor is
appointed and qualified. If there is a vacancy on the board, the
provisions of RSA 21:33-a and RSA 21:34 shall apply.
                                             
 III. The board shall biennially elect a chairperson and
vice-chairperson. Five members of the board shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 IV. Members of the board shall receive 
                                             $25 for each day they are
engaged in the duties of their office and shall be reimbursed for all
actual travel, incidental, and clerical expenses incurred in carrying
out the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 V. The board shall hold meetings as deemed necessary by the board or
the chairperson.
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004. 2011, 197:2, eff. June 14,
2011; 224:100, II, eff. July 1, 2011. 2012, 180:4, 5, eff. Aug. 10,
2012.

### Section 205-D:3

 **205-D:3 Duties of the Board. –** The duties of the board shall be
to:
                                             
 I. Assure compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standard, including compliance with the standard
as amended by the Manufactured Housing Improvement Act of 2000, Public
Law 106-569.
                                             
 II. Establish uniform manufactured housing installation standards in
order to protect the quality, durability, safety, and affordability of
manufactured housing in this state.
                                             
 III. Adequately license and train manufactured housing installers in
order to ensure the proper performance of the house and protect the
safety and welfare of the public.
                                             
 IV. Ensure compliance with state installation standards by
conducting appropriate inspections of the installation of manufactured
housing.
                                             
 V. Provide a fair and effective recourse for consumers relative to
installation standards; and provide a dispute resolution program for
timely resolution of disputes between manufacturers, retailers, and
installers of manufactured houses regarding responsibility, and for the
issuance of appropriate orders, for the correction or repair of defects
in manufactured houses that are reported during the one year period
beginning on the date of installation.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 205-D:3-a

 **205-D:3-a Administrative and Business Processing Functions. –**
All administrative, clerical, and business processing functions of the
board shall be transferred to the office of professional licensure and
certification established in RSA 310-A:1 through RSA 310-A:1-e.

**Source.** 2011, 224:101, eff. July 1, 2011. 2015, 276:49, eff. July 1,
2015.

### Section 205-D:4

 **205-D:4 Installation Standards. –**
                                             
 I. This chapter shall apply to the installation of all new and
relocated manufactured housing that is used as a residential dwelling,
except as provided in paragraph II.
                                             
 II. The following manufactured housing sites are exempt from this
chapter; provided that such housing sites are maintained and operated in
a safe and sanitary condition:
                                             
 (a) Sites that are already occupied as of the date of the
enactment of this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Sites for the installation of manufactured housing which
provides temporary relief from fire, flood, or other disasters. The site
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter for a period of one
year from the date of the placement of the house.
                                             
 III. Installers shall have the option of installing manufactured
housing in accordance with one of the following standards:
                                             
 (a) New Hampshire installation standards as developed by the
board.
                                             
 (b) A design prepared by a registered professional engineer or
architect for the site.
                                             
 (c) The manufacturer's installation instructions, provided that
such instructions meet or exceed the New Hampshire installation
standards as developed by the board.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 205-D:5

 **205-D:5 Inspectors. –**
                                             
 I. The local enforcement agency, or if there is no local enforcement
agency, the board or the board's designee, shall:
                                             
 (a) Conduct appropriate inspections to ensure compliance
throughout the state with installation practices consistent with the
provisions of this chapter and rules promulgated hereunder.
                                             
 (b) Enter any premises on which an installation is being or has
been completed subject to regulation under this chapter for the purpose
of making such inspection as is necessary to carry out his or her duties
under this chapter. Inspections shall be done prior to occupancy of the
manufactured house.
                                             
 (c) Order the correction of any violation of this chapter, or
rule adopted under this chapter.
                                             
 (d) Order any installer to discontinue installation until the
violations are corrected.
                                             
 (e) Approve the continuation of work on the installation upon
being satisfied that violations have been corrected.
                                             
 (f) Issue a certificate of compliance upon satisfaction that a
manufactured house has been installed in compliance with this chapter
and the rules promulgated under this chapter.
                                             
 II. Whenever a local enforcement agency, or if there is no local
enforcement agency, the board or the board's designee orders the
correction of a violation under subparagraph I(c), he or she shall
immediately notify the board.
                                             
 III. A certificate of compliance shall be required for occupancy.
                                             
 IV. Any installer aggrieved under the provisions of this section may
file a complaint in accordance with RSA 205-D:6.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004. 2012, 180:1, 2, eff. Aug.
10, 2012.

### Section 205-D:6

 **205-D:6 Complaints. –**
                                             
 I. A consumer, park owner, manufacturer, retailer, or installer of
manufactured housing aggrieved or having a dispute regarding the
installation of a manufactured house under the provisions of this
chapter may file a complaint with the board.
                                             
 II. All complaints shall be in writing and reviewed by the board.
                                             
 III. To be accepted for filing, complaints shall be filed on a form
provided by the board.
                                             
 IV. All complaints shall be filed with the board within one year of
the date of occupancy.
                                             
 V. If the board determines that a complaint requires further
investigation, it shall be acted upon within 60 days. The board shall
establish procedures for expedited hearings on complaints where the
circumstances set forth in the complaint warrant it.
                                             
 VI. Upon confirmation that a complaint complies with this section,
the board shall schedule a hearing on the complaint in accordance with
the provisions of RSA 541-A.
                                             
 VII. Disposition of all complaints shall be voted on by the board.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 205-D:7

 **205-D:7 License Required. –** No person shall install any
manufactured house subject to the provisions of this chapter without
first obtaining a license from the board as required by this chapter.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 205-D:8

 **205-D:8 Qualifications for License. –** The board shall issue a
license to any applicant who at a minimum:
                                             
 I. Has attained the age of 18;
                                             
 II. Has 2 years experience as a manufactured housing installer or
proves to the board's satisfaction equivalent installation experience;
                                             
 III. Has successfully completed 6 hours of training on installation
standards; and
                                             
 IV. Complies with the requirements of RSA 205-D:10.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 205-D:9

 **205-D:9 Bond Required. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall not issue a license to any person unless the
person or his or her employer on his or her behalf has posted a surety
bond or letter of credit to be held by the state treasurer in an amount
to be determined by the board. No surety bond or letter of credit shall
be accepted unless it is with a surety company authorized to do business
in this state. The surety may cancel the bond or letter of credit at any
time upon giving 30 days' written notice to the board.
                                             
 II. Any person who is damaged by any violation of this chapter may
bring an action against the bond or letter of credit to recover damages
suffered and any other amounts allowable by law. The attorney general,
in any action brought under this chapter or any other applicable
provisions of the law, may likewise proceed against the bond or letter
of credit.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1. 2005, 184:6, eff. June 30, 2005. 2011, 197:3,
eff. June 14, 2011.

### Section 205-D:10

 **205-D:10 Application for License. –**
                                             
 I. Applications for licenses shall be made on forms adopted by the
board.
                                             
 II. Applications for licensure shall be accompanied by proof of the
surety bond required by this chapter, and payment of the license fee.
                                             
 III. The board may require each applicant to provide additional
information about the applicant's background and trustworthiness as is
reasonably necessary.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 205-D:11

 **205-D:11 Expiration and Renewal. –**
                                             
 I. All licenses issued by the board shall expire on the last day of
the month of the licensee's birth in the third year following the year
of issuance, but may be renewed during the following month, retroactive
to the first day of the month. Upon failure to pay the renewal fee
within the required period, a licensee may renew his or her license by
submitting the required fee plus 
                                             $10 before the last day of the second
month following the month of his or her birth.
                                             
 II. Persons licensed as installers are eligible for renewal of their
licenses if they:
                                             
 (a) Are not in violation of this chapter;
                                             
 (b) Meet any requirements for continuing education established by
the board in rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A; and
                                             
 (c) Submit evidence that a surety bond required under RSA 205-D:9
is in force.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004. 2012, 180:6, eff. Aug. 10,
2012.

### Section 205-D:12

 **205-D:12 Fees. –**
                                             
 I. The board may establish, pursuant to RSA 541-A, fees for
licensure, license renewal, training, inspections, and issuance of the
manufacturer's warranty seal. The fees established by the board shall be
sufficient to produce estimated revenues equal to 125 percent of the
direct operating expenses of the board budgeted for the biennium in
which they will apply.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. If an inspection is conducted by a local enforcement agency,
the local enforcement agency may charge fees established pursuant to RSA
674:51, III(d).

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004. 2011, 224:100, III, eff.
July 1, 2011. 2012, 180:3, eff. Aug. 10, 2012. 2014, 269:3, eff. July 1,
2014.

### Section 205-D:13

 **205-D:13 Disciplinary Action. –**
                                             
 I. The board may undertake disciplinary proceedings:
                                             
 (a) Upon its own initiative; or
                                             
 (b) Upon a sworn written complaint of any person which charges
that a person licensed by the board has committed misconduct under
paragraph II and which specifies the grounds therefor.
                                             
 II. Conduct sufficient to support disciplinary proceedings under
this section shall include, but is not limited to, any of the
following:
                                             
 (a) The practice of fraud or deceit in procuring or attempting to
procure a license to practice under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Willful or repeated violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
                                             
 (c) Suspension or revocation of a license, similar to one issued
under this chapter, in another jurisdiction and which has not been
reinstated.
                                             
 III. The board may take disciplinary action in any one or more of
the following ways:
                                             
 (a) By reprimand.
                                             
 (b) By suspension, limitation, or restriction of license for a
period of up to 5 years.
                                             
 (c) By revocation of license.
                                             
 (d) By requiring the person to participate in a program of
continuing education in the area or areas in which he or she has been
found deficient.
                                             
 (e) By imposing a fine not to exceed 
                                             $1,500 for each offense.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 205-D:14

 **205-D:14 Hearings. –** The board shall take no disciplinary action
without a hearing. At least 14 days prior to hearing, both parties to a
disciplinary proceeding shall be served, either personally or by
registered mail, with a written copy of the complaint filed and notice
of the time and place for hearing. All complaints shall be objectively
received and fairly heard by the board. A hearing shall be held on all
written complaints received by the board within 90 days of the date that
notice of a complaint was received by the accused, unless otherwise
agreed to by the parties. Written notice of all disciplinary decisions
made by the board shall be given to both parties to the proceeding upon
their issuance.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 205-D:15

 **205-D:15 Penalty. –** Any person acting as an installer without a
license, or violating any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 205-D:16

 **205-D:16 Consumer Protection Act. –** Nothing in this chapter
shall preclude an aggrieved party from seeking redress under RSA 358-A,
the consumer protection act, for any unfair or deceptive trade practice
committed relative to the installation of manufactured housing.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 205-D:17

 **205-D:17 Warranty Seal. –** In order to keep record of and verify
the proper installation of manufactured homes, no manufactured house may
be installed in this state until the manufacturer or an installer
licensed by the board has obtained a warranty seal from the board and
attached the seal to the manufactured house.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004. 2011, 197:1, eff. June 14,
2011.

### Section 205-D:18

 **205-D:18 Exemptions. –**
                                             
 I. Manufactured housing which is installed in compliance with this
chapter shall be exempt from all state or local standards or regulations
which regulate the same matters.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to amend or repeal
the provisions of RSA 31:116, relative to manufactured housing
foundations in parks, and RSA 47:22-b, relative to manufactured housing
foundations in parks.
                                             
 III. This chapter shall not apply to students engaged in a high
school vocational program under the supervision of a licensed installer
or as otherwise allowed by the board in its rules.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 205-D:19

 **205-D:19 Federal Funds and Other Funding Sources. –** The board
may seek and receive funds from the federal government and other public
or private sources to further activities under this chapter.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1, eff. July 1, 2004. 2011, 224:102, eff. July 1,
2011.

### Section 205-D:20

 **205-D:20 Rulemaking Authority. –** The board shall be authorized,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, to adopt rules relative to:
                                             
 I. The establishment of uniform manufactured housing installation
standards.
                                             
 II. The design and content of all forms and applications required
under this chapter.
                                             
 III. The application procedure for a license to practice under this
chapter.
                                             
 IV. The qualifications of license applicants set under this
chapter.
                                             
 V. How an applicant shall be trained, including the minimum
education requirements and training standards.
                                             
 VI. How a license to practice under this chapter shall be renewed,
including any requirements for continuing education.
                                             
 VII. The establishment of fees required under this chapter.
                                             
 VIII. Ethical and professional standards required to be met by each
holder of a license to practice under this chapter and how disciplinary
actions by the board shall be implemented for violations of these
standards.
                                             
 IX. The establishment of complaint procedures including
investigations and expedited hearings procedures.
                                             
 X. Procedures for the conduct of hearings consistent with the
requirements of due process.
                                             
 XI. The establishment of a program for the timely resolution of
disputes between manufacturers, retailers, and installers of
manufactured housing regarding responsibility, for the issuance of
appropriate orders, and for the correction or repair of defects in
manufactured houses that are reported during the one year period
following the date of installation.
                                             
 XII. The establishment of bond and letter of credit requirements
under RSA 205-D:9.

**Source.** 2004, 191:1. 2005, 184:7, eff. June 30, 2005. 2011, 224:103,
eff. July 1, 2011.
