---
title: 'CHAPTER 205-B WARRANTIES ON PRESITE BUILT AND PREFABRICATED HOMES'
---

TITLE XVII
                                             
HOUSING AND REDEVELOPMENT
=========================

CHAPTER 205-B
                                             
WARRANTIES ON PRESITE BUILT AND PREFABRICATED HOMES
---------------------------------------------------

### Section 205-B:1

 **205-B:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "New'' shall include any unit not previously sold or occupied as
a dwelling unit.
                                             
 II. "Prefabricated'' shall mean construction materials or assembled
units fabricated prior to erection or installation in a building or
structure, but shall not include manufactured housing as defined in RSA
674:31.
                                             
 III. "Presite built housing'' means "presite built housing'' as
defined by RSA 674:31-a.

**Source.** 1988, 231:4, eff. June 29, 1988.

### Section 205-B:2

 **205-B:2 Manufacturer's Warranty. –** No person shall sell at
retail a new prefabricated or presite built home in this state without a
written manufacturer's warranty to the buyer which shall include the
following terms:
                                             
 I. That such home is free from any substantial defects in materials
or workmanship in the structure, plumbing, heating, and electrical
systems and in all appliances and other equipment installed or included
in such home by the manufacturer.
                                             
 II. That the seller or manufacturer shall take appropriate
corrective action at the site of such home in instances of substantial
defects in materials or workmanship which become evident within one year
from the date of delivery of such home to the buyer, provided the buyer
gives written notice of the defects to the seller, manufacturer, or
dealer at his business address as soon as such defects become evident.

**Source.** 1988, 231:4, eff. June 29, 1988.

### Section 205-B:3

 **205-B:3 Waiver Prohibited. –** The warranty provided in RSA
205-B:2 shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other right
or privilege which the buyer may have as otherwise provided by law. The
seller or manufacturer shall not require the buyer to waive his rights
under this chapter and any waiver shall be deemed contrary to public
policy and shall be void and unenforceable.

**Source.** 1988, 231:4, eff. June 29, 1988.

### Section 205-B:4

 **205-B:4 Attorney's Fees. –** Any action instituted by a buyer for
failure of a manufacturer to comply with the provisions of this chapter
shall allow for the recovery of court costs and reasonable attorney's
fees.

**Source.** 1988, 231:4, eff. June 29, 1988.
