---
title: 'CHAPTER 205-C MODULAR BUILDING STANDARDS'
---

TITLE XVII
                                             
HOUSING AND REDEVELOPMENT
=========================

CHAPTER 205-C
                                             
MODULAR BUILDING STANDARDS
--------------------------

### Section 205-C:1

 **205-C:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Approved third party inspection agency'' means an entity or
organization, public or private, determined by the department to be
qualified by reason of facilities, personnel, experience, and
demonstrated reliability and independence of judgment, to evaluate and
certify building manufacturers and factory assembled modular
construction.
                                             
 II. "Modular building code'' means the state building code as
defined in and adopted in RSA 155-A.
                                             
 III. "Building component'' means any system, subsystem, or
subassembly of closed construction designed for use in or as part of a
modular building, which may include structural, electrical, mechanical,
plumbing, and fire protection systems and other systems affecting health
and safety.
                                             
 IV. "Certification'' means the process by which modular building
manufacturers or modular construction has been evaluated to ensure
conformity with the state modular construction standard and applicable
rules of the department.
                                             
 V. "Closed construction'' means a method of manufacturing in which
parts or processes are concealed and cannot be inspected at the building
site without disassembly, damage, or destruction.
                                             
 V-a. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of safety.
                                             
 VI. "Department'' means the department of safety.
                                             
 VII. "Installation'' means the assembly of modular buildings on site
and the process of affixing modular buildings or building components to
land, a foundation, footings, utilities, or an existing building.
                                             
 VIII. "Label'' means the approved insignia or seal including the
name of the approved third party inspection agency that shall be affixed
to a modular building or building component certified in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 IX. "Local enforcement agency'' means the agency or agencies of
local government with authority to make inspections and to enforce the
laws, ordinances and rules enacted by the state and by local government
that establish standards and requirements applicable to the
construction, alteration, or repair of buildings.
                                             
 X. "Manufacturing facilities'' means the place at which machinery,
equipment and other capital goods are assembled and operated for the
purpose of making, fabricating, constructing, forming or assembling
modular buildings.
                                             
 XI. "Modular building'' means any building of closed construction,
which is made or assembled in manufacturing facilities off the building
site, for installation, or assembly and installation, on the building
site. This definition shall not be construed to include any structure
labeled in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction
and Safety Standards Act of 1974, nor shall it include single-wide
structures under 750 square feet, provided that they are not for
residential or classroom use, nor shall it include any recreational
vehicle or park trailer as defined in American National Standards
Institute A119.2, Standard for Recreational Vehicles, or A119.5,
Standard for Park Trailers, or any building type not subject to the
requirements of nationally recognized model building codes.
                                             
 XII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XIII. "Person'' means any individual or organized group of any kind,
including partnerships, corporations and other forms of association, as
well as federal, state or local instrumentalities, political
subdivisions, or officers.

**Source.** 1990, 169:2. 1997, 44:2-4. 2002, 8:5, 12, I; 270:2. 2007,
108:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2007. 2011, 197:4, eff. June 14, 2011.

### Section 205-C:2

 **205-C:2 Modular Building Standard. –**
                                             
 I. All modular buildings and building components ordered on or after
the date one year after the effective date of RSA 155-A:2 shall comply
with the modular building code and the state fire code.
                                             
 II. All modular buildings and building components bearing a label of
certification pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall be
deemed by local enforcement agencies as meeting the modular building
code, however, such certification shall not be deemed to preempt
enforcement of any state or local standards governing installation or
work performed on the building site, including but not limited to site
grading, foundations, driveways, on-site water and sewer systems or
connections to off-site systems, and electrical line connections to the
power source.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as amending,
repealing or superseding any local law, ordinance, code or regulation,
and all modular buildings and building components shall comply with all
applicable state or local building requirements that exceed the modular
building code, in addition to any land use restrictions including but
not limited to subdivision regulations, use and location restrictions,
density and dimensional limitations, or historic district laws or
ordinances.

**Source.** 1990, 169:2. 1997, 44:5. 2002, 8:6, eff. Sept. 14, 2002;
270:3, eff. Sept. 14, 2002 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 205-C:3

 **205-C:3 Certification Required. –** No person shall sell, lease,
or install for use in this state any modular building or building
component manufactured after July 24, 1992, unless such building or
building component bears a label of certification issued by the
department.

**Source.** 1990, 169:2. 1997, 44:6, eff. July 11, 1997.

### Section 205-C:4

 **205-C:4 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules under
RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 I. Requirements for approval of third party inspection agencies by
the department.
                                             
 II. Requirements for approved third party inspection agency
certification of the manufacturing facilities of any person who engages
in the business of manufacturing modular buildings or building
components for installation in this state.
                                             
 III. Requirements for approved third party inspection agency
certification and labeling or modular buildings and building components
for sale, lease or installation in this state.
                                             
 IV. Investigation of complaints of noncompliance.
                                             
 V. Enforcement procedures, including standards for revocation and
suspension of certification.
                                             
 VI. Imposition and collection of fees, administrative fines, and
penalties.
                                             
 VII. Standards and requirements in interagency agreements.

**Source.** 1990, 169:2. 1997, 44:7, eff. July 11, 1997.

### Section 205-C:5

 **205-C:5 Interagency Coordination. –**
                                             
 I. The department may issue a label of certification to modular
buildings or building components that have been certified by an agency
of the federal government or component authority within another state,
if the department finds that such certification is granted on the basis
of a standard which is equivalent or more stringent than required under
RSA 205-C:2.
                                             
 II. The department may enter into interagency agreements with any
other department or agency of state government necessary or appropriate
for administration of this chapter.

**Source.** 1990, 169:2, eff. June 26, 1990.

### Section 205-C:6

 **205-C:6 Fees. –** The commissioner shall by rule establish fees to
defray the costs of administering this chapter. Such rules shall specify
fees for the certification of third party inspection agencies by the
department; certification of manufacturing facilities by approved third
party inspection agencies; and certification of modular buildings and
building components by approved third party inspection agencies. Fees
established by the commissioner shall be sufficient to produce estimated
revenues equal to 125 percent of the direct operating expenses for
administering this chapter budgeted for the biennium in which they will
apply. All fees collected by the department shall be deposited into the
general fund.

**Source.** 1990, 169:2. 1993, 358:2. 1997, 44:8, eff. July 11, 1997.
2014, 269:2, eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 205-C:7

 **205-C:7 Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall investigate or cause to be investigated all
complaints made to it alleging noncompliance with the requirements of
this chapter.
                                             
 II. Where the department finds that a manufacturer, modular
building, or building component does not conform to the requirements of
this chapter or applicable rules, the department may obtain injunctive
relief from a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the sale, lease,
delivery or installation in this state of any or all modular buildings
or building components manufactured by the person in violation.
                                             
 III. Where the department finds that an approved third party
inspection agency, manufacturer, modular building, or building component
does not conform to the requirements of this chapter or applicable
rules, the department may suspend or revoke its certification, including
any certification granted through an approved third party inspection
agency acting on behalf of the department. Under no circumstances shall
the offender be eligible for reinstatement until the department has
confirmed that the agency, manufacturer, system, building or component
in question is in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter
and applicable rules.
                                             
 IV. Additional fines, penalties, and remedies for violations of this
chapter shall be the same as for violations of RSA title LXIV, as stated
in RSA 676:15 and 676:17.
                                             
 V. The building inspector or other local official with the authority
to enforce building or land use regulations or codes may enforce the
provisions of this chapter. A copy of the complaint or petition shall be
sent, by certified mail, to the department on or before the date upon
which it is filed.

**Source.** 1990, 169:2, eff. June 26, 1990.
