---
title: CHAPTER 273 DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
---

TITLE XXIII
                                             
LABOR
============

CHAPTER 273
                                             
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
-------------------

Labor Commissioner
------------------

### Section 273:1

 **273:1 Department; Commissioner. –** There shall be a department of
labor under the executive direction of a labor commissioner who shall be
appointed by the governor, with the advice and consent of the council.
Subject to the state personnel regulations, and within the limits of
available appropriations and funds, the labor commissioner shall employ
such clerks and assistants as may be necessary for the performance of
the duties of the department, except for the division of employment
security.

**Source.** 1911, 198:1. PL 174:1. RL 210:1. 1950, 5, part 18:1, eff.
June 30, 1950.

### Section 273:1-a

 **273:1-a Budget and Accounting. –** The department of labor shall
budget and account for its operations through restricted funds rather
than through the general fund; said restricted funds to be funded
through all fees, licenses, certificates, and civil penalties of the
department of labor, as well as existing assessment procedures.

**Source.** 2011, 224:51, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 273:1-b

 **273:1-b Restricted Fund. –** There is hereby established in the
state treasury a department of labor restricted fund for the sole
purpose of paying costs of operating the department of labor other than
workers' compensation. All moneys in the restricted fund shall be
continually appropriated to the department of labor. The commissioner
shall administer the fund, and the state treasurer shall be the
custodian of the fund. All moneys in the fund in excess of amounts used
by the department for authorized personnel expenses, administrative
costs, and other related costs for the operation of the department,
shall be transferred on June 30 of each year to the general fund. The
existence and operation of this restricted fund shall not affect the
continued existence and operation of the administration fund established
by RSA 281-A:59.

**Source.** 2011, 224:51, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 273:2

 **273:2 Term of Commissioner; Removal. –** The commissioner shall
hold office for 3 years from the date of appointment and may be removed
for cause by the governor, with the advice and consent of the council.

**Source.** 1911, 198:1. PL 174:2. RL 210:2. 2007, 156:7, eff. Aug. 17,
2007.

### Section 273:3

 **273:3 Vacancy. –** Any vacancy existing in the office of
commissioner shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governor,
with the advice and consent of the council.

**Source.** 1911, 198:1. PL 174:3. RL 210:3.

### Section 273:4

 **273:4 Salary; Expenses. –** The salary of the commissioner shall
be that prescribed by RSA 94:1-4, and his actual expenses incurred in
the work of his office shall be paid on duly detailed vouchers approved
by the governor.

**Source.** 1911, 198:1. 1925, 174:14. PL 174:4. 1939, 205:1. RL 210:4.
1953, 265:1, eff. July 1, 1953.

### Section 273:4-a

 **273:4-a Division of Workers' Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established within the department of labor the
division of workers' compensation under the supervision of a classified
director of workers' compensation who shall be under the direction of
the commissioner. The director shall perform such duties as are assigned
by the commissioner.
                                             
 II. The division shall conduct annual reviews of the job
descriptions of its employees and the qualifications for such
descriptions to assure that the job descriptions are followed and the
qualifications are met.
                                             
 III. There is hereby created the classified position of assistant
director of workers' compensation who shall be under the direction of
the commissioner. The assistant director of workers' compensation shall
perform such duties as may be assigned by the commissioner, including,
but not limited to, such duties as are necessary to carry out the
responsibilities of the commissioner under RSA 281-A:5 through 281-A:5-c
and 281-A:11, or the regulation of public employer self-insured workers'
compensation programs under RSA 5-B.

**Source.** 1990, 254:1. 1992, 43:2, eff. June 8, 1992.

### Section 273:4-b

 **273:4-b Internal Organization. –** The division of workers'
compensation shall include the following internal organization units:
                                             
 I. The bureau of rehabilitation management coordination.
                                             
 II. The bureau of case dispute resolution coordination.
                                             
 III. The bureau of hearing officers.
                                             
 IV. The bureau of statistical analysis and audit.

**Source.** 1990, 254:1, eff. July 1, 1990.

### Section 273:5

 **273:5 Records. –**
                                             
 I. The records of the department of labor shall be public records
open to the inspection of any person interested.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1911, 198:1. PL 174:6. RL 210:6. 1950, 5, part 18:1. 2004,
223:1. 2005, 278:4, eff. Sept. 20, 2005.

### Section 273:6

 **273:6 Disposal of Papers. –** The commissioner may periodically
destroy pursuant to RSA 8-B reports, records and other documents which
are, in his opinion, no longer of any value to the state.

**Source.** 1945, 51:1. RSA 273:6. 1977, 125:1, eff. Aug. 1, 1977.

### Section 273:7

 **273:7 Deputy Commissioner. –** The commissioner shall appoint a
deputy labor commissioner. Said deputy shall exercise the powers and
perform the duties of the commissioner whenever the labor commissioner
is incapacitated, absent, unable to act from any cause, or whenever the
commissioner deems it advisable and in the interest of all parties
concerned. Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of labor
commissioner the deputy shall have the powers and duties of the
commissioner until another commissioner is appointed and qualified.

**Source.** 1893, 48:4. PL 174:7. RL 210:7. RSA 273:7. 1955, 323:2.
1959, 202:1, eff. Sept. 21, 1959.

### Section 273:8

 **273:8 Compensation. –** The salary of the deputy labor
commissioner shall be that as fixed by RSA 94:1.

**Source.** 1893, 48:4. PL 174:8. RL 210:8. RSA 273:8. 1955, 323:2, eff.
Aug. 5, 1955.

### Section 273:9

 **273:9 Inspections. –** The commissioner shall, at such times as he
shall deem it necessary, and without notice, visit the manufacturing,
mechanical and mercantile establishments in the state, so far as
practicable, for the purpose of ascertaining whether the laws with
reference to employment are complied with, and for the further purpose
of ascertaining if reasonable sanitary and hygienic conditions are
maintained, calculated to promote the health and welfare of the working
people.

**Source.** 1911, 198:2. PL 174:9. RL 210:9.

### Section 273:10

 **273:10 Reports. –** He shall transmit to the legislature a report
upon these matters when he shall deem the occasion of sufficient
importance, with such recommendations as he shall think advisable. He
shall biennially make a report of the proceedings of the department of
labor to the governor and council, containing the transactions of the
office and such other matters and recommendations as he shall deem
proper.

**Source.** 1911, 198:2, 9. 1913, 186:1. PL 174:10. RL 210:10. 1950, 5,
part 18:1. RSA 273:10. 1973, 140:49, eff. Jan. 1, 1974.

### Section 273:11

 **273:11 Prosecutions; Injunctions. –** Whenever the commissioner
deems it necessary, the commissioner may investigate and may prosecute
any offenses against the laws under the commissioner's jurisdiction. The
commissioner may, with the consent of the attorney general, proceed in
superior court or other court of competent jurisdiction to restrain by
temporary or permanent injunctive relief an employer or owner subject to
the laws administered by the department from conducting business at the
affected facility. The temporary or permanent injunctive relief shall be
effective for so long as issued following a hearing held pursuant to RSA
541-A under any provisions of title XII, title XXIII, or any provisions
of this chapter. No ex parte order shall be issued under this section.

**Source.** 1911, 198:2. PL 174:11. RL 210:11. RSA 273:11. 1996, 34:3,
eff. June 23, 1996.

### Section 273:11-a

 **273:11-a Civil Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. In addition to any criminal penalty provided under this title,
the commissioner may, after hearing, impose a civil penalty not to
exceed 
                                             $2,500, as determined by the commissioner, for any violation of
the provisions of, or any rule adopted pursuant to, this title, except
RSA 273-A, RSA 273-C, and RSA 282-A. All moneys collected under this
section shall be deposited in the general fund.
                                             
 II. Except as provided in paragraph III, the commissioner shall
issue one written warning to the employer. The employer shall have 30
days from receipt of the warning to cure the defect causing the
violation.
                                             
 III. No warning shall be issued if, in the opinion of the
commissioner, the employer intends to cause harm, the violation poses a
threat to public safety, or the violation involves any of the
following:
                                             
 (a) Failure to pay an employee in full and on time under RSA
275:43.
                                             
 (b) Payment of wages by checks on a financial institution that is
not convenient to the place of employment as required by RSA 275:43,
I(e).
                                             
 (c) Failure to pay final wages in full as required by RSA
275:44.
                                             
 (d) Failure to pay amounts withheld for court ordered child
support to the custodial parent.
                                             
 (e) Continuation of wage withholding for insurance benefits that
have been cancelled.
                                             
 (f) Illegal withholding of wages to compensate employer for
employee actions resulting in loss or damage.
                                             
 (g) Failure to comply with RSA 275-A:4-a regarding undocumented
workers.
                                             
 (h) Requiring that employees to perform any illegal activities
under threat of job loss.
                                             
 IV. Any person on whom a penalty is imposed under this section may
appeal as provided in RSA 273:11-c and 273:11-d.
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to the conduct of hearings under paragraph IV.

**Source.** 1983, 389:1. 1996, 34:1. 2005, 177:101, eff. July 1, 2005;
241:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2006. 2011, 182:1, eff. Aug. 13, 2011; 224:53, eff.
July 1, 2011. 2014, 49:1, eff. July 26, 2014; 123:2, eff. Aug. 15, 2014.

### Section 273:11-b

 **273:11-b Penalty Appeal Board. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby created a penalty appeal board which shall hear
appeals from penalties imposed by the commissioner.
                                             
 II. The board shall be composed of 3 members, as follows:
                                             
 (a) One person representing the interests of management, to be
appointed by the governor and council;
                                             
 (b) One person representing the interests of labor, to be
appointed by the governor and council; and
                                             
 (c) One person to serve as chairman, who shall be an attorney and
who shall be familiar with the labor laws of this state. The chairman
shall be chosen and appointed jointly by the other 2 members of the
board; provided, however, that, if such members are unable to agree on
the appointment of the chairman within 30 days after the later of their
appointments, the governor and council shall appoint the chairman.
                                             
 III. At the time of making appointments pursuant to paragraph II,
the governor and council or 2 appointing members of the board, as
applicable, shall also appoint an alternate member representing the
interests of management, an alternate member representing the interests
of labor and an alternate chairman, who shall serve whenever the
corresponding member of the board is unable, because of a conflict of
interest or otherwise, to participate in the determination of a matter
before the board.
                                             
 IV. Members and alternate members shall be appointed for terms of 3
years and shall serve until their successors are appointed and
qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms. Members
and alternate members shall serve without compensation but shall receive
mileage at the same rate paid to state employees.

**Source.** 1983, 389:1. 1991, 181:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992. 2015, 97:1,
eff. Aug. 4, 2015.

### Section 273:11-c

 **273:11-c Appeal. –**
                                             
 I. A person on whom the commissioner has imposed a penalty pursuant
to RSA 273:11-a may appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the penalty
appeal board within 15 business days after the commissioner's order. If
no such notice is filed within this time limit, the commissioner's order
shall become final and no appeal may be taken.
                                             
 II. The penalty appeal board shall hear appeals de novo and shall
not be bound by prior findings or determinations of the commissioner. An
appeal shall be filed and presented and the hearing conducted in
accordance with rules adopted by the board pursuant to RSA 541-A. Such
rules need not conform to common law or statutory rules of evidence or
other technical rules of procedure. The place and time of a hearing
shall be determined by the board. In no case shall a hearing proceed
unless the chairman or alternate chairman is present.
                                             
 III. A full and complete record shall be kept of all proceedings in
connection with an appeal, and all testimony at any hearing shall be
recorded verbatim.
                                             
 IV. Within a reasonable time after the board has heard an appeal,
the chairman shall prepare a written decision which shall be sent by
certified mail to the last known address of the appealing party. The
decision shall set forth all the material findings necessary to support
the conclusions and shall either affirm, reverse or modify the order of
the commissioner.

**Source.** 1983, 389:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1983.

### Section 273:11-d

 **273:11-d Judicial Review. –**
                                             
 I. A person who has appealed to the penalty appeal board and who is
aggrieved by a final decision of the board may appeal that decision to
the supreme court, but only if the notice of that appeal is filed with
the court within 15 business days after the date of mailing of the
decision and the notice of appeal is contemporaneously served on the
commissioner and the board. The notice of appeal shall specifically
identify each error for which review is sought. The filing of a notice
of appeal shall not stay enforcement of the board's decision.
                                             
 II. Within 60 days after the service of the notice of appeal upon
the board, or within such further time allowed by the court, the board
shall transmit to the court a certified copy of the entire record of the
proceeding before the board. By stipulation of all parties to the review
proceeding, the record may be shortened. If the record is shortened by
stipulation, the court may subsequently require additional portions of
the record certified.
                                             
 III. The review of the court shall be confined to the record. No
evidence shall be received in the court. The court may require oral
argument or written briefs, or both.
                                             
 IV. The court shall not substitute its judgment for that of the
board as to the weight of the evidence on questions of fact. The court
shall reverse or modify the decision of the board, or remand the case
for further proceedings, as determined by the court, only if the
substantial rights of the appellant had been prejudiced because the
administrative findings, inferences, or conclusions are:
                                             
 (a) In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions;
                                             
 (b) In excess of statutory authority;
                                             
 (c) Made upon unlawful procedures;
                                             
 (d) Clearly erroneous in view of the substantial evidence on the
whole record; or
                                             
 (e) Affected by other error of law.
                                             
Otherwise the court shall affirm the board's decision.

**Source.** 1983, 389:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1983.

Board of Conciliation and Arbitration
-------------------------------------

### Section 273:12

 **273:12 Appointment. –** There shall be a state board of
conciliation and arbitration consisting of 3 members and 3 alternates.
The governor, with the advice and consent of the council, shall
annually, in June, appoint one member and one alternate whose terms
shall be 3 years from the following July 1. One member and one alternate
of the board shall be employers, or shall be selected from an
association representing employers of labor; one member and one
alternate shall be selected from labor organizations and shall not be
employers of labor, and one member and one alternate shall be appointed
upon the recommendation of the other 4 members and alternates, or, if
they do not, at least 30 days prior to the expiration of a term, or
within 30 days after the happening of a vacancy, agree upon a third
member and a third alternate, they shall then be appointed by the
governor without such recommendation.

**Source.** 1913, 186:1. PL 174:12. RL 210:12. RSA 273:12. 1983, 213:3,
eff. June 16, 1983.

### Section 273:13

 **273:13 Oath; Chairman. –** Each member shall be sworn before
entering upon the duties of his office. The board shall choose from its
members a chairman, who shall preside at its meetings.

**Source.** 1913, 186:1. PL 174:13. RL 210:13.

### Section 273:14

 **273:14 Seal. –** The board shall have a seal which shall be like
the seal of the state, except that the device thereon shall be
surrounded by the words "N.H. State Board of Conciliation and
Arbitration,'' and which shall be affixed by the chairman of said board
to all official papers issued by it.

**Source.** 1917, 17:1. PL 174:14. RL 210:14.

### Section 273:14-a

 **273:14-a Single Arbiter. –** Where conflict of interests prevents
either employer or labor representative from serving on any case, upon
written agreement of the representatives of the employer and employees
involved in the dispute, the chairman may act as a single arbiter with
all powers of the board.

**Source.** 1963, 216:1, eff. July 1, 1963.

### Section 273:15

 **273:15 Investigating Controversies. –** Whenever any controversy
or difference arises relating to the conditions of employment or rates
of wages between any employer, whether resident or non-resident, and his
employees, such controversy involving the interest of not less than 10
employees in the same general line of business in this state, the
commissioner shall, upon application as hereinafter provided, visit the
locality and make careful inquiry into all the conditions and
circumstances of the situation, hear all persons interested therein who
may come before him, advise the respective parties what, if anything,
ought to be conceded by either or both, and adjust such controversy or
difference and, within 5 days after such inquiry, make a written
decision thereon, a copy of which shall be furnished the parties and a
copy kept on file in the department of labor.

**Source.** 1911, 198:4. 1917, 142:1. PL 174:15. RL 210:15.

### Section 273:16

 **273:16 Applications for Investigations. –** Said application shall
be signed by the employer or by a majority of his employees in the
department of the business in which the controversy or difference
exists, or their duly authorized agent, or by both parties, and shall
contain a concise statement of the grievance alleged, and shall be sworn
to by at least one of the signers.

**Source.** 1911, 198:5. PL 174:16. RL 210:16.

### Section 273:17

 **273:17 Application by Agent. –** When an application is signed by
an agent claiming to represent a majority of such employees the
commissioner shall, before proceeding further, satisfy himself by secret
ballot or otherwise that such agent is duly authorized to represent a
majority of such employees. If the commissioner requires such secret
ballot all regular employees of the unit may vote thereat. If the
commissioner does not require a secret ballot he shall require a
statement in writing from a majority of the employees that said agent is
duly authorized to represent them. In the latter case the names of the
employees giving written authority to such agent shall be kept secret by
the commissioner.

**Source.** 1911, 198:5. PL 174:17. RL 210:17. RSA 273:17. 1955, 75:1,
eff. April 16, 1955.

### Section 273:18

 **273:18 Proceedings Not Evidence. –** Neither the proceedings, nor
any part thereof, before the labor commissioner by virtue of the
foregoing provisions of this subdivision shall be received in evidence
for any purpose in any judicial proceeding before any other court or
tribunal.

**Source.** 1917, 142:1. PL 174:18. RL 210:18.

### Section 273:19

 **273:19 Failure to Agree. –** Whenever in such case the employer
and employees shall fail to agree to a settlement through the
commissioner he shall endeavor to have them consent in writing to submit
their differences to said board of arbitration.

**Source.** 1911, 198:6. 1913, 186:2. PL 174:19. RL 210:19.

### Section 273:20

 **273:20 Arbitration. –** If arbitration is agreed to, the business
shall continue on the existing basis, and the employees shall remain at
work pending the decision of the board, which shall be rendered within 7
days after the completion of the hearing and shall be final.

**Source.** 1911, 198:6. 1913, 186:2. PL 174:20. RL 210:20.

### Section 273:21

 **273:21 Of Wages. –** If said hearing is on a question of wages the
decision shall revert to the date when the employees presented their
demand in writing to said employer.

**Source.** 1911, 198:6. 1913, 186:1, 2. PL 174:21. RL 210:21.

### Section 273:22

 **273:22 Effect of Decision. –** The decision shall be binding upon
the parties concerned in said controversy for 6 months, or until 60 days
after either party has given the other notice in writing of his or their
intention not to be bound by the same. Such notice may be given to
employees by posting the same in 3 conspicuous places in the place of
employment.

**Source.** 1911, 198:6. 1913, 186:2. PL 174:22. RL 210:22.

### Section 273:23

 **273:23 Procedure. –** The chairman of said board shall keep a
record of the proceedings, issue subpoenas and administer oaths to the
members of said board and to any witness the board may deem necessary to
summon. Any notice or process issued by said board may be served by any
sheriff or constable to whom the same may be directed, or in whose hands
the same may be placed for service.

**Source.** 1911, 198:6. 1913, 186:2. PL 174:23. RL 210:23.

### Section 273:24

 **273:24 Compensation of Arbitrators. –** Such arbitrators shall
receive 
                                             $50 a day for each day actually engaged in such arbitration and
their necessary traveling expenses, to be paid upon vouchers signed by
the commissioner, with the approval of the governor, out of the funds
appropriated for the maintenance of the department of labor.

**Source.** 1911, 198:5. 1913, 186:2. PL 174:24. RL 210:24. RSA 273:24.
1955, 323:8. 1963, 216:2, eff. July 1, 1963.

### Section 273:25

 **273:25 Statements to Commissioner. –** Upon the failure of the
commissioner in any case to secure a reference to said board of
arbitration, he shall request a sworn statement from each party to the
dispute of the facts upon which their dispute and their reasons for not
submitting the same to arbitration are based. Any statement made to the
commissioner under this provision shall be for public use, and shall be
given publicity in such newspapers as desire to use it.

**Source.** 1911, 198:6. 1913, 186:3. PL 174:25. RL 210:25.

### Section 273:26

 **273:26 Strikes; Lockouts. –** Whenever it shall come to the
knowledge of the commissioner, either by notice from the mayor of a
city, a county commissioner, the president of a board of trade or other
representative body, the president of a central labor council or
assembly, or of any 5 reputable citizens or otherwise, that a strike or
lockout is seriously threatened or has actually occurred in the state,
involving an employer and his or its present or past employees, if at
the time such employer is employing, or, up to the occurrence of the
strike or lockout was employing, not less than 10 persons in the same
general line of business in any city or town in this state, and the
commissioner shall be satisfied that such information is correct, it
shall be his duty, within 3 days thereafter, to put himself in
communication with such employer and employees, and endeavor by
mediation to effect an amicable settlement between them, or to persuade
them to submit the matter to said board of arbitration, and to act as
hereinbefore provided in case of disputes and controversies.

**Source.** 1911, 198:8. 1913, 186:4. PL 174:26. RL 210:26.

### Section 273:27

 **273:27 Investigations; Reports. –** In case the parties do not
agree to so submit the matter, the commissioner may investigate the
cause of such controversy and ascertain which party thereto is mainly
responsible for the continuance of the same, and may make and publish a
report assigning such responsibility.

**Source.** 1911, 198:8. 1913, 186:4. PL 174:27. RL 210:27.
