---
title: CHAPTER 274 EMPLOYMENT OFFICES
---

TITLE XXIII
                                             
LABOR
============

CHAPTER 274
                                             
EMPLOYMENT OFFICES
------------------

### Section 274:1

 **274:1 Unlicensed. –** Whoever, without a license therefor,
establishes or keeps an intelligence office for the purpose of obtaining
or giving information concerning places of employment for servants or
other laborers, or for the purpose of procuring or giving information
concerning such persons for or to employers, or for the purpose of
procuring or giving information concerning employment in business, shall
be fined 
                                             $10 for each day such office is so kept.

**Source.** 1901, 60:1. PL 179:1. RL 217:1.

### Section 274:2

 **274:2 Power to License. –** The mayor and aldermen of a city or
the selectmen of a town may, for the purposes mentioned in the preceding
section, grant licenses to suitable persons, subject to the provisions
hereof, and may revoke the same at pleasure.

**Source.** 1901, 60:2. PL 179:2. RL 217:2.

### Section 274:3

 **274:3 Licenses. –** Licenses granted to keepers of intelligence
offices shall be signed by the clerk of the city or town in which they
are granted, and every such license shall be recorded by him in a book
kept for that purpose, before being delivered to the licensee. Such
license shall set forth the name of the person licensed, the nature of
the business and the building or place in which it is to be carried on,
and shall continue in force until May first next ensuing, unless sooner
revoked.

**Source.** 1901, 60:3. PL 179:3. RL 217:3.

### Section 274:4

 **274:4 Fee. –** The board issuing such a license shall receive for
the use of the city or town for each license such sum, not less than

                                             $2, as the board shall deem reasonable.

**Source.** 1901, 60:4. PL 179:4. RL 217:4.

### Section 274:5

 **274:5 Effect. –** No license issued as aforesaid shall be valid to
protect the holder thereof in a building or place other than that
designated in the license, unless consent to removal is granted by the
mayor and aldermen or selectmen.

**Source.** 1901, 60:6. PL 179:5. RL 217:5.

### Section 274:6

 **274:6 Revocation. –** When such license is revoked, such clerk
shall note the revocation upon the face of the record of the license,
and shall give written notice to the holder thereof by delivering the
same to him in person or leaving it at the place of business designated
in the license.

**Source.** 1901, 60:7. PL 179:6. RL 217:6.

### Section 274:7

 **274:7 Notice to Department of Employment Security of Issue of
Licenses. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1991, 296:1, eff. Aug. 19, 1991.
                                             ]
