---
title: 'CHAPTER 275-E WHISTLEBLOWERS'' PROTECTION ACT'
---

TITLE XXIII
                                             
LABOR
============

CHAPTER 275-E
                                             
WHISTLEBLOWERS' PROTECTION ACT
------------------------------

### Section 275-E:1

 **275-E:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Employee'' means and includes every person who may be permitted,
required, or directed by any employer, in consideration of direct or
indirect gain or profit, to engage in any employment, but shall not
include any person exempted from the definition of employee as stated in
RSA 281-A:2, VI(b)(2), (3), or (4), or RSA 281-A:2, VII(b), or a person
providing services as part of a residential placement for individuals
with developmental, acquired, or emotional disabilities, or any person
who meets all of the following criteria:
                                             
 (a) The person possesses or has applied for a federal employer
identification number or social security number, or in the alternative,
has agreed in writing to carry out the responsibilities imposed on
employers under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) The person has control and discretion over the means and
manner of performance of the work, in that the result of the work,
rather than the means or manner by which the work is performed, is the
primary element bargained for by the employer.
                                             
 (c) The person has control over the time when the work is
performed, and the time of performance is not dictated by the employer.
However, this shall not prohibit the employer from reaching an agreement
with the person as to completion schedule, range of work hours, and
maximum number of work hours to be provided by the person, and in the
case of entertainment, the time such entertainment is to be presented.
                                             
 (d) The person hires and pays the person's assistants, if any,
and to the extent such assistants are employees, supervises the details
of the assistants' work.
                                             
 (e) The person holds himself or herself out to be in business for
himself or herself or is registered with the state as a business and the
person has continuing or recurring business liabilities or obligations.
                                             
 (f) The person is responsible for satisfactory completion of work
and may be held contractually responsible for failure to complete the
work.
                                             
 (g) The person is not required to work exclusively for the
employer.
                                             
 II. "Employer'' means an individual, partnership, association,
corporation, legal representative, trustee, receiver, trustee in
bankruptcy, governmental entity, and any common carrier who employs any
person. Employer shall include any person acting in the interest of an
employer directly or indirectly.
                                             
 III. "Governmental entity'' means any branch, department,
commission, bureau, agency, or agent of the government of this state or
a political subdivision of this state.

**Source.** 1987, 386:1. 1999, 279:3. 2007, 362:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.
2012, 139:3, eff. Aug. 6, 2012.

### Section 275-E:2

 **275-E:2 Protection of Employees Reporting Violations. –**
                                             
 I. No employer shall harass, abuse, intimidate, discharge, threaten,
or otherwise discriminate against any employee regarding compensation,
terms, conditions, location, or privileges of employment because:
                                             
 (a) The employee, in good faith, reports or causes to be
reported, verbally or in writing, what the employee has reasonable cause
to believe is a violation of any law or rule adopted under the laws of
this state, a political subdivision of this state, or the United States;
or
                                             
 (b) The employee objects to or refuses to participate in any
activity that the employee, in good faith, believes is a violation of
the law; or
                                             
 (c) The employee, in good faith, participates, verbally or in
writing, in an investigation, hearing, or inquiry conducted by any
governmental entity, including a court action, which concerns
allegations that the employer has violated any law or rule adopted under
the laws of this state, a political subdivision of this state, or the
United States.
                                             
 II. An aggrieved employee may bring a civil suit within 3 years of
the alleged violation of this section. The court may order reinstatement
and back-pay, as well as reasonable attorney fees and costs, to the
prevailing party.

**Source.** 1987, 386:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988. 2010, 340:2, eff. July 20,
2010.

### Section 275-E:3

 **275-E:3 Protection of Employees Who Refuse to Execute Illegal
Directives. –** No employer shall discharge, threaten or otherwise
discriminate against any employee regarding such employee's
compensation, terms, conditions, location, or privileges of employment
because the employee has refused to execute a directive which in fact
violates any law or rule adopted under the laws of this state, a
political subdivision of this state, or the United States.

**Source.** 1987, 386:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 275-E:4

 **275-E:4 Rights and Remedies. –**
                                             
 I. Any employee who alleges a violation of rights under RSA 275-E:2
or 3, and who has first made a reasonable effort to maintain or restore
such employee's rights through any grievance procedure or similar
process available at such employee's place of employment, may obtain a
hearing with the commissioner of labor or a designee appointed by the
commissioner. Following such hearing, the labor commissioner or the
designee appointed by such commissioner shall render a judgment on such
matter, and shall order, as the commissioner or his designee considers
appropriate, reinstatement of the employee, the payment of back pay,
fringe benefits and seniority rights, any appropriate injunctive relief,
or any combination of these remedies.
                                             
 II. Decisions rendered by the commissioner of labor under paragraph
I may be appealed pursuant to RSA 541.

**Source.** 1987, 386:1. 1992, 72:1, eff. May 20, 1992.

### Section 275-E:5

 **275-E:5 No Effect on Bargaining or Common Law Rights. –** This
chapter shall not be construed to diminish or impair either the rights
of a person under any collective bargaining agreement or any common law
rights.

**Source.** 1987, 386:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 275-E:6

 **275-E:6 Compensation of Employee. –** This chapter shall not be
construed to require an employer to compensate an employee for
participation in an investigation, hearing or inquiry held by a
governmental entity.

**Source.** 1987, 386:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 275-E:7

 **275-E:7 Posting of Notices; Violation. –** Every employer shall
post such notices as are prescribed by the commissioner of labor as a
means of keeping such employer's employees informed of their protections
and obligations under this chapter. The commissioner of labor shall
adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to the form, content, and
placement of such notices. Failure to comply with the provisions of this
section or rules adopted by the commissioner of labor shall be a
violation for each day of noncompliance.

**Source.** 1987, 386:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

Public Employee Complaint Investigation Process
-----------------------------------------------

### Section 275-E:8

 **275-E:8 Complaint Investigation by Department of Labor. –**
                                             
 I. The department of labor shall have the authority to receive and
investigate complaints or information from any public employee
concerning the possible existence of any activity constituting fraud,
waste, or abuse in the expenditure of any public funds, whether state or
local, or relating to programs and operations involving the procurement
of any supplies, services, or construction by governmental entities
within the state.
                                             
 II. The labor commissioner shall make an initial determination as to
whether a complaint received under paragraph I is without merit,
unfounded, or in need of further information, in which case, the
complaint may be dismissed without further action, or held until such
time as additional information is received, or dismissed if no further
information is received within the time period specified by the
commissioner. If the labor commissioner makes an initial determination
that the complaint has merit and warrants further investigation, the
labor commissioner may undertake such investigation or refer the matter
to the appropriate enforcement authority. The identity of the person who
filed the complaint shall not be disclosed without his or her written
consent, unless such disclosure is to a law enforcement agency that is
conducting a criminal investigation.
                                             
 III. If the labor commissioner undertakes further investigation of
the complaint, the commissioner shall have access to all records,
confidential or otherwise, reports, audits, reviews, papers, books,
documents, recommendations, and correspondence, including information or
data that is deemed necessary by the commissioner to carry out the
investigation. The labor commissioner may request such information,
cooperation, and assistance from any state, county, or local
governmental agency and may coordinate activities with the attorney
general's office. In carrying out his or her duties and
responsibilities, the labor commissioner shall immediately report to the
attorney general and either the United States Attorney or local
enforcement agency any suspected violation of state or federal criminal
law.
                                             
 IV. No governmental entity shall take any retaliatory action against
a public employee who, in good faith, files a complaint under this
section and the public employee shall be afforded all protections under
RSA 275-E:2.
                                             
 V. The labor commissioner shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A relative
to the complaint investigation process established in this section,
including the administrative procedure used for responding to
complaints, gathering additional information, and rendering decisions.
                                             
 VI. For purposes of this subdivision, the labor commissioner shall
include any person designated by the labor commissioner to carry out the
investigation authorized by this section. Public employee shall mean any
employee of a governmental entity, as defined in RSA 275-E:1, III.

**Source.** 2010, 340:1, eff. July 20, 2010.

### Section 275-E:9

 **275-E:9 Protection of Public Employees. –** No governmental entity
shall threaten, discipline, demote, fire, transfer, reassign, or
discriminate against a public employee who files a complaint with the
department of labor under RSA 275-E:8 or otherwise discloses or
threatens to disclose activities or information that the employee
reasonably believes violates RSA 275-E:2, represents a gross
mismanagement or waste of public funds, property, or manpower, or
evidences an abuse of authority or a danger to the public health and
safety. Notwithstanding this provision of law, public employers may
discipline, demote, fire, transfer, or reassign an employee so long as
the action is not arbitrary or capricious and is not in retaliation for
the filing of a complaint under this chapter. Any public employee who
files such a complaint or makes such a disclosure shall be entitled to
all rights and remedies provided by this chapter.

**Source.** 2010, 340:1, eff. July 20, 2010.
