---
title: 'CHAPTER 275-D DISPLACED HOMEMAKERS'
---

TITLE XXIII
                                             
LABOR
============

CHAPTER 275-D
                                             
DISPLACED HOMEMAKERS
--------------------

### Section 275-D:1

 **275-D:1 Purpose. –** The general court finds that there is an
increasing number of persons in the state who, in their middle and later
years and having fulfilled the role of homemaker, find themselves
displaced because of dissolution of marriage, death of a spouse, or
other loss of family income. As a consequence, displaced homemakers have
a greatly reduced income, high rate of unemployment due to age, lack of
paid work experience and discrimination, and limited opportunities to
collect funds of assistance from social security, unemployment
compensation, medicaid and other health insurance benefits, or pension
plans of the spouse. The problems require the establishment of programs
to assist displaced homemakers.

**Source.** 1979, 363:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 275-D:2

 **275-D:2 Definitions. –** For the purposes of this chapter the
following terms have meanings given:
                                             
 I. "Displaced homemaker'' means a person who (a) worked in the home
for a substantial number of years providing unpaid household services
for family members; (b) is not gainfully employed; (c) has difficulty in
securing employment; and (d) was dependent on the income of another
family member but is no longer supported by such income, or was
dependent on government assistance but is no longer eligible for such
assistance.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of labor.

**Source.** 1979, 363:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 275-D:3

 **275-D:3 Programs Established. –**
                                             
 I. In order to enable the displaced homemaker to contribute to
society and maintain independence and economic security, the
commissioner shall establish 2 pilot multipurpose service centers for
displaced homemakers, one in the metropolitan area in the southern tier
of the state, and one in the rural north country area. To the greatest
extent possible, the commissioner shall make grants to nonprofit
agencies or organizations to carry out the various programs.
                                             
 II. The centers shall develop, by working with federal, state and
local governmental agencies and private employers, job counseling and
placement services specifically designed for displaced homemakers. The
services shall:
                                             
 (a) Counsel displaced homemakers with respect to appropriate job
opportunities;
                                             
 (b) Identify community needs and seek funding for new public
sector jobs;
                                             
 (c) Provide displaced homemakers with the necessary counseling,
training, skills and referral services to become gainfully employed,
healthy and independent;
                                             
 (d) Develop plans to include more displaced homemakers in
existing training and placement programs;
                                             
 (e) Refer displaced homemakers to agencies which may provide
information and assistance with respect to health care, financial
matters, education, nutrition, and legal problems, and
                                             
 (f) Take into account and build upon the skills and experience of
the displaced homemaker.
                                             
 III. The centers shall utilize the counseling resources available
through community mental health services programs or any other existing
agency under the direction of the commissioner of health and human
services pursuant to RSA 126-B to assist displaced homemakers in their
adjustment from providing unpaid household services to locating
appropriate job opportunities.

**Source.** 1979, 363:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 275-D:4

 **275-D:4 Coordination With Federal, State and Local Agencies. –**
The commissioner shall cooperate with federal, state and local agencies
to coordinate the service programs established pursuant to RSA 275-D:3.
The commissioner, with the advice of the staff at the centers, shall
promulgate rules concerning the eligibility of persons for the job
training and other programs of the multipurpose service centers, the
level of stipends for the job training programs, and a sliding fee scale
for the service programs.

**Source.** 1979, 363:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 275-D:5

 **275-D:5 Reports. –** The director of each center shall report to
the commissioner as prescribed by rule, and shall evaluate the
effectiveness of the job training, placement and service to displaced
homemakers, including the number of persons trained, the number of
persons placed in employment, follow-up data on such persons, the number
of persons served by the various service programs, and cost
effectiveness of the various components of the center.

**Source.** 1979, 363:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 275-D:6

 **275-D:6 Securing Employment. –** Staff of the service centers
shall assist the displaced homemakers in finding permanent employment.
To this end, the commissioner and the service centers staffs shall work
with the department of employment security and any other agency to
secure employment for displaced homemakers.

**Source.** 1979, 363:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 275-D:7

 **275-D:7 Contributions. –** The director of each center may accept,
use and dispose of contributions of money, service and property or any
federal funds and private funds to implement this chapter.

**Source.** 1979, 363:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.
