---
title: 'CHAPTER 275-A CITIZENS JOB PROTECTION'
---

TITLE XXIII
                                             
LABOR
============

CHAPTER 275-A
                                             
CITIZENS JOB PROTECTION
-----------------------

### Section 275-A:1

 **275-A:1 Employment of Certain Persons Prohibited. –** A person,
partnership, firm, or corporation, or officer or agent thereof, involved
in a strike or lock-out, shall not knowingly employ in the place of an
employee involved in a strike or lock-out, any person who customarily
and repeatedly offers himself for employment in the place of employees
involved in a labor strike, lock-out, or labor dispute.

**Source.** 1965, 130:1, eff. Aug. 1, 1965.

### Section 275-A:2

 **275-A:2 Professional Strikebreakers. –** A person who customarily
and repeatedly offers himself for employment in the place of employees
involved in a strike, lock-out, or labor dispute shall not take or offer
to take the place in employment of employees involved in a strike,
lock-out, or labor dispute.

**Source.** 1965, 130:1, eff. Aug. 1, 1965.

### Section 275-A:3

 **275-A:3 Persons Unaware of Labor Dispute. –** An employer shall
not hire for work in a plant currently involved in a strike, lock-out,
or labor dispute an employee who, to the employer's knowledge, is
unaware of the existence of the strike, lock-out, or labor dispute. An
employment agency shall not refer persons to employment in a plant
currently involved in a strike, lock-out, or labor dispute without
adequate notice to such persons that there is a strike, lock-out, or
labor dispute in the plant at which the employment is offered.

**Source.** 1965, 130:1, eff. Aug. 1, 1965.

### Section 275-A:4

 **275-A:4 Professional Pickets. –** A person shall not act as a
picket for compensation in connection with any strike, lock-out, or
labor dispute in any trade or industry unless he is normally and
customarily employed in such trade or industry.

**Source.** 1965, 130:1, eff. Aug. 1, 1965.

### Section 275-A:4-a

 **275-A:4-a Employment of Undocumented Workers Prohibited. –** No
employer may employ any employee without obtaining documentation showing
the employee's eligibility to work in the United States. The employer
shall maintain such documentation for the period required by federal
law. Acceptable documentation of eligibility to work in the United
States shall include documents required by federal law or supporting
documentation that satisfies the requirement of federal law.

**Source.** 1976, 31:1, eff. July 25, 1976. 2014, 123:1, eff. Aug. 15,
2014.

### Section 275-A:4-b

 **275-A:4-b Misuse of Social Security Numbers. –**
                                             
 I. Any person whose social security number has been used by another
for identification purposes shall have a civil cause of action against:
                                             
 (a) The person who misused the number with fraudulent intent.
                                             
 (b) Any individual who knowingly supplied or aided in obtaining
false social security documentation.
                                             
 (c) Any employer who knows the documentation is false.
                                             
 II. Any employer who receives verification of the employee's
eligibility to work from the Social Security Administration, E-Verify,
or any other reputable organization providing a verification service
shall be deemed to have exercised reasonable care and shall have an
affirmative defense to the cause of action.
                                             
 III. Damages awarded by the court shall be treble damages or

                                             $10,000, whichever is greater, plus reasonable attorney's fees and any
costs incurred to correct the records of the aggrieved party.

**Source.** 2012, 244:1, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 275-A:5

 **275-A:5 Penalties. –** Any person, partnership, agency, firm, or
corporation violating any provision of RSA 275-A shall be subject to a
civil penalty of up to 
                                             $2,500 for each day of noncompliance, to be
imposed by the labor commissioner in accordance with the procedures
established in RSA 273:11-a. Any person aggrieved by the commissioner's
assessment of such penalty may appeal in accordance with RSA 273:11-b.

**Source.** 1965, 130:1. 1973, 528:170. 1976, 31:2. 1991, 181:2. 2006,
128:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.
