---
title: 'CHAPTER 276-B TASK FORCE ON WORK AND FAMILY'
---

TITLE XXIII
                                             
LABOR
============

CHAPTER 276-B
                                             
TASK FORCE ON WORK AND FAMILY
-----------------------------

### Section 276-B:1

 **276-B:1 Task Force on Work and Family Established. –** There is
established a task force on work and family, the purpose of which is to
identify the multiple barriers which keep New Hampshire workers from
achieving economic security and maximizing their contributions to the
state's economy as well as attending to family responsibilities.

**Source.** 2010, 255:1, eff. July 6, 2010.

### Section 276-B:2

 **276-B:2 Membership; Compensation; Terms. –**
                                             
 I. The members of the task force shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) Two members of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (b) One member of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (c) One member appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (d) The commissioner of the department of employment security, or
designee.
                                             
 (e) The commissioner of labor, or designee.
                                             
 (f) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (g) The commissioner of the department of education, or
designee.
                                             
 (h) A representative of the Business and Industry Association of
New Hampshire, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (i) A representative of the New Hampshire Small Business
Development Center at the university of New Hampshire, appointed by the
center.
                                             
 (j) A representative of a local chamber of commerce, appointed by
the governor.
                                             
 (k) A representative of the HR State Council of New Hampshire,
appointed by the council.
                                             
 (l) A representative of the university of New Hampshire, Carsey
Institute, appointed by the institute.
                                             
 (m) A representative of the New Hampshire Children's Trust Fund,
appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (n) A representative of the university of New Hampshire
cooperative extension, appointed by the extension.
                                             
 (o) A representative of Child and Family Services, appointed by
that organization.
                                             
 (p) A representative of the Children's Alliance of New Hampshire,
appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (q) A member of the New Hampshire AFL-CIO, appointed by the
chapter president.
                                             
 (r) A representative of skilled workers, appointed by the New
Hampshire State Building and Construction Trades Council.
                                             
 (s) A representative of Spark NH, appointed by that
organization.
                                             
 (t) A representative of the Women's Fund of New Hampshire,
appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (u) A representative of the insurance industry appointed by the
New Hampshire Association of Domestic Insurance Companies.
                                             
 II. Members of the task force shall serve without compensation,
except that legislative members shall receive mileage at the legislative
rate when attending to the duties of the task force.
                                             
 III. Members of the task force on work and family established in
2007, 373 (HB 306 of the 2007 legislative session) on the effective date
of this section may continue to serve on the task force established in
this chapter until January 1, 2011. Thereafter, members shall be
appointed as provided in paragraph I. Non-legislative members of the
task force shall serve a 2-year term, beginning January 1, 2011, except
that the initial appointment of 12 such members shall be for one year.
Legislative members of the task force shall serve a term co-terminous
with their term in office. Any vacancy shall be filled in the same
manner as the original appointment.

**Source.** 2010, 255:1, eff. July 6, 2010. 2013, 111:1, eff. June 25,
2013.

### Section 276-B:3

 **276-B:3 Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The task force shall:
                                             
 (a) Collect data and information concerning work-family issues,
including employer policies and practices that enable employees to
balance work responsibilities and family commitments and also help
employers improve productivity.
                                             
 (b) Survey businesses to identify barriers to implementing
family-responsive employment policies and practices.
                                             
 (c) Develop and promote a system of incentives and rewards, such
as the Alfred P. Sloan Awards, for businesses that provide
family-responsive benefits.
                                             
 (d) Research programs and benefits that attract and retain young
professionals and skilled workers and also provide opportunities for
elders to continue working on reduced schedules.
                                             
 (e) Continue to provide public education on work-family issues
and on the need for workplace policies and practices that support the
well-being of families and promote a strong and prosperous economy.
                                             
 (f) Study the establishment of a paid family leave voluntary
insurance program, contingent on the availability of federal funds to be
administered through the department of employment security and supported
by a payroll deduction or other revenue source.
                                             
 (g) Seek federal and private funds to complete an actuarial study
to determine the costs of sustaining a paid family leave voluntary
insurance program.
                                             
 II. The task force shall periodically hold hearings in different
geographic regions of the state to solicit information and testimony
from employers, employees, state agencies, and interested councils and
organizations.

**Source.** 2010, 255:1, eff. July 6, 2010. 2013, 111:2, eff. June 25,
2013.

### Section 276-B:4

 **276-B:4 Chairperson; Quorum. –** The members of the task force
shall elect a chairperson from among the members. The first meeting of
the task force shall be called by the first-named house member and shall
be held within 45 days of the effective date of this section. Thereafter
the task force shall meet at the call of the chair. Twelve members of
the task force shall constitute a quorum.

**Source.** 2010, 255:1, eff. July 6, 2010.

### Section 276-B:5

 **276-B:5 Report. –** On or before November 1, 2010, and each year
thereafter, the task force shall submit an annual report of its
activities and findings, including any recommendations for proposed
legislation, to the speaker of the house of representatives, the senate
president, the house clerk, the senate clerk, the governor, and the
state library.

**Source.** 2010, 255:1, eff. July 6, 2010.
