---
title: 'CHAPTER 277-A TOXIC SUBSTANCES IN THE WORKPLACE'
---

TITLE XXIII
                                             
LABOR
============

CHAPTER 277-A
                                             
TOXIC SUBSTANCES IN THE WORKPLACE
---------------------------------

### Section 277-A:1

 **277-A:1 Name. –** This chapter shall be known and may be cited as
the "Worker's Right to Know Act.''

**Source.** 1983, 466:1, eff. Oct. 26, 1983.

### Section 277-A:2

 **277-A:2 Purpose. –** The general court hereby finds and declares
that the proliferation of toxic substances in the workplace poses a
growing threat to the health of employees exposed to these substances;
that the number and variety of these substances makes effective
monitoring of these potential health hazards by governmental agencies
difficult and expensive; that employees themselves are often in the best
position to detect symptoms of toxicity, provided they are aware of the
nature of the substances to which they are exposed; that employees have
an inherent right to know the dangers to which they are potentially
exposed in their workplace so that they may make knowledgeable and
reasoned decisions with respect to their continued employment under the
circumstances and the need for corrective action; and that the workplace
often serves as an early warning mechanism for the outside environment.
The general court therefore determines that it is appropriate for
employers to provide their employees with all available information
concerning the nature of the toxic substances to which such employees
may be exposed during the course of their employment and the suspected
hazards these substances pose and to take all other practicable and
feasible measures to protect their employees from the risks of toxic
substances.

**Source.** 1983, 466:1, eff. Oct. 26, 1983.

### Section 277-A:3

 **277-A:3 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Employee'' means any person who currently works or formerly
worked, with or without compensation, in a workplace. The term
"employee'' does not include domestic workers or casual laborers
employed at the place of residence of the employer.
                                             
 II. "Employee representative'' means an individual or organization
to which an employee gives written authorization to exercise his rights
under this chapter. A recognized or certified collective bargaining
agent shall be considered to be an employee representative without
regard to written employee authorization.
                                             
 III. "Employer'' means any person, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, the state, any political subdivision of the state, or any
other entity which is engaged in a business or in providing services and
which employs employees in connection with such business or services.
                                             
 IV. "Safety data sheet'' means a written document prepared on a
toxic substance containing all of the following information except as
provided by RSA 277-A:4, III(c):
                                             
 (a) Identification including product identifier; manufacturer or
distributor name, address, phone number; emergency phone number;
recommended use; restrictions on use.
                                             
 (b) The hazards of the substance.
                                             
 (c) Composition and information on ingredients, including
information on chemical ingredients and trade secret claims.
                                             
 (d) First aid measures including important symptoms or effects,
if acute or delayed, and required treatment.
                                             
 (e) Firefighting measures including suitable extinguishing
techniques and equipment and any chemical hazards from fire.
                                             
 (f) Accidental release measures including emergency procedures,
protective equipment, and proper methods of containment and cleanup.
                                             
 (g) Handling and storage precautions, including
incompatibilities.
                                             
 (h) Exposure controls and personal protection, including
Occupational Safety and Health Administration Permissible Exposure
Limits, Threshold Limit Values, appropriate engineering controls, and
personal protective equipment.
                                             
 (i) Physical and chemical properties and characteristics.
                                             
 (j) Stability, reactivity, and the possibility of hazardous
reactions.
                                             
 (k) Toxicological information including routes of exposure,
related symptoms, acute and chronic effects, and numerical measures of
toxicity.
                                             
 (l) The date such information was compiled and the name and
address of the manufacturer, producer, or formulator responsible for
compiling it.
                                             
 V. "Toxic substance'' means any radioactive or other substance which
is defined as a toxic substance by a rule adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A
by the department of health and human services. The department shall
define as a toxic substance:
                                             
 (a) Any substance which appears on any list of toxic or hazardous
substances which is included in any of the following:
                                             
 (1) The United States Department of Transportation's 1980
Emergency Response Guidebook of Hazardous Waste Materials.
                                             
 (2) TLV's: Threshold Limit Values for Chemical Substances and
Physical Agents in the Workroom Environment, published by the American
Conference of Government Industrial Hygienists.
                                             
 (3) Title 29, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 1910.1000.
                                             
 (4) Standards issued under Section 6(b)(5) of the Occupational
Safety and Health Act of 1970.
                                             
 (5) The Director of the Department of Industrial Relations'
List of Hazardous Substances, published by the State of California.
                                             
 (b) Any substance which has yielded positive evidence of acute or
chronic health hazards in human, animal or other biological testing
which could be applicable to human beings;
                                             
 (c) Any other substance which the department determines should be
so defined consistent with the purposes of this chapter and consistent
to the extent possible with the methods and criteria used in compiling
the lists of toxic or hazardous substances referred to in subparagraph
(a). For the purposes of this chapter, the term "toxic substance'' shall
not include any liquor or beverage, as those terms are defined in RSA
175:1, VIII and XLII, or any other substance which has been packaged for
retail sale or which is contained in a product which has been packaged
for retail sale; and
                                             
 (d) Any substance which is combustible, a compressed gas,
explosive, flammable, a health hazard, an organic peroxide, an oxidizer,
pyrophoric, unstable (reactive) or water reactive as established by the
latest edition of the Fire Protection Guide on Hazardous Materials
published by the National Fire Protective Association.
                                             
 VI. "Trade secret'' means any confidential formula, pattern, device
or compilation of information which does all of the following:
                                             
 (a) Is used in the employer's business.
                                             
 (b) Gives the employer the opportunity to obtain an advantage
over competitors who do not know or use it.
                                             
 (c) Is known only to the employer and to those employees to whom
it is necessary to confide.
                                             
 VII. "Workplace'' means any location, permanent or temporary, where
an employee performs any work-related duty in the course of his
employment.
                                             
 VIII. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of labor.

**Source.** 1983, 466:1. 1990, 255:10. 1995, 310:175, 181, eff. Nov. 1,
1995. 2015, 141:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 277-A:4

 **277-A:4 Safety Data Sheets. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph III, no person shall obtain,
purchase, manufacture, formulate, transport or distribute any toxic
substance within this state unless the substance is accompanied by a
complete safety data sheet prepared by the manufacturer, producer, or
formulator of such substance no more than one year prior to the
obtainment, purchase, manufacture, formulation, transportation or
distribution.
                                             
 II. A manufacturer, producer or formulator may provide a single
safety data sheet for a product mixture containing 2 or more toxic
substances instead of providing a safety data sheet for each toxic
substance component of such mixture if all of the following are
applicable:
                                             
 (a) The product mixture itself has been submitted to sufficient
analysis and testing to justify a valid judgment on its hazardous
properties.
                                             
 (b) Each component toxic substance is identified on the product
label individually, within the limits of practicability and
feasibility.
                                             
 (c) A safety data sheet on each component toxic substance
identified pursuant to subparagraph (b) is available upon request.
                                             
 III. (a) When a manufacturer, producer, formulator or employer
considers the identity of or other information concerning a toxic
substance to be a protectable trade secret whose disclosure would
compromise his or her competitive advantage, he or she shall register
this information as secret with the commissioner of labor provided that
such information is already registered as a trade secret pursuant to any
provision of federal law or such information is not registered as a
trade secret but is related to a proprietary process the disclosure of
which would compromise his or her competitive position.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner of labor shall not release any data which
discloses any trade secret or proprietary process unless he or she shall
notify, in writing and by certified mail, the submitter of such
information of the intent to release the data. The commissioner may not
release the information, without the submitter's consent, until the
thirtieth day after the submitter has been furnished such notice. Any
subsequent release shall be pursuant to applicable provisions relating
to trade secrets or the Freedom of Information Act.
                                             
 (c) In the event that a toxic substance or product mixture
containing 2 or more toxic substances is registered by a manufacturer,
producer or formulator as a component of a trade secret or otherwise
protected as a proprietary process, such manufacturer, producer or
formulator shall not be required to divulge the specific identity of the
substance, but shall be required to provide a safety data sheet
containing the information specified in RSA 277-A:3, IV(b)-(l).
                                             
 (d) In the event that a toxic substance or product mixture
containing 2 or more toxic substances is registered as a component of a
trade secret or otherwise protected as a proprietary process, the
employer shall not be required to divulge the specific identity of the
substance but shall otherwise be subject to all of the duties imposed by
RSA 277-A:5.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph III, full and
complete information regarding any toxic substance or substances to
which an employee has been exposed shall be made available to a licensed
physician if the information is needed for the purpose of medical
diagnosis or treatment of such person.

**Source.** 1983, 466:1, eff. Oct. 26, 1983. 2015, 141:2, eff. Jan. 1,
2016.

### Section 277-A:5

 **277-A:5 Employer's Duty to Provide Information. –** Subject to the
limitations of RSA 277-A:4, III, every employer whose employees handle,
use, or are otherwise exposed to any toxic substance during the course
and scope of their employment shall:
                                             
 I. Keep on file in a convenient office location and make available
for examination and reproduction upon request a safety data sheet for
each toxic substance or product mixture containing 2 or more toxic
substances to which an employee may be exposed in carrying out his or
her duties.
                                             
 II. Post a notice, written in clearly understandable nontechnical
language, in a conspicuous location accessible to the employees and as
close to the work area as possible containing the word "Warning'' in
large letters and all the following information on each toxic substance
to which employees may be exposed:
                                             
 (a) The name or names of the substance.
                                             
 (b) The acute and chronic hazards of exposure to the substance.
                                             
 (c) Symptoms of exposure and overexposure, including known
behavioral effects.
                                             
 (d) Appropriate emergency treatment for exposure and
overexposure.
                                             
 (e) Proper conditions for safe use of and exposure to the
substance.
                                             
 (f) Procedures for cleanup of leaks and spills of the substance.
                                             
 (g) Procedures in case of fire or other environmental changes
which would result in increasing the substance's hazardous or toxic
properties.
                                             
 III. Post a notice of the availability of a safety data sheet for
each of the toxic substances to which the employee may be exposed and,
upon request by an employee for a safety data sheet, supply such data
sheet within 72 hours.
                                             
 IV. Conduct an education and training program within 180 days of
October 26, 1983, for all employees routinely exposed to toxic
substances, and thereafter during the first month of employment of any
such new employee, informing such employees of the nature of the toxic
substances to which they will be exposed, prescribing proper and safe
procedures for handling under all circumstances, and advising them of
the potential risks involved.
                                             
 V. Make every reasonable effort to obtain from manufacturers,
producers, formulators, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, or
any other authoritative source, any new or updated information
concerning the toxic substances in his or her workplace and to make such
information available to all affected employees immediately.
                                             
 VI. Notify all employees of their rights under this chapter.
                                             
 VII. Send a copy of each safety data sheet with details of the
specific locations of each toxic substance and available extinguishing
agents to the local fire department. Such safety data sheets shall be
available for public inspection at such fire departments.
                                             
 VIII. Maintain on file at the workplace safety data sheets for a
period of at least 30 years after discontinuation of the use of each
toxic substance. In the event that the employer ceases operations or
relocates, all safety data sheets shall be submitted to the department
of labor to be maintained on file for the statutorily required 30 year
period. All rights of access to safety data sheets provided in this
chapter shall apply to the full 30 year period.

**Source.** 1983, 466:1, eff. Oct. 26, 1983. 2015, 141:2, eff. Jan. 1,
2016.

### Section 277-A:6

 **277-A:6 Employees' Rights if Information Not Provided. –** Any
employee who requests information about a toxic substance required
pursuant to RSA 277-A:5, III may, if he does not receive such
information within 5 working days, refuse to work with such substance
until such time as the employer provides him with such information.

**Source.** 1983, 466:1, eff. Oct. 26, 1983.

### Section 277-A:7

 **277-A:7 Discharge or Discrimination for Exercise of Rights
Forbidden. –**
                                             
 I. No employer shall discharge or cause to be discharged or
otherwise discipline or in any manner discriminate against any employee,
prospective employee or employee representative because that person has
filed any complaint or has instituted or caused to be instituted any
proceeding related to the provisions of this chapter, or has exercised
any right provided in this chapter.
                                             
 II. Any employee, prospective employee or employee representative
who believes that he has been discharged, disciplined, or otherwise
discriminated against by an employer pursuant to paragraph I shall,
within 30 days of such violation, or 30 days after he first obtains
knowledge of such violation, file a complaint with the commissioner of
labor alleging such discrimination. Upon receipt of such a complaint,
the commissioner shall conduct an investigation as he deems appropriate.
If, upon investigation, the commissioner determines the allegation to
have substance, he may refer the matter to the attorney general for
appropriate action.

**Source.** 1983, 466:1, eff. Oct. 26, 1983.

### Section 277-A:8

 **277-A:8 Inspection by Department of Labor Permitted. –**
                                             
 I. If the commissioner or his designee finds, or has cause to
believe, that any provision of this chapter is being violated, he may
enter and inspect the premises of any employer's place of business and
take samples of any unknown substance in order to ascertain compliance
with this chapter. The laboratory services of the department of health
and human services shall be made available to the department of labor
for purposes related to enforcement of this chapter, subject to the
availability of adequate laboratory support.
                                             
 II. The following persons may, if they so desire, accompany such
agent or employee of the department of labor:
                                             
 (a) The affected employer.
                                             
 (b) An employee of the affected employer or an employee
representative.
                                             
 III. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to
interfere with the agent or employee of the department of labor in the
discharge of his duties as prescribed by this chapter.

**Source.** 1983, 466:1. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 277-A:9

 **277-A:9 Penalty. –** Any person who violates any provisions of
this chapter shall be liable for a penalty of not more than 
                                             $2,500 for
each such violation, to be collected in a civil action by the
commissioner of labor. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each
day during which it continues shall constitute an additional and
separate offense.

**Source.** 1983, 466:1, eff. Oct. 26, 1983.

### Section 277-A:10

 **277-A:10 Construction of Chapter. –** The provisions of this
chapter shall be construed as being complementary to and not in lieu of
any other law or of any rule adopted under authority of law relative to
toxic substances or toxic waste including but not limited to RSA 147-A
and RSA 147-B. However, any conflict between this chapter and an
existing statute or rule shall be resolved at all times by following the
stricter requirement.

**Source.** 1983, 466:1, eff. Oct. 26, 1983.
