---
title: CHAPTER 277 SAFETY AND HEALTH OF EMPLOYEES
---

TITLE XXIII
                                             
LABOR
============

CHAPTER 277
                                             
SAFETY AND HEALTH OF EMPLOYEES
------------------------------

Generally
---------

### Section 277:1

 **277:1 Application. –** This chapter shall apply to all places of
employment in which one or more persons are regularly employed.

**Source.** 1917, 183:1. 1919, 66:1. 1921, 130:1. PL 177:1. RL 215:1.
RSA 277:1. 1955, 291:1. 1963, 220:1. 1985, 243:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 277:1-a

 **277:1-a Elevator Law. –** The provisions of RSA 157-B also apply
to all places covered by RSA 277:1.

**Source.** 1967, 310:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1968.

### Section 277:1-b

 **277:1-b Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Employee'' means any person employed to work in a place of
employment. Volunteers or auxiliary members of a fire, police
department, ambulance service or the state police, whether paid or not
paid, shall be deemed to be in the employment of a political subdivision
when performing official service or duty for a political subdivision.
                                             
 II. "Employer'' means the state or any of its political subdivisions
operating a place of employment.
                                             
 III. "Imminent danger'' means a situation created by any conditions
or practices in any place of employment which are such that a danger
exists which could reasonably be expected to cause death or serious
physical harm either immediately or before such danger could be
eliminated through the procedures provided by this chapter.
                                             
 IV. "Place of employment'' means all buildings, offices or other
sites owned or leased by the state or by any political subdivision of
the state. "Place of employment'' includes all buildings, sheds,
structures or places used in connection with employee activity at a
place of employment.

**Source.** 1985, 243:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

Building Construction and Repair Work
-------------------------------------

### Section 277:2

 **277:2 Scaffolding and Other Devices for Use of Employees. –** A
person employing or directing another to perform labor of any kind in
the erection, demolition, repairing, altering, painting, cleaning or
pointing of a building or structure shall furnish or erect, or cause to
be furnished or erected for the performance of such labor, scaffolding,
hoists, stays, ladders, slings, hangers, blocks, pulleys, braces, irons,
ropes, and other devices which shall be so constructed, placed and
operated as to give proper protection to a person so employed or
directed.

**Source.** 1953, 201:1 par. 39-a, eff. June 3, 1953.

### Section 277:3

 **277:3 Requirements. –** Scaffolding or staging more than 14 feet
from the ground or floor, swung or suspended from an overhead support or
erected with stationary supports, except scaffolding wholly within the
interior of a building and covering the entire floor space of any room
therein, shall have a safety rail of suitable material properly
attached, bolted, braced or otherwise secured, rising at least 34 inches
above the floor or main portions of such scaffolding or staging and
extending along the entire length of the outside and the ends thereof,
with only such openings as may be necessary for the delivery of
materials. Such scaffolding or staging shall be so fastened as to
prevent it from swaying from the building or structure.

**Source.** 1953, 201:1 par. 39-b, eff. June 3, 1953.

### Section 277:4

 **277:4 Weight Requirement. –** All scaffolding shall be so
constructed as to bear 4 times the maximum weight required to be
dependent therefrom or placed thereon when in use.

**Source.** 1953, 201:1 par. 39-c, eff. June 3, 1953.

### Section 277:5

 **277:5 Duty of Commissioner. –** The labor commissioner shall
immediately inspect a scaffold, ladder, or device concerning which
complaint is made. He shall attach to every scaffold, ladder, or device
that he inspects a certificate stating that he has made the inspection
and has found the same safe or unsafe as the case may be. If unsafe, the
commissioner shall at once, in writing, notify the person responsible
for the scaffold, ladder, or mechanical device of the fact and shall
prohibit the use of it by him or by any other person until all danger is
removed by alteration, reconstruction or replacement as the commissioner
may direct. Such notice may be served personally upon the person
responsible or by affixing it conspicuously to the scaffold, ladder, or
device declared unsafe.

**Source.** 1953, 201:1 par. 39-d, eff. June 3, 1953.

### Section 277:5-a

 **277:5-a Occupational Safety and Health Administration
Certification. –**
                                             
 I. Any person signing a contract to work on a construction,
reconstruction, alteration, remodeling, installation, demolition,
maintenance, or repair of any public work or building by a state agency,
municipality, or instrumentality thereof, and with a total project cost
of 
                                             $100,000 or more, shall have an Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) 10-hour construction safety program for their
on-site employees. All employees are required to complete the program
prior to beginning work. The training program shall utilize an
OSHA-approved curriculum. Graduates shall receive a card from OSHA
certifying the successful completion of the training program. This
section shall apply to the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
remodeling, installation, demolition, maintenance, or repair of any
public work or building paid for in whole or in part with state funds.
                                             
 II. Any employee required to complete the OSHA 10-hour construction
safety program under this section who has not completed the program
shall be subject to removal from the worksite if the employee does not
provide documentation of having completed such program by the fifteenth
day after the date the employee is found to be in noncompliance. Proof
of such documentation provided by the employer shall constitute
compliance with this section. The labor commissioner or commissioner's
designee shall enforce this section.
                                             
 III. The labor commissioner shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A
relative to implementation and enforcement of this section. The
commissioner may also assess a civil penalty of up to 
                                             $2,500; in
addition, such an employer shall be assessed a civil penalty of 
                                             $100
per employee for each day of noncompliance. All funds collected under
this section shall be deposited into the general fund. The labor
commissioner shall appoint as many individuals as necessary to carry out
the department's responsibilities under this section.
                                             
 IV. The following individuals are exempt from the requirements of
the OSHA 10-hour construction safety program:
                                             
 (a) Law enforcement officers involved with traffic control or
jobsite security.
                                             
 (b) Flagging personnel who have completed the training required
by the department of transportation.
                                             
 (c) All relevant federal, state, and municipal government
employees and inspectors.
                                             
 (d) All individuals who are not considered to be on the site of
work under the federal Davis-Bacon Act, including, but not limited to,
construction and non-construction delivery personnel and non-trade
personnel.

**Source.** 2007, 326:1, eff. Sept. 14, 2007. 2012, 144:3, eff. Jan. 1,
2013.

Maintenance of First Aid Equipment, Appliances, Etc.
----------------------------------------------------

### Section 277:6

 **277:6 Medical Chests. –** Every employer shall at all times keep
and maintain, free of expense to the employees, such a medical and
surgical chest as shall be required by the local board of health of the
city or town, containing plasters, bandages, absorbent cotton, gauze and
all other necessary medicines, instruments and other appliances for the
treatment of persons injured or taken ill upon the premises.

**Source.** 1911, 30:1. PL 177:2. RL 215:2.

### Section 277:7

 **277:7 Penalty. –** Whoever violates RSA 277:6 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other
person. Each week during which such violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.

**Source.** 1911, 30:2. PL 177:3. RL 215:3. RSA 277:7. 1973, 529:55,
eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 277:8

 **277:8 Seats. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 243:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 277:9

 **277:9 Penalty. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 243:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 277:10

 **277:10 Sanitation, Provision for. –** Every employer shall provide
and maintain reasonable and proper toilet facilities and reasonably
sanitary and hygienic conditions for employees.

**Source.** 1917, 183:2. PL 177:6. RL 215:6.

### Section 277:11

 **277:11 Safeguards. –** Whenever the nature or condition of any
such place of employment, or the machinery or other appliances therein,
are such as to render work therein or in proximity thereto dangerous to
the safety or health of employees, it shall be the duty of the employer
to provide and maintain such safeguards, safety devices, appliances and
lighting facilities, and to do such other things as may be reasonably
necessary and practicable to lessen the dangers of such employment.

**Source.** 1917, 183:2. PL 177:7. RL 215:7.

### Section 277:12

 **277:12 Interference With. –** No person shall remove, displace,
damage or carry off any safety device or safeguard furnished and
provided for use in any employment or place of employment so as to
interfere with the intended use thereof, or interfere in any way with
the use thereof by any other person, and no person shall interfere with
the use of any method or process adopted for the protection of any
employee in such employment or place of employment.

**Source.** 1917, 183:3. PL 177:8. RL 215:8.

Inspections and Orders by Commissioner
--------------------------------------

### Section 277:13

 **277:13 Inspection. –** The labor commissioner shall cause all
places of employment subject to this law to be inspected at intervals to
be determined by him, for the purpose of determining whether the
provisions of this chapter have been complied with and the conditions
therein with respect to the safety and health of the employees.

**Source.** 1917, 183:4. PL 177:9. RL 215:9. RSA 277:13. 1957, 187:15.
1963, 220:2, eff. July 1, 1963.

### Section 277:13-a

 **277:13-a Petition for Inspection. –** Any employee may petition
the commissioner to inspect any place of employment in which the
employee is employed for the purpose of determining whether the employer
has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or rules adopted
under this chapter. Upon receipt of such petition, the commissioner
shall cause such place of employment to be inspected within a reasonable
time.

**Source.** 1985, 243:4, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 277:14

 **277:14 Report. –** A report of such inspection shall be filed in
the office of the commissioner and a copy thereof given the employer.

**Source.** 1917, 183:4. PL 177:10. RL 215:10.

### Section 277:15

 **277:15 Entry. –** The commissioner, factory inspectors and other
assistants of the commissioner shall have the right to enter any such
place of employment and to examine the same for the purposes of this
chapter.

**Source.** 1917, 183:4. PL 177:11. RL 215:11.

### Section 277:16

 **277:16 Rulemaking. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of labor shall adopt such rules, under RSA
541-A, as he deems reasonable and necessary in order to carry out
properly the provisions of RSA 277:10 and 277:11.
                                             
 II. Prior to January 1, 1987, the commissioner of labor shall
present proposed legislation containing a specific delegation of
rulemaking authority to replace this section to the chairman of the
joint legislative committee on administrative rules established under
RSA 541-A and to the senate president and the speaker of the house of
representatives who may refer such proposed legislation to the
appropriate standing committees. This proposed legislative delegation of
rulemaking authority shall be drafted in as narrow a manner as possible,
consistent with the need to provide the commissioner of labor with
sufficient authority to fulfill the regulatory role assigned to him
under RSA 277:10-11.

**Source.** 1917, 183:5. PL 177:12. RL 215:12. RSA 277:16. 1963, 220:3.
1985, 243:6. 1987, 140:1, eff. May 7, 1987.

### Section 277:17

 **277:17 Modification. –** Whenever the commissioner, after any
place of employment subject to this chapter shall have been inspected in
accordance with RSA 277:13, shall be of the opinion that the special
conditions in that place of employment render the standards inadequate
or unreasonable, as applied to such place of employment, he may, by
special order applicable to that place, so modify or extend the
requirements of such standards as to make the same adequate and
reasonable with respect to such special conditions.

**Source.** 1917, 183:5. PL 177:13. RL 215:13. RSA 277:17. 1963, 220:4,
eff. July 1, 1963.

### Section 277:18

 **277:18 Added Safeguards. –** Whenever, after inspection as
provided in RSA 277:13, the commissioner shall be of the opinion that
compliance with the standards, under the special conditions obtaining in
any place of employment, necessitates the use of any safeguard, or the
doing of any other act for which the standards adopted by him do not
provide, he shall have power, by special order, to require the adoption
in that place of employment of such particular safeguards, safety
devices, appliances, lighting facilities, or other means as may be
reasonable and practicable for the safety and health of the employees.

**Source.** 1917, 183:5. PL 177:14. RL 215:14. RSA 277:18. 1963, 220:5,
eff. July 1, 1963.

### Section 277:19

 **277:19 Sanitation, Enforcement of. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1963, 220:6,
eff. July 1, 1963.
                                             ]

### Section 277:20

 **277:20 Compliance, Time. –** Every order made by the commissioner
shall fix the time when it shall take effect, and in every case a
reasonable time shall be allowed to the employer affected thereby for
compliance with the order.

**Source.** 1917, 183:6. PL 177:16. RL 215:16. RSA 277:20. 1985, 243:7,
eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 277:21

 **277:21 Notice of Orders. –** Notice shall be given by certified
mail of every order to those who are required to comply with the order.
Notice of any such order of general application may be given by
publication in some newspaper having circulation throughout the state.

**Source.** 1917, 183:6. PL 177:17. RL 215:17. RSA 277:21. 1985, 243:7,
eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 277:21-a

 **277:21-a Consultation. –** The commissioner shall provide
occupational health and safety services to public and private employers,
and shall consult with the commissioner of the department of health and
human services relative to the implementation of occupational health
unit programs authorized by RSA 125:16-16-d.

**Source.** 1983, 291:1, I; 410:2. 1995, 310:182, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

Proceedings Before the Commissioner
-----------------------------------

### Section 277:22

 **277:22 Powers. –** For the purpose of carrying into effect the
provisions of this chapter the commissioner shall have power to
administer oaths, certify to official acts, issue subpoenas and compel
the attendance of witnesses and the production of papers, books,
accounts, documents and testimony.

**Source.** 1917, 183:10. PL 177:18. RL 215:18.

### Section 277:23

 **277:23 Depositions. –** The deposition of any witness within or
without the state, taken in the manner prescribed by law for depositions
in civil actions, may be used in any proceeding for review or appeal.

**Source.** 1917, 183:11. PL 177:19. RL 215:19.

### Section 277:24

 **277:24 Record. –** The commissioner shall keep a complete record
of all orders, rules or regulations made and adopted by him.

**Source.** 1917, 183:10. PL 177:20. RL 215:20.

Review of Orders
----------------

### Section 277:25

 **277:25 Petition. –** Any employer affected by such order, rule or
regulation may petition the commissioner for a review of the validity or
reasonableness thereof. The commissioner may join in one proceeding all
petitions alleging invalidity or unreasonableness of the same or
substantially similar orders, rules or regulations. The petition for
review shall be filed within 30 days after notice of the adoption of the
order, rule or regulation; provided, that the commissioner may, whenever
in his opinion justice may require it, extend the time for filing such
petition.

**Source.** 1917, 183:7. PL 177:21. RL 215:21.

### Section 277:26

 **277:26 Hearing. –** Upon receipt of the petition the commissioner
shall, if necessary to determine the issue raised, order a hearing.
Notice of the time and place of hearing, which shall be open to the
public, shall be given to the petitioner and to such other persons as
the commissioner may find to be directly interested in the issues
raised.

**Source.** 1917, 183:7. PL 177:22. RL 215:22.

### Section 277:27

 **277:27 Revocation of Order or Regulation. –** If, upon such
hearing, the commissioner finds that the order, rule or regulation
complained of is invalid or unreasonable he shall revoke it, or
substitute therefor a new or amended one.

**Source.** 1917, 183:7. PL 177:23. RL 215:23.

### Section 277:28

 **277:28 Effect of Commissioner's Decision. –** The decision of the
commissioner upon such petition shall be final unless appeal is taken in
the manner herein provided.

**Source.** 1917, 183:7. PL 177:24. RL 215:24.

Appeals From Orders
-------------------

### Section 277:29

 **277:29 Petition. –** Any employer aggrieved by any order, rule or
regulation of the commissioner may file a petition in the superior court
against the commissioner to determine the validity and reasonableness
thereof. Such petition shall be filed within 30 days after notice of the
adoption of the order, rule or regulation, or, if a petition for review
is filed, within 30 days from the decision upon such petition.

**Source.** 1917, 183:8. PL 177:25. RL 215:25.

### Section 277:30

 **277:30 Notice; Procedure. –** Such notice shall be given to the
commissioner of the pendency of such proceedings as the superior court
may order. Such petition, so far as practicable, shall have precedence
over other actions in the same court, and the order appealed from shall
be prima facie valid and reasonable. The proceedings upon such petition
shall be as nearly as may be in accordance with proceedings in equity,
and the court shall make such order or decree as justice may require.

**Source.** 1917, 183:8. PL 177:26. RL 215:26.

### Section 277:31

 **277:31 Reference. –** The court may, and on the request of the
parties shall, refer any issues arising in such action to one or more
persons, who shall find and report the facts, together with his or their
recommendations, to the court. One or more of such persons may be a
layman conversant with the subject matter involved in such appeal.

**Source.** 1917, 183:8. PL 177:27. RL 215:27.

### Section 277:32

 **277:32 Effect of Appeal, Etc. –** During the pendency of any
petition for review, the order, rule or regulation under review shall be
suspended, and during the pendency of an appeal to the superior court,
it may be suspended by the superior court if justice requires. Except as
herein provided, every order, rule or regulation made and adopted under
the provisions of this chapter shall have the effect of law.

**Source.** 1917, 183:9. PL 177:28. RL 215:28.

Inspectors and Other Assistants
-------------------------------

### Section 277:33

 **277:33 Inspectors. –** For the purpose of inspecting
establishments subject to this chapter, the commissioner may employ
competent persons who shall be known as inspectors, one of whom shall be
a woman, and shall fix their compensation in accordance with the state
personnel regulations and within the limits of available appropriations
and funds.

**Source.** 1917, 183:12. 1921, 130:2. PL 177:29. RL 215:29. 1950, 5,
part 18:13. 1951, 168:1. RSA 277:33. 1957, 172:1. 1963, 220:7, eff. July
1, 1963.

### Section 277:34

 **277:34 Assistants. –** The commissioner may employ such other
assistants and clerical employees as may be necessary to the proper
discharge of his duties.

**Source.** 1917, 183:12. 1921, 130:2. PL 177:30. RL 215:30. RSA 277:34.
1963, 220:8, eff. July 1, 1963.

Prosecutions, Penalties, Etc.
-----------------------------

### Section 277:35

 **277:35 Preliminary Requirements. –** No prosecution against any
employer shall be commenced under this chapter until the commissioner
shall have made an order in accordance with the provisions hereof, and
the employer affected thereby shall have had a reasonable opportunity to
comply therewith.

**Source.** 1917, 183:13. PL 177:31. RL 215:31.

### Section 277:35-a

 **277:35-a Petition for Review. –** If an employer retaliates or
takes any action against an employee who exercises his rights under this
chapter, the employee may petition the commissioner for a review of the
employer's action. The commissioner shall hold a hearing pursuant to RSA
277:25. The commissioner may order reinstatement of the employee or such
other action as he deems necessary pending his decision.

**Source.** 1985, 243:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 277:36

 **277:36 Penalties; Stop Work Order. –**
                                             
 I. Any employer who does not comply with any lawful order or rule
made under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural
person or guilty of a felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who willfully violates RSA 277:12 shall be guilty of
a violation if a natural person or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other
person.
                                             
 III. In case of imminent danger in any place of employment, the
commissioner shall direct that work in the area of endangerment cease
until the danger is abated. No employee shall suffer loss of wages,
salary, seniority, fringe benefit or other benefit as a result of the
commissioner's order.

**Source.** 1917, 183:13. PL 177:32. RL 215:32. RSA 277:36. 1973,
529:56. 1985, 243:5, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 277:37

 **277:37 Statements. –** Every employer subject to the provisions of
RSA 277 shall immediately send to the commissioner a statement setting
forth his name, address, business and approximate number of employees.
Any employer wilfully neglecting to comply with the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1917, 183:14. PL 177:33. RL 215:33. RSA 277:37. 1973,
531:95, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 277:38

 **277:38 Enforcement of Laws, Orders, and Regulations. –** It shall
be the duty of the commissioner to administer and enforce, so far as not
otherwise provided for, all laws relating to factories, workshops,
commercial and mercantile establishments, and all valid orders, rules or
regulations.

**Source.** 1917, 183:12. 1921, 130:2. PL 177:34. RL 215:34.
