---
title: CHAPTER 278 APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAMS IN TRADE AND INDUSTRY
---

TITLE XXIII
                                             
LABOR
============

CHAPTER 278
                                             
APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAMS IN TRADE AND INDUSTRY
---------------------------------------------

### Section 278:1

 **278:1 Purposes. –** The purposes of this chapter are:
                                             
 I. To encourage employers, associations of employers and
organizations of employees to voluntarily establish apprenticeship
programs and the making of apprenticeship agreements;
                                             
 II. To create opportunities for young people to obtain employment
and adequate training in trades and industry with parallel instructions
in related and supplementary education under conditions that will equip
them for profitable employment and citizenship;
                                             
 III. To cooperate with the promotion and development of
apprenticeship programs and systems in other states and with the federal
committee on apprenticeship appointed under Public Law No. 308-75th U.S.
Congress (Fitzgerald Act);
                                             
 IV. To recommend to the Office of Apprenticeship, United States
Department of Labor (OA) the registration and approval of apprenticeship
programs and apprenticeship agreements and the issuance of state
certificates of completion of apprenticeship.

**Source.** 1947, 166:1 par. 1. 2007, 241:1, eff. Aug. 24, 2007.

### Section 278:2

 **278:2 Apprenticeship Council. –** There is hereby created a state
apprenticeship advisory council (the council), composed of: the labor
commissioner or designee, the commissioner of the department of
employment security or designee, the commissioner of education or
designee, and 2 members who shall be employers and 2 members who shall
be employees or persons who represent said employees. The commissioner
of labor, or designee, shall act as chairman. The 2 members who are
employers and the 2 members who are employees or who represent said
employees shall be appointed by the governor with the advice and consent
of the council. The initial appointment of these 4 members shall be as
follows: one member for a term of one year, one member for a term of 2
years, one member for a term of 3 years, and one member for a term of 4
years. Upon the expiration of each of their terms and each year
thereafter, one new member shall be appointed for a term of 4 years. The
members of the council shall receive no compensation for their services.

**Source.** 1947, 166:1, par. 2. 1950, 5, part 18:10. RSA 278:2. 1957,
187:15. 1971, 347:1. 2007, 241:2, eff. Aug. 24, 2007.

### Section 278:3

 **278:3 Duties. –** The council shall meet quarterly and as often as
may be necessary, and in cooperation with the OA and state departments
of education and labor, establish, maintain, and review and recommend
approval of consistent standards for on-the-job training programs to be
coordinated with related course instruction and included in
apprenticeship programs and agreements established in trade or industry
by employee organizations, joint employee-employer committees, employers
or employer groups; and may request the services of any state or federal
agency or department which may be of assistance in carrying out the
purposes of this chapter. In addition to the foregoing, the council
shall:
                                             
 I. Encourage and promote the development of apprenticeship programs
and the making of apprenticeship agreements;
                                             
 II. Assist the OA in bringing about the settlement of differences
arising out of an apprenticeship agreement when such differences cannot
be adjusted locally or in accordance with established trade procedure;
                                             
 III. Supervise the execution of agreements and maintenance of
standards;
                                             
 IV. Recommend to the OA the registration of apprenticeship programs
and agreements which provide equal opportunity for training and
employment without regard to race, color, creed or national origin and
which incorporate standards consistent with those already established
and approved by the council and the OA, or terminate or cancel the
registration of apprenticeship programs and agreements when said
programs or agreements fail to meet or maintain said registration
qualifications;
                                             
 V. Issue certificates of completion of apprenticeship as shall be
authorized by the council;
                                             
 VI. Keep a record of apprenticeship programs and apprentice
agreements and their disposition;
                                             
 VII. Cooperate with the state department of education and the local
school authorities in the organization and establishment of classes of
related and supplemental instruction for apprentices employed under
approved agreements;
                                             
 VIII. Render such assistance and submit such information and data as
may be requested by employers, employees and joint apprenticeship
committees engaged in the formulation and operation of programs of
apprenticeship, particularly in regard to work schedules, wages,
conditions of employment, apprenticeship records and number of
apprentices; and
                                             
 IX. Review and assist the OA in the adoption of rules and
regulations to insure nondiscrimination in all phases of apprenticeship
and employment during apprenticeship.

**Source.** 1947, 166:1 par. 3. RSA 278:3. 1965, 66:1. 1969, 168:1, 2.
2007, 241:3, 4, eff. Aug. 24, 2007.

### Section 278:3-a

 **278:3-a Personnel. –** For the purpose of carrying out
administerial duties the council may employ assistants and clerical
personnel as are necessary, who work under the general supervision of
the labor commissioner.

**Source.** 1965, 66:2, eff. June 20, 1965.

### Section 278:4

 **278:4 Transfer to Department of Labor. –** The apprenticeship
advisory council as provided in RSA 278:2 shall function within the
department of labor as a separate organizational entity, as heretofore
constituted, and with all the powers and duties as heretofore provided.

**Source.** 1950, 5, part 18:12. 2007, 241:5, eff. Aug. 24, 2007.

### Section 278:5

 **278:5 Biennial Report. –** The council shall biennially make a
report of its activities and progress to the governor and council and
the report shall also be contained in the biennial report of the
department of labor.

**Source.** 1947, 166:1 par. 4. RSA 278:5. 1973, 140:37, eff. Jan. 1,
1974.

### Section 278:6

 **278:6 Related and Supplemental Instruction. –** Related and
supplemental instruction for apprentices, coordination of instruction
with work experiences, and the selection of teachers and coordinators
for such instruction shall be the responsibility of state and local
boards of education. The state department of education shall be
responsible and make provision subject to the department's decision on
the allotment of its funds for related and supplementary instruction for
apprentices as may be employed under apprenticeship programs registered
and approved by the OA and the council.

**Source.** 1947, 166:1 par. 5. 2007, 241:6, eff. Aug. 24, 2007.

### Section 278:7

 **278:7 Local, Regional and State Joint Apprenticeship Committees.
–** Local and state joint apprenticeship committees may be approved, in
any trade or group of trades, in cities, regions of the state or trade
areas, by the OA and the council, whenever the apprentice training needs
of such trade or group of trades or such regions justify such
establishment. Such local, regional or state joint apprenticeship
committees shall be composed of an equal number of employer and employee
representatives selected by the respective local or state employer and
employee organizations in such trade or group of trades; also such
advisory members representing local boards or other agencies as may be
deemed advisable. In a trade or group of trades in which there is no
bona fide employer or employee organization, a joint committee may be
composed of persons known to represent the interests of employers and of
employees respectively, or a state joint apprenticeship committee may be
approved as, or the council may act itself as, the joint committee in
such trade or group of trades. Subject to the review of the OA and the
council, and in accordance with the standards established by the Office
of Apprenticeship and the council, such committees may devise standards
for apprenticeship agreements and give such aid as may be necessary in
their operation, in their respective trades and localities.

**Source.** 1947, 166:1 par. 6. 2007, 241:7, eff. Aug. 24, 2007.

### Section 278:8

 **278:8 Minimum Standards for Apprenticeship Agreements. –** All
apprenticeship agreements submitted for approval and registration shall
meet the following minimum standards:
                                             
 I. A statement of the trade or craft to be taught and the required
hours for completion of the apprenticeship shall be established by
agreement under RSA 278:3 and 278:7, but in no case shall it be less
than 2000 hours.
                                             
 II. A statement of the processes in the trade or craft divisions in
which the apprentice is to be taught and the approximate amount of time
to be spent at each process;
                                             
 III. A statement of the number of hours to be spent by the
apprentice in work and the number of hours to be spent in related and
supplemental instruction which instruction shall be not less than 144
hours per year;
                                             
 IV. A statement that apprentices shall be not less than 16 years of
age;
                                             
 V. Provision for a period of probation, not exceeding 6 months or
1,000 hours, during which period, the council shall terminate or cancel
the registration of an apprenticeship agreement at the request in
writing of any party thereto. After the probationary period, the
apprenticeship advisory council shall terminate or cancel the
registration of an apprenticeship agreement upon request in writing of
both parties or upon just cause shown;
                                             
 VI. Provision for "an increasing schedule of wages'' which shall
average, over the required hours or years for completion, not less than
approximately 1/2 of the journeyman's rate;
                                             
 VII. Provision that the services of the apprenticeship advisory
council may be utilized for consultation regarding the settlement of
differences arising out of the apprenticeship agreement where such
differences cannot be adjusted locally or in accordance with the
established trade procedure;
                                             
 VIII. Provision that if an employer is unable to fulfill his or her
obligations under the apprenticeship agreement he or she may arrange for
the transfer of the agreement to another employer after consent by the
apprentice and approval by the OA and the council and the new employer;
                                             
 IX. A statement as to the ratio of apprentices to journeymen or
number of apprentices to be employed during any year under the program.
Where the apprenticeship standards provide for a workforce ratio of one
apprentice for one journeyman for the first 5 apprentices and 3
additional journeymen for each additional apprentice thereafter, no
standard shall have the effect of requiring the employment of any
greater number of journeymen per apprentice;
                                             
 X. Provision for the granting of credit to apprentices for previous
work experience or related and supplemental training; and
                                             
 XI. Provision for supervision and the keeping of records.

**Source.** 1947, 166:1, par. 7. RSA 278:8. 1979, 198:1. 1999, 268:1.
2007, 241:8-10, eff. Aug. 24, 2007.

### Section 278:9

 **278:9 Apprenticeship Agreements Defined. –** For the purposes of
this chapter an apprenticeship agreement is an individual written
agreement between an employer and an apprentice, or a written agreement
between an apprentice and an association of employers, or an
organization of employees, or where an approved joint committee exists,
a written agreement between an apprentice and such committee.

**Source.** 1947, 166:1 par. 8, eff. May 29, 1947.

### Section 278:10

 **278:10 Applicability of Chapter. –** The provisions of this
chapter shall apply to a person, firm, corporation or organization of
employees or an association of employers only after such person, firm,
corporation or organization of employees or association of employers has
voluntarily elected to conform with its provisions.

**Source.** 1947, 166:1 par. 9, eff. May 29, 1947.
