---
title: CHAPTER 283 PREFERENCE OF RESIDENT LABORERS AND VETERANS
---

TITLE XXIII
                                             
LABOR
============

CHAPTER 283
                                             
PREFERENCE OF RESIDENT LABORERS AND VETERANS
--------------------------------------------

Unskilled Labor
---------------

### Section 283:1

 **283:1 Definitions. –**
                                             
 I. State, county, or municipal agency shall mean any board,
commission, department, officer, agency, or agent of the state or of any
county, city, town or political division thereof charged with the duty
of making contracts therefor.
                                             
 II. Contract shall mean any contract for the construction,
maintenance, repair, or demolition of any road, bridge, building, public
work, project, or any portion of the same, wherein federal funds are not
used in whole or in part.
                                             
 III. Contractor shall include any person, firm, association, or
corporation.

**Source.** 1935, 111:1. RL 219:1.

### Section 283:2,-3

 **283:2, 283:3 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 399:3, eff. Aug. 27,
1971.
                                             ]

Clerks, Mechanics, Etc.
-----------------------

### Section 283:4

 **283:4 Employment of Veterans. –**
                                             
 I. In public employment of clerks, office help, mechanics, laborers,
inspectors, supervisors, foremen, janitors, peace officers, and relief
employees in the construction of public works, public projects and in
the conduct of city, town or district departments by a county, city,
town, or district, or by persons contracting therewith for such
construction, carrying out of relief projects and in the conduct of
city, town, or district departments, preference shall be given to
citizens of the state who have served in the armed forces of the United
States, for not less than 90 days, in times of war, and have been
discharged honorably therefrom or released from active duty therein, if
equally qualified for said employment and if registered in accordance
with the provisions of RSA 283:7. Where such employment is obtained from
relief rolls or for persons in need, in cases of equal or greater need
preference shall be given to such veterans.
                                             
 II. When the state is the employer, preference in hiring shall be
given to a veteran, as defined in RSA 21:50, if a veteran is one of
multiple candidates who are otherwise equally qualified.

**Source.** 1935, 144:1. RL 219:4. 1943, 190:4. 2009, 217:1, eff. Sept.
13, 2009.

### Section 283:5

 **283:5 Widows of Veterans; Wives of Disabled Veterans. –** The
employment preferences provided for veterans under the provisions of RSA
283:4 are extended to include any unremarried widow whose husband at the
time of his death was a citizen of this state and who served in the
armed forces of the United States during any war in which the United
States has been engaged, and also to any wife of a totally disabled
veteran who is a citizen of the state and who served in the armed forces
of the United States during any war in which the United States has been
engaged.

**Source.** 1947, 148:1. 1949, 41:1, eff. Mar. 3, 1949.

### Section 283:6

 **283:6 State and Political Subdivisions. –** The hiring authority
of the state or any political subdivision thereof shall take any
necessary action to secure the employment of said veterans in said
service of the state or political subdivisions thereof respectively.

**Source.** 1935, 144:2. RL 219:5. RSA 283:6. 1971, 399:1, eff. Aug. 27,
1971.

### Section 283:7

 **283:7 Proof of Entitlement. –** Veterans, in order to be entitled
to preference under this subdivision, shall furnish proof of such
entitlement to the hiring authority of the state or political
subdivision when applying for employment.

**Source.** 1943, 190:5 par. 6. RSA 283:7. 1971, 399:2, eff. Aug. 27,
1971.

### Section 283:8

 **283:8 Terms Defined. –** For the purposes of this chapter:
                                             
 I. The term "armed forces'' shall include those forces listed in RSA
72:28, IV.
                                             
 II. The terms "in time of war'' and "during any war'' shall include
all the terms used in RSA 72:28, V.

**Source.** 1943, 190:5, par. 7. RSA 283:8. 1969, 370:1. 1971, 399:4.
2003, 299:22, eff. April 1, 2003.

### Section 283:9

 **283:9 Penalty. –** Any person who violates any provision of this
subdivision shall be guilty of a violation if a natural person, or
guilty of a misdemeanor if any other person.

**Source.** 1943, 190:5 par. 8. RSA 283:9. 1973, 530:45, eff. Oct. 31,
1973 at 11:59 p.m.
