---
title: 'CHAPTER 304-B UNIFORM LIMITED PARTNERSHIP ACT'
---

TITLE XXVIII
                                             
PARTNERSHIPS
=============

CHAPTER 304-B
                                             
UNIFORM LIMITED PARTNERSHIP ACT
-------------------------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 304-B:1

 **304-B:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter, unless the
context otherwise requires:
                                             
 I. "Certificate of limited partnership'' means the certificate
referred to in RSA 304-B:8, and the certificate as amended or restated.
                                             
 II. "Contribution'' means any cash, property, services rendered, or
a promissory note or other binding obligation to contribute cash or
property or to perform services, which a partner contributes to a
limited partnership in his capacity as a partner.
                                             
 III. "Event of withdrawal of a general partner'' means an event that
causes a person to cease to be a general partner as provided in RSA
304-B:23.
                                             
 IV. "Foreign limited partnership'' means a partnership formed under
the laws of any state other than this state and having as partners one
or more general partners and one or more limited partners.
                                             
 V. "General partner'' means a person who has been admitted to a
limited partnership as a general partner in accordance with the
partnership agreement and named in the certificate of limited
partnership as a general partner.
                                             
 VI. "Limited partner'' means a person who has been admitted to a
limited partnership as a limited partner in accordance with the
partnership agreement.
                                             
 VII. "Limited partnership'' and "domestic limited partnership'' mean
a partnership formed by 2 or more persons under the laws of this state
and having one or more general partners and one or more limited
partners.
                                             
 VIII. "Partner'' means a limited or general partner.
                                             
 IX. "Partnership agreement'' means any valid agreement, written or
oral, of the partners as to the affairs of a limited partnership and the
conduct of its business.
                                             
 X. "Partnership interest'' means a partner's share of the profits
and losses of a limited partnership and the right to receive
distributions of partnership assets.
                                             
 XI. "Person'' means a natural person, partnership, limited
partnership (domestic or foreign), trust, estate, association, or
corporation.
                                             
 XII. "State'' means a state, territory, or possession of the United
States, the District of Columbia, or the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:2

 **304-B:2 Name. –**
                                             
 I. The name of each limited partnership as set forth in its
certificate of limited partnership:
                                             
 (a) Shall contain the words "limited partnership'' or the
abbreviation "L.P.'', or similar abbreviation, as the last words of its
name; and
                                             
 (b) May not contain the name of a limited partner unless (1) it
is also the name of a general partner or the corporate name of a
corporate general partner, or (2) the business of the limited
partnership had been carried on under that name before the admission of
that limited partner.
                                             
 II. A limited partnership name shall not contain language stating or
implying that the limited partnership is organized for a purpose other
than that permitted by RSA 304-B:6 and its certificate of limited
partnership.
                                             
 III. Except as authorized by paragraphs IV and V, a limited
partnership name, based upon the records of the secretary of state,
shall be distinguishable from, and not the same as:
                                             
 (a) The name of an entity incorporated, authorized, formed, or
registered to do business in this state under RSA 292, RSA 293-A, RSA
293-B, RSA 294-A, RSA 301, RSA 301-A, RSA 304-A, RSA 304-B, RSA 304-C,
RSA 305-A, or RSA 349.
                                             
 (b) A name reserved under RSA 293-A, RSA 293-B, RSA 304-A, RSA
304-B, or RSA 304-C.
                                             
 (c) The fictitious name of another foreign corporation authorized
to transact business in this state.
                                             
 (d) The name of an agency or instrumentality of the United States
or this state or a subdivision thereof.
                                             
 (e) The name of any political party recognized under RSA 652:11,
unless written consent is obtained from the authorized representative of
the political organization.
                                             
 (f) The name "farmers' market'' unless the entity meets the
definition of "farmers' market'' established in RSA 21:34-a, V.
                                             
 IV. A limited partnership may apply to the secretary of state for
authorization to use a name that is not distinguishable from, or is the
same as, one or more of the names described in paragraph III, as
determined from review of the records of the secretary of state. The
secretary of state shall authorize use of the name applied for if:
                                             
 (a) The holder or holders of the name as described in paragraph
III gives written consent to use the name that is not distinguishable
from the name of the applying limited partnership; or if the name is the
same, one or more words are added to the name to make the new name
distinguishable from the other name; or
                                             
 (b) The other entity consents to the use in writing and submits
an undertaking in a form satisfactory to the secretary of state to
change its name to a name that is distinguishable from, and not the same
as, the name of the applying limited partnership; or
                                             
 (c) The applicant delivers to the secretary of state a certified
copy of the final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction
establishing the applicant's right to use the name applied for in this
state.
                                             
 V. A limited partnership may use the name, including the fictitious
name, of another domestic or foreign entity that is used in this state
if the other entity is incorporated, authorized, formed, or registered
to transact business in this state and the proposed user limited
partnership:
                                             
 (a) Has merged with the other entity;
                                             
 (b) Has been formed by reorganization of the other entity; or
                                             
 (c) Has acquired all or substantially all of the assets,
including the name, of the other entity.
                                             
 VI. This chapter does not control the use of fictitious names.
                                             
 VII. Nothing in this section would prohibit the owner or owners of a
trade name registered under RSA 349 to form a domestic limited
partnership under the same name as the trade name.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1. 1991, 67:4. 1996, 239:2. 1999, 293:5. 2004,
248:36. 2009, 293:7. 2013, 60:1, eff. Aug. 5, 2013. 2015, 188:13, 14,
eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 304-B:3

 **304-B:3 Reservation of Name. –**
                                             
 I. The exclusive right to the use of a name may be reserved by:
                                             
 (a) Any person intending to organize a limited partnership under
this chapter and to adopt that name;
                                             
 (b) Any domestic limited partnership or any foreign limited
partnership registered in this state which, in either case, intends to
adopt that name;
                                             
 (c) Any foreign limited partnership intending to register in this
state and adopt that name; and
                                             
 (d) Any person intending to organize a foreign limited
partnership and intending to have it register in this state and adopt
that name.
                                             
 II. The reservation shall be made by filing with the secretary of
state an application, executed by the applicant, to reserve a specified
name. If the secretary of state finds that the name is available for use
by a domestic or foreign limited partnership, he shall reserve the name
for the exclusive use of the applicant for a period of 120 days. Once
having so reserved a name, the same applicant may not again reserve the
same name until more than 60 days after the expiration of the last
120-day period for which that applicant reserved that name. The right to
the exclusive use of a reserved name may be transferred to any other
person by filing in the office of the secretary of state a notice of the
transfer, executed by the applicant for whom the name was reserved and
specifying the name and address of the transferee.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:4

 **304-B:4 Specified Office and Agent. –** Each limited partnership
shall continuously maintain in this state:
                                             
 I. A registered office that may be the same as any of its places of
business; and
                                             
 II. A registered agent, which agent may be:
                                             
 (a) An individual who resides in this state and whose business
office is identical with the registered office; or
                                             
 (b) A corporation organized or authorized under RSA 292, RSA
293-A, or RSA 294-A whose business office is identical with the
registered office; or
                                             
 (c) A limited liability company formed or authorized under RSA
304-C whose business office is identical with the registered office; or
                                             
 (d) A limited liability partnership formed or authorized under
RSA 304-A:44 whose business office is identical with the registered
office.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1. 2004, 248:37, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 304-B:5

 **304-B:5 Records to be Kept. –**
                                             
 I. Each limited partnership shall keep at the office referred to in
RSA 304-B:4, I the following:
                                             
 (a) A current list of the full name and last known business
address of each partner, separately identifying the general partners (in
alphabetical order) and the limited partners (in alphabetical order);
                                             
 (b) A copy of the certificate of limited partnership and all
certificates of amendment thereto, together with executed copies of any
powers of attorney pursuant to which any certificate has been executed;
                                             
 (c) Copies of the limited partnership's federal, state and local
income tax returns and reports, if any, for the 3 most recent years;
                                             
 (d) Copies of any then effective written partnership agreements
and of any financial statements of the limited partnership for the 3
most recent years; and
                                             
 (e) Unless contained in a written partnership agreement, a
writing setting out:
                                             
 (1) The amount of cash and a description and statement of the
agreed value of the other property or services contributed by each
partner and which each partner has agreed to contribute;
                                             
 (2) The times at which or events on the happening of which any
additional contributions agreed to be made by each partner are to be
made;
                                             
 (3) Any right of a partner to receive, or of a general partner
to make, distributions to a partner which include a return of all or any
part of the partner's contribution; and
                                             
 (4) Any events upon the happening of which the limited
partnership is to be dissolved and its affairs wound up.
                                             
 II. Records kept under this section are subject to inspection and
copying at the reasonable request and at the expense of any partner
during ordinary business hours.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:6

 **304-B:6 Nature of Business. –** A limited partnership may carry on
any business that a partnership without limited partners may carry on,
except any association formed under any other statute of this state, or
formed under any statute adopted by authority, other than the authority
of this state, is not a limited partnership under this chapter, unless
such association was a limited partnership in this state prior to the
adoption of this chapter.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:7

 **304-B:7 Business Transactions of Partner With Partnership. –**
Except as provided in the partnership agreement, a partner may lend
money to and transact other business with the limited partnership and,
subject to other applicable law, has the same rights and obligations
with respect thereto as a person who is not a partner.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

Formation; Certificate of Limited Partnership
---------------------------------------------

### Section 304-B:8

 **304-B:8 Certificate of Limited Partnership. –**
                                             
 I. In order to form a limited partnership, a certificate of limited
partnership must be executed and filed in the office of the secretary of
state. The certificate shall set forth:
                                             
 (a) The name of the limited partnership;
                                             
 (b) The address of the office and the name and address of the
agent for service of process required to be maintained by RSA 304-B:4;
                                             
 (c) The name and the business address of each general partner;
                                             
 (d) The latest date upon which the limited partnership is to
dissolve; and
                                             
 (e) Any other matters the general partners determine to include
therein.
                                             
 II. A limited partnership is formed at the close of business on the
date of the filing of the certificate of limited partnership in the
office of the secretary of state, or the effective time or the delayed
effective time and date specified in accordance with RSA 304-B:13, IV in
the certificate of limited partnership if, in any case, there has been
substantial compliance with the requirements of this section. A limited
partnership filed electronically will be effective upon the date and
time of acceptance by the secretary of state corporate database and
application or as specified in accordance with RSA 304-B:13, IV.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1. 1997, 120:10. 2004, 248:38, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 304-B:9

 **304-B:9 Amendment to Certificate. –**
                                             
 I. A certificate of limited partnership is amended by filing a
certificate of amendment thereto in the office of the secretary of
state. The certificate shall set forth:
                                             
 (a) The name of the limited partnership;
                                             
 (b) The date of filing the certificate; and
                                             
 (c) The amendment to the certificate.
                                             
 II. Within 30 days after the happening of any of the following
events, an amendment to a certificate of limited partnership reflecting
the occurrence of the event or events shall be filed:
                                             
 (a) The admission of a new general partner;
                                             
 (b) The withdrawal of a general partner;
                                             
 (c) The continuation of the business under RSA 304-B:44 after an
event of withdrawal of a general partner; or
                                             
 (d) The resignation of the registered agent.
                                             
 III. A general partner who becomes aware that any statement in a
certificate of limited partnership was false when made or that any
arrangements or other facts described have changed, making the
certificate inaccurate in any respect, shall promptly amend the
certificate.
                                             
 IV. A certificate of limited partnership may be amended at any time
for any other proper purpose the general partners determine.
                                             
 V. No person has any liability because an amendment to a certificate
of limited partnership has not been filed to reflect the occurrence of
any event referred to in paragraph II of this section if the amendment
is filed within the 30-day period specified in paragraph II.
                                             
 VI. A restated certificate of limited partnership may be executed
and filed in the same manner as a certificate of amendment.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1. 1988, 62:1. 2006, 316:10, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 304-B:9-a


                                             


                                             [This section was enacted by the New Hampshire General Court and is not
a part of the national Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act.
                                             ]

 **304-B:9-a Resignation of Registered Agent. –**
                                             
 I. The registered agent of a limited partnership formed in this
state or a foreign limited partnership authorized to do business in this
state may resign his or her agency appointment by signing and delivering
to the secretary of state for filing the original and one exact or
conformed copy of a statement of resignation. The statement of
resignation may include a statement that the registered office is also
discontinued.
                                             
 II. The secretary of state shall mail the copy to the limited
partnership at its principal office address of record.
                                             
 III. The agency appointment is terminated, and the registered office
discontinued if so provided, on the thirty-first day after the date on
which the statement was filed.

**Source.** 2006, 316:11, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 304-B:10

 **304-B:10 Cancellation of Certificate. –** A certificate of limited
partnership shall be cancelled upon the dissolution and the commencement
of winding up of the partnership or at any other time there are no
limited partners. A certificate of cancellation shall be filed in the
office of the secretary of state and set forth:
                                             
 I. The name of the limited partnership;
                                             
 II. The date of filing of its certificate of limited partnership;
                                             
 III. The reason for filing the certificate of cancellation;
                                             
 IV. The effective date and time of cancellation if it is not to be
effective upon the close of business on the date of the filing of the
certificate; and
                                             
 V. Any other information the general partners filing the certificate
determine.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1. 1997, 120:11, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 304-B:11

 **304-B:11 Execution of Certificates. –**
                                             
 I. Each certificate required by this chapter to be filed in the
office of the secretary of state shall be executed in the following
manner:
                                             
 (a) An original certificate of limited partnership must be signed
by all general partners;
                                             
 (b) A certificate of amendment must be signed by at least one
general partner and by each other general partner designated in the
certificate as a new general partner;
                                             
 (c) A certificate of cancellation must be signed by all general
partners; and
                                             
 (d) A certificate of merger and a certificate of conversion must
be signed by all the general partners.
                                             
 II. Any person may sign a certificate by an attorney-in-fact, but a
power of attorney to sign a certificate relating to the admission of a
general partner must specifically describe the admission.
                                             
 III. The execution of a certificate by a general partner constitutes
an affirmation under the penalties of perjury that the facts stated
therein are true.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1. 1997, 120:12, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 304-B:12

 **304-B:12 Execution by Judicial Act. –** If a person required by
RSA 304-B:11 to execute any certificate fails or refuses to do so, any
other person who is adversely affected by the failure or refusal may
petition the superior court to direct the execution of the certificate.
If the court finds that it is proper for the certificate to be executed
and that any person so designated has failed or refused to execute the
certificate, it shall order the secretary of state to record an
appropriate certificate.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:13

 **304-B:13 Filing in Office of Secretary of State. –**
                                             
 I. One original and one exact or conformed copy of the certificate
of limited partnership and of any certificates of amendment or
cancellation (or of any judicial decree of amendment or cancellation)
and of any certificate of merger or certificate of conversion shall be
delivered to the secretary of state. Documents filed electronically need
not be filed in duplicate. A person who executes a certificate as an
agent or fiduciary need not exhibit evidence of authority as a
prerequisite to filing. Unless the secretary of state finds that any
certificate does not conform to law, upon receipt of all filing fees
required by law the secretary of state shall:
                                             
 (a) Endorse on each copy the word "filed'' and the day, month,
and year of the filing thereof;
                                             
 (b) File the original in the secretary of state's office; and
                                             
 (c) Return the exact or conformed copy to the person who filed it
or the person's representative.
                                             
 II. Upon the effective date and time of a certificate of amendment
(or judicial decree of amendment) in the office of the secretary of
state, the certificate of limited partnership shall be amended as set
forth therein, and upon the effective date and time of a certificate of
cancellation (or a judicial decree thereof), the certificate of limited
partnership is cancelled.
                                             
 III. Except as provided in paragraph IV, a document accepted for
filing is effective:
                                             
 (a) At the close of business on the date it is filed, as
evidenced by the secretary of state's date endorsement of the original
document; or
                                             
 (b) At the time specified in the document as its effective time
on the date it is filed; or
                                             
 (c) Upon the date and time of acceptance by the secretary of
state corporate database and application, if filed electronically.
                                             
 IV. A document filed in the office of the secretary of state may
specify a delayed effective time and date, and if it does so the
document becomes effective at the time and date specified. If a delayed
effective date but no time is specified, the document is effective as of
the close of business on that date. A delayed effective date for a
document shall not be later than the ninetieth day after the date it is
filed.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1. 1997, 120:13. 2004, 248:39. 2006, 316:12, eff.
July 1, 2006.

### Section 304-B:14

 **304-B:14 Liability for False Statement in Certificate. –** If any
certificate of limited partnership or certificate of amendment or
cancellation contains a false statement, one who suffers loss by
reliance on the statement may recover damages for the loss from:
                                             
 I. Any person who executes the certificate, or causes another to
execute it on his behalf, and knew, and any general partner who knew or
should have known, the statement to be false at the time the certificate
was executed; and
                                             
 II. Any general partner who thereafter knows or should have known
that any arrangement or other fact described in the certificate has
changed, making the statement inaccurate in any respect within a
sufficient time before the statement was relied upon reasonably to have
enabled that general partner to cancel or amend the certificate, or to
file a petition for its cancellation or amendment under RSA 304-B:12.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:15

 **304-B:15 Scope of Notice. –** The fact that a certificate of
limited partnership is on file in the office of the secretary of state
is notice that the partnership is a limited partnership and the persons
designated therein as general partners are general partners, but it is
not notice of any other fact.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:16

 **304-B:16 Delivery of Certificates to Limited Partners. –** Upon
the return by the secretary of state pursuant to RSA 304-B:13 of a
certificate marked "filed'', the general partners shall promptly deliver
or mail a copy of the certificate of limited partnership and each
certificate of amendment or cancellation to each limited partner unless
the partnership agreement provides otherwise.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

Mergers and Conversions
-----------------------

### Section 304-B:16-a


                                             


                                             [This subdivision was enacted by the New Hampshire General Court and is
not a part of the national Uniform Limited Partnership Act.
                                             ]

 **304-B:16-a Merger. –**
                                             
 I. As used in this section, "other business entity'' means a
domestic or foreign corporation, limited liability company, or
partnership, whether general or limited, that is authorized by
applicable statute to merge with a limited partnership.
                                             
 II. Pursuant to an agreement of merger, a limited partnership may
merge with or into one or more limited partnerships or other business
entities, with such limited partnership or such other business entity as
the agreement shall provide being the surviving limited partnership or
other business entity.
                                             
 III. Each such limited partnership and other entity shall enter into
a written agreement or plan of merger. The agreement shall state:
                                             
 (a) The terms and conditions of the merger;
                                             
 (b) The mode of carrying the same into effect;
                                             
 (c) The manner of converting the partnership interests of each
such limited partnership and the shares or the limited liability company
or partnership interests of each such other entity into shares, limited
liability company or partnership interests, or other securities of the
entity surviving from such merger, and if any partnership interests of
any such limited partnership or any shares, limited partnership or
limited liability company or partnership interests of any such other
entity are not to be converted solely into shares, limited liability
company or partnership interests, or other securities of the entity
surviving from such merger, the cash, property, rights or securities of
any other corporation or entity which the holders of such shares or
limited liability company or partnership interests are to receive in
exchange for, or upon conversion of, such shares or limited partnership
or limited liability company interests and the surrender of any
certificates evidencing such shares or interests which cash, property,
rights or securities of any other corporation or entity may be in
addition to or in lieu of shares, limited liability company or
partnership interests, or other securities of the entity surviving from
such merger; and
                                             
 (d) Such other details or provisions as are deemed desirable,
including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a provision
for the payment of cash in lieu of the issuance of fractional shares or
interests of the surviving corporation or other entity. Any of the terms
of the agreement or plan of merger may be made dependent upon facts
ascertainable outside of such agreement or plan provided that the manner
in which such facts shall operate upon the terms of the agreement or
plan is clearly and expressly set forth in the agreement or plan of
merger.
                                             
 IV. Unless otherwise provided in the partnership agreement, a merger
shall be approved by each limited partnership which is to merge (1) by
all general partners, and (2) by the limited partners or, if there is
more than one class or group of limited partners, then by each class or
group of limited partners, in either case, by limited partners who own
more than 50 percent of the then current percentage or other interest in
the profits of the limited partnership owned by all of the limited
partners or by the limited partners in each class or group, as
appropriate. In connection with a merger hereunder, rights or securities
of, or interests in, a limited partnership or other business entity
which is a constituent party to the merger may be exchanged for or
converted into cash, property, rights or securities of, or interests in,
the surviving limited partnership or other business entity or, in
addition to or in lieu thereof, may be exchanged for or converted into
cash, property, rights or securities of, or interests in, a limited
partnership or other business entity which is not the surviving limited
partnership or other business entity in the merger. Notwithstanding
prior approval, an agreement of merger may be terminated or amended
pursuant to a provision for such termination or amendment contained in
the agreement of merger at any time before the certificate of merger is
filed.
                                             
 V. If a limited partnership is merging under this section, the
limited partnership or other business entity surviving in the merger
shall file in the office of the secretary of state a certificate of
merger setting forth:
                                             
 (a) The name and jurisdiction of formation or organization of
each of the limited partnerships or other business entities which is to
merge;
                                             
 (b) That an agreement of merger has been approved and executed by
each of the limited partnerships or other business entities which is to
merge;
                                             
 (c) The name of the surviving limited partnership or other
business entity;
                                             
 (d) If a corporation is the surviving entity of the merger, the
plan of merger;
                                             
 (e) If shareholder approval of any corporation party to the
merger was not required, a statement to that effect;
                                             
 (f) If approval of the shareholders of one or more corporations
party to the merger or share exchange was required:
                                             
 (1) The designation, number of outstanding shares, and number
of votes entitled to be cast by each voting group entitled to vote
separately on the plan as to each corporation; and
                                             
 (2) Either the total number of votes cast for and against the
plan by each voting group entitled to vote separately on the plan or the
total number of undisputed votes cast for the plan separately by each
voting group and a statement that the number cast for the plan by each
voting group was sufficient for approval by that voting group.
                                             
 (g) In the case of a merger in which a corporation is the
surviving entity, such amendments or changes in the articles of
incorporation of the surviving corporation as are desired to be effected
by the merger, or, if no such amendments or changes are desired, a
statement that the articles of incorporation of the surviving
corporation shall be its articles of incorporation;
                                             
 (h) If the surviving business entity is not a corporation, that
the executed agreement of merger is on file at the principal place of
business of the surviving business entity and the address thereof;
                                             
 (i) That a copy of the agreement of merger will be furnished by
the surviving limited partnership or other business entity, on request
and without cost, to any partner or any limited partnership or any
person holding an interest in any other business entity which is to
merge;
                                             
 VI. Upon the merger taking effect, a surviving foreign other entity
of a merger is deemed:
                                             
 (a) To appoint the secretary of state as its agent for service of
process in a proceeding to enforce any obligation or the rights of
dissenting partners of each limited partnership party to the merger;
and
                                             
 (b) To agree that it will promptly pay to the dissenting parties
of each limited partnership party to the merger or share exchange the
amount, if any, to which they are entitled under RSA 304-C:16-b.
                                             
 VII. A merger shall be effective upon the effective date and time of
the certificate of merger.
                                             
 VIII. A certificate of merger shall act as a certificate of
cancellation for a domestic limited partnership which is not the
surviving entity in the merger.
                                             
 IX. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in a
partnership agreement, a partnership agreement containing a specific
reference to this paragraph may provide that an agreement of merger
approved in accordance with paragraph VII of this section may (1) effect
any amendment to the partnership agreement or (2) effect the adoption of
a new partnership agreement for a limited partnership if it is the
surviving limited partnership in the merger. Any amendment to a
partnership agreement or adoption of a new partnership agreement made
pursuant to the foregoing sentence shall be effective at the effective
time and date of the merger. The provisions of this paragraph shall not
be construed to limit the accomplishment of a merger or of any of the
matters referred to herein by any other means provided for in a
partnership agreement or other agreement or as otherwise permitted by
law, including that the partnership agreement of any constituent limited
partnership to the merger (including a limited partnership formed for
the purpose of consummating a merger) shall be the partnership agreement
of the surviving limited partnership.
                                             
 X. When any merger shall have become effective under this section,
for all purposes of the laws of the state of New Hampshire, all of the
rights, privileges and powers of each of the limited partnerships and
other business entities that have merged, and all property, real,
personal and mixed, and all debts due to any of said limited
partnerships and other business entities, as well as all other things
and causes of action belonging to each of such limited partnerships and
other business entities, shall be vested in the surviving limited
partnership or other business entity, and shall thereafter be the
property of the surviving limited partnership or other business entity
as they were of each of the limited partnerships and other business
entities that have merged, and the title to any real property vested by
deed or otherwise, under the laws of the state of New Hampshire, in any
of such limited partnerships and other business entities, shall not
revert or be in any way impaired by reason of this chapter; but all
rights of creditors and all liens upon any property of any of said
limited partnerships and other business entities shall be preserved
unimpaired, and all debts, liabilities and duties of each of the limited
partnerships and other business entities that have merged shall
thenceforth attach to the surviving limited partnership or other
business entity, and may be enforced against it to the same extent as if
said debts, liabilities, and duties had been incurred or contracted by
it. Unless otherwise agreed, a merger of a limited partnership,
including a limited partnership which is not the surviving entity in the
merger, shall not require such limited partnership to wind up its
affairs under RSA 304-B:46 or pay its liabilities and distribute its
assets under RSA 304-B:47.
                                             
 XI. Except as provided by agreement with a person to whom a general
partner of a limited partnership is obligated, a merger of a limited
partnership that has become effective shall not affect any obligation or
liability existing at the time of such merger of a general partner of a
limited partnership which is merging.
                                             
 XII. If a limited partnership is a constituent party to a merger
that shall have become effective, but the limited partnership is not the
surviving entity of the merger, then a judgment creditor of a general
partner of such limited partnership may not levy execution against the
assets of the general partner to satisfy a judgment based on a claim
against the surviving entity of the merger unless:
                                             
 (a) A judgment based on the same claim has been obtained against
the surviving entity of the merger and a writ of execution on the
judgment has been returned unsatisfied in whole or in part;
                                             
 (b) The surviving entity of the merger is a debtor in
bankruptcy;
                                             
 (c) The general partner has agreed that the creditor need not
exhaust the assets of the limited partnership that was not the surviving
entity of the merger;
                                             
 (d) The general partner has agreed that the creditor need not
exhaust the assets of the surviving entity of the merger;
                                             
 (e) A court grants permission to the judgment creditor to levy
execution against the assets of the general partner based on a finding
that the assets of the surviving entity of the merger that are subject
to execution are clearly insufficient to satisfy the judgment, that
exhaustion of the assets of the surviving entity of the merger is
excessively burdensome, or that the grant of permission is an
appropriate exercise of the court's equitable powers; or
                                             
 (f) Liability is imposed on the general partner by law or
contract independent of the existence of the surviving entity of the
merger.

**Source.** 1997, 120:14, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 304-B:16-b

 **304-B:16-b Approval of Conversion of a Limited Partnership. –** A
limited partnership may convert to an other business entity, as defined
in RSA 304-B:16-a, I, other than a limited partnership, upon the
authorization of such conversion in accordance with this section and to
the extent authorized by and in accordance with the laws applicable to
conversion to such other business entity. If the partnership agreement
specifies the manner of authorizing a conversion of the limited
partnership, the conversion shall be authorized as specified in the
partnership agreement. If the partnership agreement does not specify the
manner of authorizing a conversion of the limited partnership and does
not prohibit a conversion of the limited partnership, the conversion
shall be authorized in the same manner as is specified in the
partnership agreement for authorizing a merger that involves the limited
partnership as a constituent party to the merger. If the partnership
agreement does not specify the manner of authorizing a conversion of the
limited partnership or a merger that involves the limited partnership as
a constituent party and does not prohibit a conversion of the limited
partnership, the conversion shall be authorized by the approval (1) by
all general partners, and (2) by the limited partners or, if there is
more than one class or group of limited partners, then by each class or
group of limited partners, in either case, by limited partners who own
more than 50 percent of the then current percentage or other interest in
the profits of the limited partnership owned by all of the limited
partners or by the limited partners in each class or group, as
appropriate.

**Source.** 1997, 120:14, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

Dissenters' Rights
------------------

### Section 304-B:16-c


                                             


                                             [This subdivision was enacted by the New Hampshire General Court and is
not a part of the national Uniform Limited Partnership Act.
                                             ]

 **304-B:16-c Definitions and Construction. –**
                                             
 In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Dissenter'' means a limited partner who is entitled to dissent
from limited partnership action under RSA 304-B:16-d and who exercises
that right when and in the manner required under this subdivision.
                                             
 II. "Fair value'' means the value of the dissenter's partnership
interest of a limited partnership immediately before the effective date
of the limited liability action referred to in RSA 304-B:16-d, excluding
any appreciation or depreciation in anticipation of the limited
partnership action.
                                             
 III. "Interest'' means interest from the effective date of the
action referred to in RSA 304-B:16-d that gave rise to the limited
partner's right to dissent until the date of payment, at the average
auction rate paid on United States treasury bills with a maturity of 6
months (or the closest maturity thereto) as of the auction date for such
treasury bills closest to such effective date.
                                             
 IV. "Limited partnership'' means a limited partnership whose limited
partners have obtained rights to dissent under RSA 304-B:16-d and
includes any successor by merger or conversion.

**Source.** 1997, 120:14, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 304-B:16-d

 **304-B:16-d Dissenters' Rights. –**
                                             
 I. A limited partner is entitled to dissent from, and obtain payment
of, the fair value of the limited partner's partnership interest upon
either of the following actions:
                                             
 (a) Consummation of a plan of merger to which the limited
partnership is a party.
                                             
 (b) Consummation of a plan of conversion of the limited
partnership to some other business entity.
                                             
 II. A limited partner entitled to dissent and obtain payment for
such limited partner's partnership interest under this subdivision may
not challenge the limited partnership action creating such limited
partner's entitlement unless the action is unlawful or fraudulent with
respect to the limited partner or the limited partnership.

**Source.** 1997, 120:14, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 304-B:16-e

 **304-B:16-e Notice of Dissenters' Rights. –**
                                             
 I. If the proposed action of the limited partnership creating
dissenters' rights under RSA 304-B:16-d is submitted to a vote at a
meeting of the limited partners, the meeting notice must state that
limited partners are or may be entitled to assert dissenters' rights
under this subdivision and be accompanied by a copy of this
subdivision.
                                             
 II. If the limited partnership action creating dissenters' rights
under RSA 304-B:16-d is taken without a vote of the limited partners,
the limited partnership shall notify in writing all limited partners
entitled to assert dissenters' rights that the action was taken and send
them the dissenters' notice described in RSA 304-B:16-g.
                                             
 III. A limited partnership's failure to give notice pursuant to this
section shall not invalidate the limited partnership action.

**Source.** 1997, 120:14, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 304-B:16-f

 **304-B:16-f Notice of Intent to Demand Payment. –**
                                             
 I. If proposed action of a limited partnership creating dissenters'
rights under RSA 304-B:16-d is submitted to a vote at a meeting of the
limited partners, a limited partner who wishes to assert dissenters'
rights shall:
                                             
 (a) Deliver to the limited partnership before the vote is taken a
written notice of the member's intent to demand payment for the limited
partner's limited partnership interest if the proposed action is
effectuated.
                                             
 (b) Not vote the limited partner's limited partnership interest
in favor of the proposed action.
                                             
 II. No such written notice of intent to demand payment is required
of any limited partner to whom the limited partnership has failed to
provide the notice required by RSA 304-B:16-e.
                                             
 III. A limited partner who does not satisfy the requirements of this
section is not entitled to payment for such limited partner's limited
partnership interest under this subdivision.

**Source.** 1997, 120:14, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 304-B:16-g

 **304-B:16-g Dissenters' Notice. –**
                                             
 I. If proposed action of a limited partnership creating dissenters'
rights under RSA 304-B:16-d is authorized at a meeting of the limited
partners, the limited partnership shall deliver a written dissenters'
notice to all limited partners who have satisfied the requirements of
RSA 304-B:16-f.
                                             
 II. The dissenters' notice must be sent no later than 10 days after
the action of the limited partnership was authorized by the members or
effectuated, whichever is the first to occur, and shall:
                                             
 (a) State where the payment demand shall be sent;
                                             
 (b) Supply a form for demanding payment that includes the date of
the first announcement to news media or to limited partners of the
principal terms of the proposed limited partnership action and requires
that the person asserting dissenters' rights certify whether or not the
limited partner acquired the limited partnership interest before that
date;
                                             
 (c) Set a date by which the limited partnership must receive the
payment demand, which date may not be fewer than 30 days and not more
than 60 days after the date of the notice required by paragraph II is
sent; and
                                             
 (d) Be accompanied by a copy of this subdivision if the limited
partnership has not previously sent a copy of this subdivision to the
limited partner pursuant to RSA 304-B:16-e.

**Source.** 1997, 120:14, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 304-B:16-h

 **304-B:16-h Duty to Demand Payment. –**
                                             
 I. A limited partner sent a dissenters' notice described in RSA
304-B:16-g must demand payment and certify whether the limited partner
acquired the limited partnership interest before the date required to be
set forth in the dissenters' notice pursuant to RSA 304-B:16-g.
                                             
 II. A limited partner who demands payment under paragraph I retains
all of the rights of a limited partner until those rights are canceled
or modified by consummation of the proposed action of the limited
partnership.
                                             
 III. A limited partner who does not demand payment by the date set
forth in the dissenters' notice is not entitled to payment of fair value
for such limited partner's partnership interest under this subdivision.
                                             
 IV. A demand for payment filed by a limited partner may not be
withdrawn unless the limited partnership with which it was filed or the
surviving limited partnership or other business entity consents to such
withdrawal.

**Source.** 1997, 120:14, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 304-B:16-i

 **304-B:16-i Payment. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in RSA 304-B:16-k, as soon as the proposed
limited partnership action is effectuated, or upon receipt of a payment
demand, whichever is later, the limited partnership shall pay each
dissenter who complied with RSA 304-B:16-h the amount the limited
partnership estimates to be the fair value of such dissenter's
partnership interest, plus accrued interest.
                                             
 II. The payment shall be accompanied by:
                                             
 (a) The limited partnership's balance sheet as of the end of a
fiscal year ending not more than 16 months before the date of payment,
an income statement for that year, and the latest available interim
financial statements, if any;
                                             
 (b) A statement of the limited partnership's estimate of the fair
value of the limited partnership interest;
                                             
 (c) An explanation of how the value of the limited partnership
interest was calculated;
                                             
 (d) A statement of the dissenter's right to demand payment under
RSA 304-B:16-l; and
                                             
 (e) A copy of this subdivision, if the limited partnership has
not previously sent a copy of this subdivision to the limited partner
pursuant to RSA 304-B:16-e or RSA 304-B:16-g.

**Source.** 1997, 120:14, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 304-B:16-j

 **304-B:16-j Failure to Take Action. –** If the limited partnership
does not effectuate the proposed action that gave rise to the
dissenters' rights within 60 days after the date set for demanding
payment, it shall send a new dissenters' notice under RSA 304-B:16-e and
repeat the payment demand procedure if it effectuates the proposed
action.

**Source.** 1997, 120:14, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 304-B:16-k

 **304-B:16-k After-Acquired Limited Partnership Interests. –**
                                             
 I. A limited partnership may elect to withhold payment required by
RSA 304-B:16-i from a dissenter unless the dissenter was a limited
partner before the date set forth in the dissenters' notice as the date
of the first announcement to news media or to limited partners of the
principal terms of the proposed limited partnership action.
                                             
 II. To the extent the limited partnership elects not to withhold
payment under paragraph I, after effectuating the proposed limited
partnership action, it shall estimate the fair value of the limited
partnership interest, plus accrued interest, and shall pay this amount
to each dissenter who agrees to accept it in full satisfaction of the
dissenter's demand. The limited partnership shall send with its offer a
statement of its estimate of the fair value of the limited partnership
interest, an explanation of how the interest was calculated, and a
statement of the dissenter's right to demand payment under RSA
304-B:16-*l.*

**Source.** 1997, 120:14, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 304-B:16-l

 **304-B:16-l Procedure if Limited Partner Dissatisfied With Payment
of Offer. –**
                                             
 I. A dissenter may notify the limited partnership in writing of the
dissenter's own estimate of the fair value of such dissenter's limited
partnership interest and amount of interest due, and demand payment of
the dissenter's estimate (less any payment under RSA 304-B:16-i), or
reject the limited partnership's offer under RSA 304-B:16-k; and demand
payment of the fair value of the limited partnership interest and
interest due, if:
                                             
 (a) The dissenter believes that the amount paid under RSA
304-B:16-i or offered under RSA 304-B:16-k is less than the fair value
of such dissenter's limited partnership interest or that the interest
due is incorrectly calculated; or
                                             
 (b) The limited partnership fails to make payment under RSA
304-B:16-i within 60 days after the date set for demanding payment.
                                             
 II. A dissenter waives the right to demand payment under this
section unless the dissenter notifies the limited partnership of such
dissenter's demand in writing under paragraph I within 30 days after the
limited partnership made or offered payment for such dissenter's limited
partnership interest.

**Source.** 1997, 120:14, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 304-B:16-m

 **304-B:16-m Court Action. –**
                                             
 I. If a demand for payment under RSA 304-B:16-l remains unsettled,
the limited partnership shall commence a proceeding within 60 days after
receiving the payment demand and petition the court to determine the
fair value of the limited partnership interest and accrued interest. If
the limited partnership does not commence the proceeding within the
60-day period, it shall pay each dissenter whose demand remains
unsettled the amount demanded.
                                             
 II. The limited partnership shall commence the proceeding in
superior court of the county where the limited partnership's principal
executive office (or, if none in this state, its registered office) is
located. If the limited partnership is a foreign entity without a
registered office in this state, it shall commence the proceeding in the
county in this state where the registered office of the domestic limited
partnership merged with or converted into the foreign entity was
located.
                                             
 III. The limited partnership shall make all dissenters (whether or
not residents of this state) whose demands remain unsettled parties to
the proceeding as in an action against their limited partnership
interests, and all parties must be served with a copy of the petition.
Nonresidents may be served by registered or certified mail or by
publication as provided by law.
                                             
 IV. The jurisdiction of the court in which the proceeding is
commenced under paragraph II is plenary and exclusive. The court may
appoint one or more persons as appraisers to receive evidence and
recommend decision on the question of fair value. The appraisers have
the powers described in the order appointing them, or in any amendment
to it. The dissenters are entitled to the same discovery rights as
parties in other civil proceedings.
                                             
 V. Each dissenter made a party to the proceeding is entitled to
judgment:
                                             
 (a) For the amount, if any, by which the court finds the fair
value of the dissenter's partnership interest plus accrued interest
exceeds the amount paid by the limited partnership; or
                                             
 (b) For the fair value, plus accrued interest, of such
dissenter's after-acquired partnership interests for which the limited
partnership elected to withhold payment under RSA 304-B:16-k.
                                             
 VI. The limited partnership is entitled to judgment against each
specific dissenter for the amount, if any, by which the court finds the
fair value of such dissenter's partnership interest, plus accrued
interest, is less than the amount paid by the limited partnership to
each dissenter.

**Source.** 1997, 120:14, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 304-B:16-n

 **304-B:16-n Court Costs and Counsel Fees. –**
                                             
 I. The court in an appraisal proceeding commenced under RSA
304-B:16-m shall determine all costs of the proceeding, including the
reasonable compensation and expenses of appraisers appointed by the
court. The court shall assess the costs against the limited partnership,
except that the court may assess costs against all or some of the
dissenters, in amounts the court finds equitable, to the extent the
court finds the dissenters acted arbitrarily, vexatiously, or not in
good faith in demanding payment under RSA 304-B:16-*l.*
                                             
 II. The court may also assess the fees and expenses of counsel and
experts for the respective parties, in amounts the court finds
equitable:
                                             
 (a) Against the limited partnership and in favor of any or all
dissenters if the court finds the limited partnership did not
substantially comply with the requirements of RSA 304-B:16-d through
304-B:16-*l.*
                                             
 (b) Against either the limited partnership or a dissenter, in
favor of any other party, if the court finds that the party against whom
the fees and expenses are assessed acted arbitrarily, vexatiously, or
not in good faith with respect to the rights provided by this
subdivision.
                                             
 III. If the court finds that the services of counsel for any
dissenter were of substantial benefit to other dissenters similarly
situated and that the fees for those services should not be assessed
against the limited partnership, the court may award to these counsel
reasonable fees to be paid out of the amounts awarded to the dissenters
who were benefited.

**Source.** 1997, 120:14, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 304-B:16-o

 **304-B:16-o Procedures as to Assignees of Financial Rights. –**
                                             
 I. When an assignment of all or a portion of a limited partnership
interest is in effect and a copy delivered to the limited partnership
prior to the action described in RSA 304-B:16-i, then as to that limited
partnership interest the provisions of RSA 304-B:16-c through RSA
304-B:16-n must be followed subject to the requirements of this
section.
                                             
 II. If the limited partner has not ceased to be a partner upon
assignment of the limited partner's partnership interest prior to the
action described in RSA 304-B:16-i, all rights to be exercised and
actions to be taken by a limited partner under RSA 304-B:16-d through
RSA 304-B:16-n shall be taken by the limited partner and not by an
assignee of the limited partner's partnership interest. As between the
limited partnership and the assignees, the actions taken or omitted by
the limited partner bind the assignees, and the following requirements
shall apply:
                                             
 (a) Instead of remitting a payment under RSA 304-B:16-i, the
limited partnership shall forward to the dissenter limited partner:
                                             
 (1) The materials described in RSA 304-B:16-i, II;
                                             
 (2) An offer to pay the amount listed in the materials, with
that amount to be allocated among and paid to the limited partner and
the assignees of the limited liability company interest according to the
terms of the assignments reflected in the required records; and
                                             
 (3) A statement of that allocation.
                                             
 (b) If the dissenter limited partner accepts the amount of the
offer made under subparagraph (a) but disputes the allocation, the
dissenter shall promptly so notify the limited partnership and within 60
days after the notification commence a proceeding and petition the court
to determine the proper allocation. The limited partner shall commence
the proceeding in superior court of the county in which the principal
office of the limited partnership (or if none, its registered office) is
located, or in the case of a surviving foreign limited partnership or
other entity that is complying with this section following a merger with
or conversion of a limited partnership, the limited partner shall
commence the proceeding in superior court of the county in this state in
which the last registered office of the limited partnership was located.
The petition shall name as parties the limited partner, the limited
partnership and all assignees of the limited partner's limited
partnership interest. Upon being served with the petition, the limited
partnership shall promptly pay into the court the amount offered under
paragraph II and shall then be dismissed from the proceeding.
                                             
 (c) If the dissenter considers the amount offered under
subparagraph (a) inadequate, the dissenter may decline the offer and
demand payment under RSA 304-B:16-l. If the dissenter makes demand for
payment, RSA 304-B:16-m and RSA 304-B:16-n apply with the court having
jurisdiction also to determine the correctness of the allocation.
                                             
 (d) If the limited partner fails to take action under either
subparagraph (b) or (c), then:
                                             
 (1) As to the limited partnership, both the member and the
assignees of the limited partner's limited partnership interests are
limited to the amount and allocation offered under subparagraph (a);
and
                                             
 (2) The limited partnership discharges its obligation of
payment by making payment according to the amount and allocation offered
under subparagraph (a).
                                             
 III. If the limited partner has ceased to be a limited partner upon
assignment of the limited partner's partnership interest, the assignees
of the limited partner's partnership interest shall be entitled to
exercise all rights of the limited partner pursuant to RSA 304-B:16-d
through RSA 304-B:16-n.

**Source.** 1997, 120:14, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

Limited Partners
----------------

### Section 304-B:17

 **304-B:17 Admission of Limited Partners. –**
                                             
 I. A person becomes a limited partner:
                                             
 (a) At the time the limited partnership is formed; or
                                             
 (b) At any later time specified in the records of the limited
partnership for becoming a limited partner.
                                             
 II. After the filing of a limited partnership's original certificate
of limited partnership, a person may be admitted as an additional
limited partner:
                                             
 (a) In the case of a person acquiring a partnership interest
directly from the limited partnership, upon the compliance with the
partnership agreement or, if the partnership agreement does not so
provide, upon the written consent of all partners; and
                                             
 (b) In the case of an assignee of a partnership interest of a
partner who has the power, as provided in RSA 304-B:42, to grant the
assignee the right to become a limited partner, upon the exercise of
that power and compliance with any conditions limiting the grant or
exercise of the power.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:18

 **304-B:18 Voting. –** Subject to RSA 304-B:19, the partnership
agreement may grant to all or a specified group of the limited partners
the right to vote (on a per capita or other basis) upon any matter.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:19

 **304-B:19 Liability to Third Parties. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph IV, a limited partner is not
liable for the obligations of a limited partnership unless he is also a
general partner or, in addition to the exercise of his rights and powers
as a limited partner, he participates in the control of the business.
However, if the limited partner participates in the control of the
business, he is liable only to persons who transact business with the
limited partnership reasonably believing, based upon the limited
partner's conduct, that the limited partner is a general partner.
                                             
 II. A limited partner does not participate in the control of the
business within the meaning of paragraph I solely by doing one or more
of the following:
                                             
 (a) Being a contractor for or an agent or employee of the limited
partnership or of a general partner or being an officer, director, or
shareholder of a general partner that is a corporation;
                                             
 (b) Consulting with and advising a general partner with respect
to the business of the limited partnership;
                                             
 (c) Acting as surety for the limited partnership or guaranteeing
or assuming one or more specific obligations of the limited
partnership;
                                             
 (d) Taking any action required or permitted by law to bring or
pursue a derivative action in the right of the limited partnership;
                                             
 (e) Requesting or attending a meeting of partners;
                                             
 (f) Proposing, approving, or disapproving, by voting or
otherwise, one or more of the following matters:
                                             
 (1) The dissolution and winding up of the limited
partnership;
                                             
 (2) The sale, exchange, lease, mortgage, pledge, or other
transfer of all or substantially all of the assets of the limited
partnership;
                                             
 (3) The incurrence of indebtedness by the limited partnership
other than in the ordinary course of its business;
                                             
 (4) A change in the nature of the business;
                                             
 (5) The admission or removal of a general partner;
                                             
 (6) The admission or removal of a limited partner;
                                             
 (7) A transaction involving an actual or potential conflict of
interest between a general partner and the limited partnership or the
limited partners;
                                             
 (8) An amendment to the partnership agreement or certificate
of limited partnership; or
                                             
 (9) Matters related to the business of the limited partnership
not otherwise enumerated in paragraph II of this section, which the
partnership agreement states in writing may be subject to the approval
or disapproval of limited partners;
                                             
 (g) Winding up the limited partnership pursuant to RSA 304-B:46;
or
                                             
 (h) Exercising any right or power permitted to limited partners
under this chapter and not specifically enumerated in this paragraph.
                                             
 III. The enumeration in paragraph II does not mean that the
possession or exercise of any other powers by a limited partner
constitutes participation by him in the business of the limited
partnership.
                                             
 IV. A limited partner who knowingly permits his name to be used in
the name of the limited partnership, except under circumstances
permitted by RSA 304-B:2, II, is liable to creditors who extend credit
to the limited partnership without actual knowledge that the limited
partner is not a general partner.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:20

 **304-B:20 Person Erroneously Believing Himself a Limited Partner.
–**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph II, a person who makes a
contribution to a business enterprise and erroneously but in good faith
believes that he has become a limited partner in the enterprise is not a
general partner in the enterprise and is not bound by its obligations by
reason of making the contribution, receiving distributions from the
enterprise, or exercising any rights of a limited partner, if, on
ascertaining the mistake, he:
                                             
 (a) Causes an appropriate certificate of limited partnership or
certificate of amendment to be executed and filed; or
                                             
 (b) Withdraws from future equity participation in the enterprise
by executing and filing in the office of the secretary of state a
certificate declaring withdrawal under this section.
                                             
 II. A person who makes a contribution of the kind described in
paragraph I is liable as a general partner to any third party who
transacts business with the enterprise (a) before the person withdraws
and an appropriate certificate is filed to show withdrawal, or (b)
before an appropriate certificate is filed to show that he is not a
general partner, but in either case only if the third party actually
believed in good faith that the person was a general partner at the time
of the transaction.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:21

 **304-B:21 Information. –** Each limited partner has the right to:
                                             
 I. Inspect and copy any of the partnership records required to be
maintained by RSA 304-B:5; and
                                             
 II. Obtain from the general partners from time to time upon
reasonable demand (a) true and full information regarding the state of
the business and financial condition of the limited partnership, (b)
promptly after becoming available, a copy of the limited partnership's
federal, state and local income tax returns for each year, and (c) other
information regarding the affairs of the limited partnership as is just
and reasonable.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

General Partners
----------------

### Section 304-B:22

 **304-B:22 Admission of Additional General Partners. –** After the
filing of a limited partnership's original certificate of limited
partnership, additional general partners may be admitted as provided in
writing in the partnership agreement or, if the partnership agreement
does not provide in writing for the admission of additional general
partners, with the written consent of all partners.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:23

 **304-B:23 Events of Withdrawal. –** Except as approved by the
specific written consent of all partners at the time, a person ceases to
be a general partner of a limited partnership upon the happening of any
of the following events:
                                             
 I. The general partner withdraws from the limited partnership as
provided in RSA 304-B:32;
                                             
 II. The general partner ceases to be a member of the limited
partnership as provided in RSA 304-B:40;
                                             
 III. The general partner is removed as a general partner in
accordance with the partnership agreement;
                                             
 IV. Unless otherwise provided in writing in the partnership
agreement, the general partner:
                                             
 (a) Makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors;
                                             
 (b) Files a voluntary petition in bankruptcy;
                                             
 (c) Is adjudicated as bankrupt or insolvent;
                                             
 (d) Files a petition or answer seeking for himself any
reorganization, arrangement, composition, readjustment, liquidation,
dissolution or similar relief under any statute, law, or rule;
                                             
 (e) Files an answer or other pleading admitting or failing to
contest the material allegations of a petition filed against him in any
proceeding of this nature; or
                                             
 (f) Seeks, consents to, or acquiesces in the appointment of a
trustee, receiver, or liquidator of the general partner or of all or any
substantial part of his properties;
                                             
 V. Unless otherwise provided in writing in the partnership
agreement, 120 days after the commencement of any proceeding against the
general partner seeking reorganization, arrangement, composition,
readjustment, liquidation, dissolution or similar relief under any
statute, law, or rule, the proceeding has not been dismissed, or if
within 90 days after the appointment without his consent or acquiescence
of a trustee, receiver, or liquidator of the general partner or of all
or any substantial part of his properties, the appointment is not
vacated or stayed or within 90 days after the expiration of any such
stay, the appointment is not vacated;
                                             
 VI. In the case of a general partner who is a natural person:
                                             
 (a) His death; or
                                             
 (b) The entry of an order by a court of competent jurisdiction
adjudicating him incompetent to manage his person or his estate;
                                             
 VII. In the case of a general partner who is acting as a general
partner by virtue of being a trustee of a trust, the termination of the
trust (but not merely the substitution of a new trustee);
                                             
 VIII. In the case of a general partner that is a separate
partnership, the dissolution and commencement of winding up of the
separate partnership;
                                             
 IX. In the case of a general partner that is a corporation, the
filing of a certificate of dissolution, or its equivalent, for the
corporation or the revocation of its charter; or
                                             
 X. In the case of an estate, the distribution by the fiduciary of
the estate's entire interest in the partnership.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:24

 **304-B:24 General Powers and Liabilities. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in this chapter or in the partnership
agreement, a general partner of a limited partnership has the rights and
powers and is subject to the restrictions and liabilities of a partner
in a partnership without limited partners.
                                             
 II. Except as provided in this chapter, a general partner of a
limited partnership has the liabilities of a partner in a partnership
without limited partners to persons other than the partnership and the
other partners. Except as provided in this chapter or in the partnership
agreement, a general partner of a limited partnership has the
liabilities of a partner in a partnership without limited partners to
the partnership and to the other partners.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:25

 **304-B:25 Contributions by General Partner. –** A general partner
of a limited partnership may make contributions to the partnership and
share in the profits and losses of, and in distributions from, the
limited partnership as a general partner. A general partner also may
make contributions to and share in profits, losses, and distributions as
a limited partner. A person who is both a general partner and a limited
partner has the rights and powers, and is subject to the restrictions
and liabilities, of a general partner and, except as provided in the
partnership agreement, also has the powers, and is subject to the
restrictions, of a limited partner to the extent of his participation in
the partnership as a limited partner.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:26

 **304-B:26 Voting. –** The partnership agreement may grant to all or
certain identified general partners the right to vote (on a per capita
or any other basis), separately or with all or any class of the limited
partners, on any matter.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

Finance
-------

### Section 304-B:27

 **304-B:27 Form of Contribution. –** The contribution of a partner
may be in cash, property, or services rendered, or a promissory note or
other obligation to contribute cash or property or to perform services.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:28

 **304-B:28 Liability for Contribution. –**
                                             
 I. A promise by a limited partner to contribute to the limited
partnership is not enforceable unless set out in a writing signed by the
limited partner.
                                             
 II. Except as provided in the partnership agreement, a partner is
obligated to the limited partnership to perform any enforceable promise
to contribute cash or property or to perform services, even if he is
unable to perform because of death, disability, or any other reason. If
a partner does not make the required contribution of property or
services, he is obligated at the option of the limited partnership to
contribute cash equal to that portion of the value, as stated in the
partnership records required to be kept pursuant to RSA 304-B:5, of the
stated contribution that has not been made.
                                             
 III. Unless otherwise provided in the partnership agreement, the
obligation of a partner to make a contribution or return money or other
property paid or distributed in violation of this chapter may be
compromised only by consent of all the partners. Notwithstanding the
compromise, a creditor of a limited partnership who extends credit or
otherwise acts in reliance on that obligation after the partner signs a
writing which reflects the obligation and before the amendment or
cancellation thereof to reflect the compromise may enforce the original
obligation.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:29

 **304-B:29 Sharing of Profits and Losses. –** The profits and losses
of a limited partnership shall be allocated among the partners, and
among classes of partners, in the manner provided in writing in the
partnership agreement. If the partnership agreement does not so provide
in writing, profits and losses shall be allocated on the basis of the
value as stated in the partnership records required to be kept pursuant
to RSA 304-B:5, of the contributions made by each partner to the extent
they have been received by the partnership and have not been returned.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:30

 **304-B:30 Sharing of Distributions. –** Distributions of cash or
other assets of a limited partnership shall be allocated among the
partners, and among classes of partners, in the manner provided in
writing in the partnership agreement. If the partnership agreement does
not so provide in writing, distributions shall be made on the basis of
the value as stated in the partnership records required to be kept
pursuant to RSA 304-B:5, of the contributions made by each partner to
the extent they have been received by the partnership and have not been
returned.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

Distributions and Withdrawal
----------------------------

### Section 304-B:31

 **304-B:31 Interim Distributions. –** Except as provided in this
subdivision, a partner is entitled to receive distributions from a
limited partnership before his withdrawal from the limited partnership
and before the dissolution and winding up thereof to the extent and at
the times or upon the happening of the events specified in the
partnership agreement.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:32

 **304-B:32 Withdrawal of General Partner. –** A general partner may
withdraw from a limited partnership at any time by giving written notice
to the other partners, but if the withdrawal violates the partnership
agreement, the limited partnership may recover from the withdrawing
general partner damages for breach of the partnership agreement and
offset the damages against the amount otherwise distributable to him.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:33

 **304-B:33 Withdrawal of Limited Partner. –** A limited partner may
withdraw from a limited partnership at the time or upon the happening of
events specified in writing in the partnership agreement. If the
agreement does not specify in writing the time or the events upon the
happening of which a limited partner may withdraw or a definite time for
the dissolution and winding up of the limited partnership, a limited
partner may withdraw upon not less than 6 months' prior written notice
to each general partner at his address on the books of the limited
partnership at its office in this state.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:34

 **304-B:34 Distribution Upon Withdrawal. –** Except as provided in
this subdivision, upon withdrawal any withdrawing partner is entitled to
receive any distribution to which he is entitled under the partnership
agreement and, if not otherwise provided in the agreement, he is
entitled to receive, within a reasonable time after withdrawal, the fair
value of his interest in the limited partnership as of the date of
withdrawal based upon his right to share in distributions from the
limited partnership.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:35

 **304-B:35 Distribution in Kind. –** Except as provided in writing
in the partnership agreement, a partner, regardless of the nature of his
contribution, has no right to demand and receive any distribution from a
limited partnership in any form other than cash. Except as provided in
writing in the partnership agreement, a partner may not be compelled to
accept a distribution of any asset in kind from a limited partnership to
the extent that the percentage of the asset distributed to him exceeds a
percentage of that asset which is equal to the percentage in which he
shares in distributions from the limited partnership.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:36

 **304-B:36 Right to Distribution. –** At the time a partner becomes
entitled to receive a distribution, he has the status of, and is
entitled to all remedies available to, a creditor of the limited
partnership with respect to the distribution.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:37

 **304-B:37 Limitations on Distributions. –** A partner may not
receive a distribution from a limited partnership to the extent that,
after giving effect to the distribution, all liabilities of the limited
partnership, other than liabilities to partners on account of their
partnership interests, exceed the fair value of the partnership assets.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:38

 **304-B:38 Liability Upon Return of Contribution. –**
                                             
 I. If a partner has received the return of any part of his
contribution without violation of the partnership agreement or this
chapter, he is liable to the limited partnership for a period of one
year thereafter for the amount of the returned contribution, but only to
the extent necessary to discharge the limited partnership's liabilities
to creditors who extended credit to the limited partnership during the
period the contribution was held by the partnership.
                                             
 II. If a partner has received the return of any part of his
contribution in violation of the partnership agreement or this chapter,
he is liable to the limited partnership for a period of 6 years
thereafter for the amount of the contribution wrongfully returned.
                                             
 III. A partner receives a return of his contribution to the extent
that a distribution to him reduces his share of the fair value of the
net assets of the limited partnership below the value, as set forth in
the partnership records required to be kept pursuant to RSA 304-B:5, of
his contribution which has not been distributed to him.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

Assignment of Partnership Interests
-----------------------------------

### Section 304-B:39

 **304-B:39 Nature of Partnership Interest. –** A partnership
interest is personal property.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:40

 **304-B:40 Assignment of Partnership Interest. –** Except as
provided in the partnership agreement, a partnership interest is
assignable in whole or in part. An assignment of a partnership interest
does not dissolve a limited partnership or entitle the assignee to
become or to exercise any rights of a partner. An assignment entitles
the assignee to receive, to the extent assigned, only the distribution
to which the assignor would be entitled. Except as provided in the
partnership agreement, a partner ceases to be a partner upon assignment
of all his partnership interest.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:41

 **304-B:41 Rights of Creditor. –** On application to a court of
competent jurisdiction by any judgment creditor of a partner, the court
may charge the partnership interest of the partner with payment of the
unsatisfied amount of the judgment with interest. To the extent so
charged, the judgment creditor has only the rights of an assignee of the
partnership interest. This chapter does not deprive any partner of the
benefit of any exemption laws applicable to his partnership interest.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:42

 **304-B:42 Right of Assignee to Become Limited Partner. –**
                                             
 I. In assignee of a partnership interest, including an assignee of a
general partner, may become a limited partner if and to the extent that
(a) the assignor gives the assignee that right in accordance with
authority described in the partnership agreement, or (b) all other
partners consent.
                                             
 II. An assignee who has become a limited partner has, to the extent
assigned, the rights and powers, and is subject to the restrictions and
liabilities, of a limited partner under the partnership agreement and
this chapter. An assignee who becomes a limited partner also is liable
for the obligations of his assignor to make and return contributions as
provided in RSA 304-B:27-38. However, the assignee is not obligated for
liabilities unknown to the assignee at the time he became a limited
partner.
                                             
 III. If an assignee of a partnership interest becomes a limited
partner, the assignor is not released from his liability to the limited
partnership under RSA 304-B:14 and RSA 304-B:28.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:43

 **304-B:43 Power of Estate of Deceased or Incompetent Partner. –**
If a partner who is an individual dies or a court of competent
jurisdiction adjudges him to be incompetent to manage his person or his
property, the partner's executor, administrator, guardian, conservator,
or other legal representative may exercise all the partner's rights for
the purpose of settling his estate or administering his property,
including any power the partner had to give an assignee the right to
become a limited partner. If a partner is a corporation, trust, or other
entity and is dissolved or terminated, the powers of that partner may be
exercised by its legal representative or successor.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

Dissolution
-----------

### Section 304-B:44

 **304-B:44 Nonjudicial Dissolution. –** A limited partnership is
dissolved and its affairs shall be wound up upon the happening of the
first to occur of the following:
                                             
 I. At the time specified in the certificate of limited partnership;
                                             
 II. Upon the happening of events specified in writing in the
partnership agreement;
                                             
 III. Written consent of all partners;
                                             
 IV. An event of withdrawal of a general partner, unless at the time
there is at least one other general partner and the written provisions
of the partnership agreement permit the business of the limited
partnership to be carried on by the remaining general partner and that
partner does so, but the limited partnership is not dissolved and is not
required to be wound up by reason of any event of withdrawal if, within
90 days after the withdrawal, all partners agree in writing to continue
the business of the limited partnership and to the appointment of one or
more additional general partners if necessary or desired; or
                                             
 V. Entry of a decree of judicial dissolution under RSA 304-B:45.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:45

 **304-B:45 Judicial Dissolution. –** On application by or for a
partner, the superior court may decree dissolution of a limited
partnership whenever it is not reasonably practicable to carry on the
business in conformity with the partnership agreement.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:46

 **304-B:46 Winding Up. –** Except as provided in the partnership
agreement, the general partners who have not wrongfully dissolved a
limited partnership or, if none, the limited partners, may wind up the
limited partnership's affairs; but the superior court may wind up the
limited partnership's affairs upon application of any partner, his legal
representative, or assignee.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:47

 **304-B:47 Distribution of Assets. –** Upon the winding up of a
limited partnership, the assets shall be distributed as follows:
                                             
 I. To creditors, including partners who are creditors, to the extent
permitted by law, in satisfaction of liabilities of the limited
partnership other than liabilities for distributions to partners under
RSA 304-B:31 or RSA 304-B:34;
                                             
 II. Except as provided in the partnership agreement, to partners and
former partners in satisfaction of liabilities for distributions under
RSA 304-B:31 or RSA 304-B:34; and
                                             
 III. Except as provided in the partnership agreement, to partners
first for the return of their contributions and secondly respecting
their partnership interests, in the proportions in which the partners
share in distributions.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

Foreign Limited Partnerships
----------------------------

### Section 304-B:48

 **304-B:48 Law Governing. –** Subject to the constitution of this
state, (a) the laws of the state under which a foreign limited
partnership is organized govern its organization and internal affairs
and the liability of its limited partners, and (b) a foreign limited
partnership may not be denied registration by reason of any difference
between those laws and the laws of this state.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:49

 **304-B:49 Registration. –** Before transacting business in this
state, a foreign limited partnership shall register with the secretary
of state. In order to register, a foreign limited partnership shall
submit to the secretary of state, in duplicate, an application for
registration as a foreign limited partnership, signed and sworn to by a
general partner and setting forth:
                                             
 I. The name of the foreign limited partnership and, if different,
the name under which it proposes to register and transact business in
this state;
                                             
 II. The state and date of its formation;
                                             
 III. The name and address of any agent for service of process on the
foreign limited partnership whom the foreign limited partnership elects
to appoint. The registered agent may be:
                                             
 (a) An individual who resides in this state and whose business
office is identical with the registered office; or
                                             
 (b) A corporation organized or authorized under RSA 292, RSA
293-A, or RSA 294-A whose business office is identical with the
registered office; or
                                             
 (c) A limited liability company formed or authorized under RSA
304-C whose business office is identical with the registered office; or
                                             
 (d) A limited liability partnership formed or authorized under
RSA 304-A:44 whose business office is identical with the registered
office.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 V. The address of the office required to be maintained in the state
of its organization by the laws of that state or, if not so required, of
the principal office of the foreign limited partnership;
                                             
 VI. The name and business address of each general partner; and
                                             
 VII. The address of the office at which is kept a list of the names
and addresses of the limited partners and their capital contributions,
together with an undertaking by the foreign limited partnership to keep
those records until the foreign limited partnership's registration in
this state is cancelled or withdrawn.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1. 1988, 62:2. 1992, 255:5. 2004, 248:40, 62, II,
eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 304-B:50

 **304-B:50 Issuance of Registration. –**
                                             
 I. If the secretary of state finds that an application for
registration conforms to law and all requisite fees have been paid, he
shall:
                                             
 (a) Endorse on the application the word "filed'', and the month,
day and year of the filing thereof;
                                             
 (b) File in his office a duplicate original of the application;
and
                                             
 (c) Issue a certificate of registration to transact business in
this state.
                                             
 II. The certificate of registration, together with a duplicate
original of the application, shall be returned to the person who filed
the application or his representative.
                                             
 III. The secretary of state shall not accept an application for
registration unless accompanied by the certification required by RSA
421-B:13, I-a(b).

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:51

 **304-B:51 Name. –** The name of the foreign limited partnership
shall satisfy the requirements of RSA 304-B:2.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1. 1996, 239:3. 1997, 61:6. 2004, 248:41, eff.
July 1, 2004.

### Section 304-B:52

 **304-B:52 Changes and Amendments. –** If any statement in the
application for registration of a foreign limited partnership was false
when made or any arrangements or other facts described have changed,
making the application inaccurate in any respect, the foreign limited
partnership shall promptly file in the office of the secretary of state
a certificate, signed and sworn to by a general partner, correcting such
statement.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:53

 **304-B:53 Cancellation of Registration. –** A foreign limited
partnership may cancel its registration by filing with the secretary of
state a certificate of cancellation signed and sworn to by a general
partner. A cancellation does not terminate the authority of the
registered agent to accept service of process on the foreign limited
partnership with respect to causes of action arising out of the
transactions of business in this state.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1. 2004, 248:42, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 304-B:54

 **304-B:54 Transaction of Business Without Registration. –**
                                             
 I. A foreign limited partnership transacting business in this state
may not maintain any action, suit, or proceeding in any court of this
state until it has registered in this state.
                                             
 II. The failure of a foreign limited partnership to register in this
state does not impair the validity of any contract or act of the foreign
limited partnership or prevent the foreign limited partnership from
defending any action, suit, or proceeding in any court of this state.
                                             
 III. A limited partner of a foreign limited partnership is not
liable as a general partner of the foreign limited partnership solely by
reason of having transacted business in this state without
registration.
                                             
 IV. A foreign limited partnership transacting business in this state
without registration may be served by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, addressed to the secretary of the foreign
limited partnership at its principal office. Service is perfected under
section at the earliest of:
                                             
 (a) The date the foreign limited partnership receives the mail;
                                             
 (b) The date shown on the return receipt, if signed on behalf of
the foreign limited partnership; or
                                             
 (c) Five days after its deposit in the United States Mail, as
evidenced by the postmark, if mailed postpaid and correctly addressed.
                                             
 V. This section does not prescribe the only means, or necessarily
the required means, of serving a foreign limited partnership.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1. 2004, 248:43, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 304-B:55

 **304-B:55 Action by Attorney General. –** The attorney general may
bring an action to restrain a foreign limited partnership from
transacting business in this state in violation of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

Derivative Actions
------------------

### Section 304-B:56

 **304-B:56 Right of Action. –** A limited partner may bring an
action in the right of a limited partnership to recover a judgment in
its favor if general partners with authority to do so have refused to
bring the action or if an effort to cause those general partners to
bring the action is not likely to succeed.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:57

 **304-B:57 Proper Plaintiff. –** In a derivative action, the
plaintiff must be a partner at the time of bringing the action and (a)
must have been a partner at the time of the transaction of which he
complains or (b) his status as a partner must have devolved upon him by
operation of law or pursuant to the terms of the partnership agreement
from a person who was a partner at the time of the transaction.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:58

 **304-B:58 Pleading. –** In a derivative action, the complaint shall
set forth with particularity the effort of the plaintiff to secure
initiation of the action by a general partner or the reasons for not
making the effort.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:59

 **304-B:59 Expenses. –** If a derivative action is successful, in
whole or in part, or if anything is received by the plaintiff as a
result of a judgment, compromise, or settlement of an action or claim,
the court may award the plaintiff reasonable expenses, including
reasonable attorney's fees, and shall direct him to remit to the limited
partnership the remainder of those proceeds received by him.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

Miscellaneous
-------------

### Section 304-B:60

 **304-B:60 Construction and Application. –** This chapter shall be
so applied and construed to effectuate its general purpose to make the
law uniform with respect to the subject of this chapter among states
enacting it.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:61

 **304-B:61 Short Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the Uniform
Limited Partnership Act.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:62

 **304-B:62 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:63

 **304-B:63 Rules for Cases Not Provided for in This Chapter. –** In
any case not provided for in this chapter the provisions of the Uniform
Partnership Act, RSA 304-A, shall govern.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 304-B:64


                                             


                                             [This section was enacted by the New Hampshire General Court and is not
a part of the national Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act.
                                             ]

 **304-B:64 Fees. –**
                                             
 The secretary of state shall charge the following fees for filing
under this chapter:
                                             
 I. For a certificate of limited partnership or registration as a
foreign limited partnership, 
                                             $100.
                                             
 II. For a certificate of amendment or correction, or a certificate
of cancellation, 
                                             $35.
                                             
 III. For a reservation or transfer of reservation of name, 
                                             $15.
                                             
 IV. For a certificate of merger, 
                                             $35.

**Source.** 1987, 349:1. 1990, 3:23. 1993, 350:29. 1997, 120:15. 2004,
248:44, eff. July 1, 2004. 2015, 273:24, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.
