---
title: 'CHAPTER 305-A REGISTRATION OF FOREIGN PARTNERSHIPS'
---

TITLE XXVIII
                                             
PARTNERSHIPS
=============

CHAPTER 305-A
                                             
REGISTRATION OF FOREIGN PARTNERSHIPS
------------------------------------

### Section 305-A:1

 **305-A:1 Registration. –**
                                             
 I. Every foreign partnership, desiring to do business within this
state, shall pay a filing fee of 
                                             $50 to the secretary of state on the
date of registration.
                                             
 II. Every foreign partnership, desiring to do business within this
state, shall continuously maintain in this state:
                                             
 (a) A registered office which may or may not be the same as its
place of business in the state; and
                                             
 (b) A registered agent, which agent may be:
                                             
 (1) An individual who resides in this state and whose business
office is identical with the registered office; or
                                             
 (2) A corporation organized or authorized under RSA 292, RSA
293-A, or RSA 294-A whose business office is identical with the
registered office; or
                                             
 (3) A limited liability company formed or authorized under RSA
304-C whose business office is identical with the registered office; or
                                             
 (4) A limited liability partnership formed or authorized under
RSA 304-A:44 whose business office is identical with the registered
office.

**Source.** 1965, 187:1. 1973, 267:3. 1975, 96:1; 503:11. 1977, 25:1.
1986, 131:6. 1987, 349:2, 4, II; 393:2. 1990, 3:24. 1991, 67:5. 1993,
350:30, 41, VIII. 1999, 293:7. 2004, 248:55, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 305-A:2

 **305-A:2 Application for Certificate of Authority. –** All
applications of foreign partnerships for authority to do business in
this state shall be made on forms prescribed or furnished by and filed
in the office of the secretary of state and shall be executed by a
general partner of the partnership desiring to so register, and shall
set forth: (a) the name of the partnership, the state under which laws
it is formed, and the post office address with street and number, if
any, of its principal office in such state; and (b) a statement
registering an office and agent in this state and the address including
street and number, if any, of such registered office in this state and
the name of such registered agent in this state at such address. On
compliance with the provisions of this section, the secretary of state
shall forthwith issue a certificate of authority to do business in this
state; copies of applications, certified by the secretary of state,
shall be sufficient evidence thereof.

**Source.** 1965, 187:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1965.

### Section 305-A:2-a

 **305-A:2-a Changes. –** Any partnership which has changed its name,
changed any of its general or limited partners, or changed its
registered office or registered agent shall, within 30 days, file with
the secretary of state a certificate of such change, signed and sworn to
by a general partner of the partnership, and shall pay a filing fee of

                                             $35 for a change of name or change of general or limited partners or a
filing fee of 
                                             $15 for a change of registered office or registered
agent.

**Source.** 1969, 87:1. 1975, 96:2. 2004, 248:56, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 305-A:2-b

 **305-A:2-b Suspension. –** If any foreign partnership fails for 2
consecutive years to make the payments of fees required by this chapter,
its right to do business in this state shall be suspended.

**Source.** 1969, 87:1, eff. June 9, 1969.

### Section 305-A:2-c

 **305-A:2-c Inactive List. –** The secretary of state is hereby
directed to remove from the active list of foreign partnerships
authorized to do business in this state (1) the name of any such
partnership whose right to do business herein has been suspended for
failure to make payments by provisions of RSA 305-A:2-b, and (2) the
name of any such partnership which may have withdrawn from doing
business in this state but has failed to make a return to the secretary
of state of such withdrawal and to pay the filing fee as required by RSA
305-A:5. The secretary of state shall keep on an inactive list the names
of the foreign partnerships so removed from the active list which are no
longer authorized to do business in this state.

**Source.** 1969, 87:1, eff. June 9, 1969.

### Section 305-A:2-d

 **305-A:2-d Reregistration. –** If any foreign partnership removed
from the active list of foreign partnerships authorized to do business
in this state pursuant to RSA 305-A:2-c shall again wish to register to
do business in this state, it shall make a new application for such
registration and pay the required fees for such registration.

**Source.** 1969, 87:1, eff. June 9, 1969.

### Section 305-A:2-e

 **305-A:2-e Name. –**
                                             
 I. Except as authorized by paragraphs II and III, a foreign
partnership name, based upon the records of the secretary of state,
shall be distinguishable from, and not the same as:
                                             
 (a) The name of an entity incorporated, authorized, formed, or
registered to do business in this state under RSA 292, RSA 293-A, RSA
293-B, RSA 294-A, RSA 301, RSA 301-A, RSA 304-A, RSA 304-B, RSA 304-C,
RSA 305-A, or RSA 349.
                                             
 (b) A name reserved under RSA 293-A, RSA 293-B, RSA 304-A, RSA
304-B, or RSA 304-C.
                                             
 (c) The fictitious name of another foreign corporation authorized
to transact business in this state.
                                             
 (d) The name of an agency or instrumentality of the United States
or this state or a subdivision thereof.
                                             
 (e) The name of any political party recognized under RSA 652:11,
unless written consent is obtained from the authorized representative of
the political organization.
                                             
 (f) The name "farmers' market'' unless the entity meets the
definition of "farmers' market'' established in RSA 21:34-a, V.
                                             
 II. A foreign partnership may apply to the secretary of state for
authorization to use a name that is not distinguishable from, or is the
same as, one or more of the names described in paragraph I, as
determined from review of the records of the secretary of state. The
secretary of state shall authorize use of the name applied for if:
                                             
 (a) The holder or holders of the name as described in paragraph I
gives written consent to use the name that is not distinguishable from
the name of the applying foreign partnership; or if the name is the
same, one or more words are added to the name to make the new name
distinguishable from the other name; or
                                             
 (b) The other entity consents to the use in writing and submits
an undertaking in a form satisfactory to the secretary of state to
change its name to a name that is distinguishable from, and not the same
as, the name of the applying foreign partnership; or
                                             
 (c) The applicant delivers to the secretary of state a certified
copy of the final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction
establishing the applicant's right to use the name applied for in this
state.
                                             
 III. A foreign partnership may use the name, including the
fictitious name, of another domestic or foreign entity that is used in
this state if the other entity is incorporated, authorized, formed, or
registered to transact business in this state and the proposed user
foreign partnership:
                                             
 (a) Has merged with the other entity;
                                             
 (b) Has been formed by reorganization of the other entity; or
                                             
 (c) Has acquired all or substantially all of the assets,
including the name, of the other entity.
                                             
 IV. This chapter does not control the use of fictitious names.
                                             
 V. Nothing in this section would prohibit the owner or owners of a
trade name registered under RSA 349 to form a foreign partnership under
the same name as the trade name.

**Source.** 1969, 87:1. 2004, 248:57. 2009, 293:10, eff. Sept. 29, 2009.
2015, 188:19, 20, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 305-A:2-f

 **305-A:2-f Resignation of Registered Agent. –**
                                             
 I. The registered agent of a foreign partnership authorized to do
business in this state may resign his or her agency appointment by
signing and delivering to the secretary of state for filing the original
and one exact or conformed copy of a statement of resignation. The
statement of resignation may include a statement that the registered
office is also discontinued.
                                             
 II. The secretary of state shall mail the copy to the foreign
partnership at its principal office address of record.
                                             
 III. The agency appointment is terminated, and the registered office
discontinued if so provided, on the thirty-first day after the date on
which the statement was filed.

**Source.** 2006, 316:15, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 305-A:3

 **305-A:3 Noncompliance; Penalty. –** Any foreign partnership which
refuses to comply with the requirements of this chapter may be
restrained from further prosecution of business in this state by
proceedings in equity brought by the attorney general in the county of
Merrimack and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1965, 187:1. 1973, 529:65, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 305-A:4

 **305-A:4 Effect. –** Failure to comply with the registration
provisions of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any contract
with a foreign partnership; but no action shall be maintained or
recovery had in any of the courts of this state by any such foreign
partnership so long as it fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter.

**Source.** 1965, 187:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1965.

### Section 305-A:5

 **305-A:5 Withdrawal From State; Fee. –** A foreign partnership
authorized to do business in the state may withdraw from the state at
any time. Such withdrawal shall become effective when such partnership
shall have filed in the office of the secretary of state on forms
prescribed or furnished by the secretary of state, signed for the
partnership by a general partner thereof, a statement of withdrawal
which shall set forth: (a) the name of such partnership, the state or
county under the laws of which it is formed, and the post office address
with street and number, if any, of its principal office in such state;
(b) the address including street and number, if any, of its registered
office in this state and the name of its registered agent in this state
at such address; and (c) that it surrenders its authority to do business
in this state. Such statement shall be accompanied by a filing fee of

                                             $35.

**Source.** 1965, 187:1. 2004, 248:58, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 305-A:6

 **305-A:6 Service of Process; How Made. –**
                                             
 I. Service of process in any suit, action, or proceeding or service
of any notice or demand required or permitted by law to be served on a
foreign partnership may be made on such partnership by service thereof
on a registered agent of such partnership. Service of any such process
or of any such notice or demand upon a registered agent as registered
agent may be made:
                                             
 (a) By leaving an attested copy of such process, notice, or
demand in the registered office of the registered agent during regular
business hours; or
                                             
 (b) A foreign partnership may be served by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the secretary of
the foreign partnership at its principal office shown in its application
for a certificate of authority, if the foreign partnership:
                                             
 (1) Has no registered agent or its registered agent cannot
with reasonable diligence be served;
                                             
 (2) Has withdrawn from transacting business in this state
under RSA 305-A:5; or
                                             
 (3) Has had its certificate of authority suspended under RSA
305-A:2-b.
                                             
 II. Service is perfected under subparagraph I(b) at the earliest
of:
                                             
 (a) The date the foreign partnership receives the mail; or
                                             
 (b) The date shown on the return receipt, if signed on behalf of
the foreign partnership; or
                                             
 (c) Five days after its deposit in the United States Mail, as
evidenced by the postmark, if mailed postpaid and correctly addressed.
                                             
 III. This section does not prescribe the only means, or necessarily
the required means, of serving a foreign partnership.

**Source.** 1965, 187:1. 2004, 248:59, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 305-A:7

 **305-A:7 On Secretary of State. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2004, 248:62, III,
eff. July 1, 2004.
                                             ]

### Section 305-A:8

 **305-A:8 Service. –** The method of service provided by this
chapter is not exclusive and service on foreign partnerships may be made
in any other manner provided by law.

**Source.** 1965, 187:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1965.
