---
title: CHAPTER 517 DEPOSITIONS
---

TITLE LIII
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN COURT
====================

CHAPTER 517
                                             
DEPOSITIONS
------------

In Civil Cases
--------------

### Section 517:1

 **517:1 Taking; Use. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 210:1, II, eff. Jan. 1,
1987.
                                             ]

### Section 517:2

 **517:2 Before Whom. –** Any justice or notary public in the state,
any commissioner appointed under the laws of the state to take
depositions in other states, any judge or justice of the peace or notary
public in any other state or country, may take such deposition.

**Source.** RS 188:14. CS 200:14. GS 210:2. GL 229:2. PS 225:3. PL
337:2. RL 393:2.

### Section 517:3

 **517:3 Disqualifications. –** No person shall write the testimony
of a witness, record the testimony of a witness, or act as magistrate in
taking the same, if:
                                             
 I. Such person is a party to the action;
                                             
 II. Such person is a relative, employee, or attorney of a party to
the action;
                                             
 III. Such person has a financial interest in the action or its
outcome;
                                             
 IV. Such person has entered into an arrangement with a person or
entity which has a financial interest in the action or its outcome,
where the arrangement purports to create a relationship in which the
person transcribing the deposition or recording the deposition will be
providing exclusive deposition transcribing or deposition recording
services for the interested person or entity; or
                                             
 V. Such person is employed by or is an independent contractor
working for a person or entity which has entered into an arrangement
with a person or entity which has a financial interest in the action or
its outcome, where the arrangement purports to create a relationship in
which the person's employer will be providing exclusive deposition
transcribing or deposition recording services for the interested person
or entity.

**Source.** RS 188:18. CS 200:18. GS 210:6. GL 229:6. PS 225:7. PL
337:3. RL 393:3. 2000, 216:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 517:4

 **517:4 Notice. –** The party proposing to take a deposition shall
cause a notice in writing, signed by a justice or notary, stating the
day, hour, and place of taking the same, to be delivered to the adverse
party, or one of them, or to be left at his or her abode, if either of
such parties resides in this state, and within 20 miles of the place of
taking, or of the party taking the same, a reasonable time before the
taking thereof. A party may, at such party's expense, record a video
deposition taken under this chapter, provided the party indicates the
intent to record the video deposition in the notice.

**Source.** RS 188:15. CS 200:15. GS 210:3. 1871, 39:1. GL 229:3. PS
225:4. PL 337:4. RL 393:4. 2013, 65:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 517:5

 **517:5 Notice to Agent. –** If the adverse party resides out of the
state, or more than twenty miles from the place of caption, or from the
party proposing to take the deposition, a like notice, given to the
agent or attorney of such adverse party or left at his abode, shall be
sufficient.

**Source.** RS 188:16. CS 200:16. GS 210:4. GL 229:4. PS 225:5. PL
337:5. RL 393:5.

### Section 517:6

 **517:6 Agency. –** No person shall be deemed an agent or attorney
for this purpose unless he has indorsed the writ in the cause, or has
appeared for his principal before the court, justice, referees or
arbitrators, where the action is pending, or has given notice in writing
that he is such attorney or agent.

**Source.** RS 188:17. CS 200:17. GS 210:5. GL 229:5. PS 225:6. PL
337:6. RL 393:6.

### Section 517:7

 **517:7 Signing; Oath. –** Every witness shall subscribe his
deposition, and shall make oath that it contains the truth, the whole
truth and nothing but the truth, relative to the cause for which it was
taken.

**Source.** RS 188:19. CS 200:19. GS 210:7. GL 229:7. PS 225:8. PL
337:7. RL 393:7.

### Section 517:8

 **517:8 Caption. –** The magistrate taking the deposition shall
certify such oath, with the time and place of taking the deposition, the
case and court in which it is to be used, that the adverse party was or
was not present, was or was not notified, and that he did or did not
object.

**Source.** RS 188:20. CS 200:20. GS 210:8. GL 229:8. PS 225:9. PL
337:8. RL 393:8.

### Section 517:9

 **517:9 Annexing Copy of Notice. –** A copy of the notice left with
the adverse party, his agent or attorney, with the return of the officer
or affidavit of the person leaving such notice thereon, stating the time
of leaving it, shall be annexed to the caption of the deposition, when
the adverse party does not attend.

**Source.** RS 188:21. CS 200:21. GS 210:9. GL 229:9. PS 225:10. PL
337:9. RL 393:9.

### Section 517:10

 **517:10 Sealing. –** Depositions so taken shall be sealed up by the
magistrate taking the same, directed to the court or justice before whom
they are to be used, with a brief description of the case, and shall be
so delivered into court.

**Source.** RS 188:23. CS 200:23. GS 210:11. GL 229:11. PS 225:2. PL
337:10. RL 393:10.

### Section 517:11

 **517:11 Deposition of Party. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 210:1, III, eff.
Jan. 1, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 517:12

 **517:12 Neglect to Take. –** If any party after giving notice to
the adverse party neglects or refuses to take a deposition the adverse
party may be allowed as costs such amount as the court may deem
equitable, not exceeding twenty-five cents a mile for actual travel of
himself or his attorney to attend the same, and may have judgment and
execution therefor unless notice in writing that the deposition will not
be taken, signed by the party giving the original notice, is seasonably
given to such adverse party.

**Source.** RS 188:22. CS 200:22. GS 210:10. GL 229:10. PS 225:12. PL
337:12. RL 393:12.

In Criminal Cases
-----------------

### Section 517:13

 **517:13 Discovery Depositions in Criminal Cases. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in this section or by order of the
court, depositions shall be taken in the manner provided in civil
actions.
                                             
 II. The court in its discretion may permit either party to take the
deposition of any witness, except the defendant, in any criminal case,
upon a finding by a preponderance of the evidence that such deposition
is necessary:
                                             
 (a) To preserve the testimony of any witness who is unlikely to
be available for trial due to illness, absence from the jurisdiction or
reluctance to cooperate; or
                                             
 (b) To ensure a fair trial, avoid surprise or for other good
cause shown. In determining the necessity, the court shall consider the
complexity of the issues involved, other opportunities or information
available to discover the information sought by the deposition, and any
other special or exceptional circumstances which may exist.
                                             
 III. In any felony case either party may take a discovery deposition
of any expert witness who may be called by the other party to testify at
trial.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting discovery
depositions by agreement between the parties.
                                             
 V. Notwithstanding this section, no party in a criminal case shall
take the discovery deposition of a victim or witness who has not
achieved the age of 16 years at the time of the deposition.

**Source.** 1869, 24:1. GL 229:12. PS 225:13. PL 337:13. RL 339:13. RSA
517:13. 1959, 12:1. 1985, 228:1. 1988, 195:1. 1990, 206:1. 2003, 141:1,
eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 517:13-a

 **517:13-a Videotape Trial Testimony Authorized. –**
                                             
 I. In any criminal case, the state may move to take videotape trial
testimony of any witness, including the victim, who was 16 years of age
or under at the time of the alleged offense. Any victim or other witness
who was 16 years of age or under at the time of the offense may also
move to take videotape trial testimony. The court shall order videotape
trial testimony if it finds by a preponderance of the evidence that:
                                             
 (a) The child will suffer emotional or mental strain if required
to testify in open court; or
                                             
 (b) Further delay will impair the child's ability to recall and
relate the facts of the alleged offense.
                                             
 II. Videotape trial testimony taken pursuant to this section shall
be conducted before the judge at such a place as ordered by the court in
the presence of the prosecutors, the defendant and his attorneys, and
such other persons as the court allows. Examination and
cross-examination of the child shall proceed in the same manner as
permitted at trial. Such testimony shall be admissible into evidence at
trial in lieu of any other testimony by the child.
                                             
 III. Unless otherwise ordered by the court for good cause shown, no
victim or witness whose testimony is taken pursuant to this section
shall be required to appear or testify at trial.
                                             
 IV. Any witness who is 16 years of age or under shall be allowed to
have his parent or any other appropriate adult, or both, present during
his testimony.
                                             
 V. The supreme court shall make any rules necessary to implement the
provisions of this section.

**Source.** 1985, 228:2. 1988, 195:2. 1990, 206:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 517:14

 **517:14 Compensation of State's Counsel. –** If a county attorney
or the attorney general shall attend the caption of a deposition taken
under the provisions of the preceding section he shall receive a
reasonable compensation for his services and expenses from the treasury
of the county in which the prosecution is pending, his account being
first audited and allowed by the superior court in such county.

**Source.** 1869, 24:2. GL 229:13. PS 225:14. PL 337:14. RL 393:14. RSA
517:14. 1959, 12:1.

By Prosecution
--------------

### Section 517:14-a

 **517:14-a Deposition Authorized. –** The attorney general or a
county attorney conducting the prosecution in a criminal case may take
the deposition of any witness the prosecution intends to call at the
trial, if it is determined by a justice of the superior court that:
                                             
 I. The defendant in the case in which the deposition is sought has
been arrested or bound over to the grand jury or has been indicted, and
                                             
 II. There is reason to believe the life or safety of the witness is
endangered because of his willingness or ability to testify, and the
testimony expected from the witness is material to the prosecution of
the case.

**Source.** 1971, 209:1. 1975, 270:1, eff. Aug. 5, 1975.

### Section 517:14-b

 **517:14-b Petition to Superior Court. –** The prosecution desiring
to take the deposition of such witness shall present a petition to any
justice of the superior court, which petition shall be in writing and
under oath, briefly setting forth facts which indicate that the
requirements of RSA 517:14-a, I and II have been satisfied. The justice
may grant the petition upon receipt thereof or may require further
evidence of its allegations. If further evidence is required, such
evidence may be received without notice to or appearance by the
defendant or his counsel.

**Source.** 1971, 209:1, eff. Aug. 17, 1971.

### Section 517:14-c

 **517:14-c Court Order. –** If the justice determines that the
allegations of the petition are substantiated by the petition itself or
by any other evidence, he shall issue an order requiring that the person
whose deposition is sought present himself at a fixed time and date
before a justice of the superior court of the county in which the trial
will be held for the purpose of giving his deposition. Said order shall
also require the defendant and his counsel to be present at the taking
of the deposition. If the defendant is without counsel at the time the
petition under RSA 517:14-b is filed, the court shall be notified of
such in the petition and shall appoint counsel to represent the
defendant at the deposition. For the purposes of this section, counsel
who represented the defendant at a probable cause hearing shall continue
to represent the defendant at such deposition unless the defendant
obtains new counsel.

**Source.** 1971, 209:1, eff. Aug. 17, 1971.

### Section 517:14-d

 **517:14-d Time, Notice, etc. –** The date fixed for the deposition
shall be no more than fourteen days from the time the petition is
received by the clerk of court except that this time may be extended
upon request of the prosecution only. Notice of the court's order,
together with a copy of the original petition filed by the prosecution,
shall be served upon the defendant and his counsel at least 72 hours
before the time fixed for the taking of the deposition.

**Source.** 1971, 209:1, eff. Aug. 17, 1971.

### Section 517:14-e

 **517:14-e Record. –** The justice presiding at a deposition taken
under the provisions of this subdivision shall cause a record to be made
of the proceedings and shall cause a copy thereof to be furnished to the
defendant. Such record or a copy thereof may be used in the trial of the
case whenever in the discretion of the court the use thereof shall be
deemed necessary for the promotion of justice.

**Source.** 1971, 209:1, eff. Aug. 17, 1971.

Commissioners to Take Depositions
---------------------------------

### Section 517:15

 **517:15 Appointment. –** Upon petition the superior court may
appoint some suitable person as commissioner to take depositions outside
this state, for use in causes pending in or returnable to said court.

**Source.** 1903, 21:1. PL 337:15. RL 393:15. RSA 517:15. 1967, 132:29,
eff. July 18, 1967.

### Section 517:16

 **517:16 Procedure. –** After the appointment of such commissioner,
the notice of the time and place of taking depositions before him, the
proceedings in taking such depositions, the certificates to be made by
him, and all other formalities with reference to taking, filing and
using such depositions shall be the same, so far as applicable, as for
taking other depositions in civil causes.

**Source.** 1903, 21:2. PL 337:16. RL 393:16.

### Section 517:17

 **517:17 Powers. –** Said commissioner shall have and exercise all
the powers conferred by the laws of other states, territories and
foreign countries upon commissioners or other persons authorized to take
depositions in said other states, territories and foreign countries for
use in causes pending in this state.

**Source.** 1903, 21:3. PL 337:17. RL 393:17.

### Section 517:18

 **517:18 Foreign. –** A commissioner or other person appointed by
any court of record of any other state, territory or foreign country,
for the purpose of taking depositions in this state for use in causes
pending in such court of record, shall have the same powers of procuring
the attendance of witnesses to give depositions before him, and of
requiring the production of papers and the giving of such depositions,
as justices of the peace within this state with reference to depositions
for use in civil causes pending within the courts of this state.

**Source.** 1903, 21:4. PL 337:18. RL 393:18.

Fees for Taking Depositions
---------------------------

### Section 517:19

 **517:19 Fees for Justices of the Peace for Taking Depositions. –**
                                             
 I. Justices of the peace shall be entitled to a fee of at least 
                                             $5
but no more than 
                                             $50 in the taking of depositions, dependent upon that
amount which the justice of the peace feels is sufficient payment for
his services.
                                             
 II. In addition to the fee as provided in paragraph I, a justice of
the peace is entitled to 
                                             $.20 per mile as mileage to swear witnesses.

**Source.** RS 229:1. CS 245:1. GS 272:1. GL 290:1. PS 287:3. PL 337:19.
RL 393:19. RSA 517:19. 1990, 16:2, eff. May 12, 1990.

### Section 517:20

 **517:20 Stenographers. –** When by agreement of the parties
depositions are taken in shorthand and thereafter transcribed, or are
taken down by the use of a typewriter, the court may allow as costs the
whole or any part of the expense thereof, as justice may require.

**Source.** PL 337:20. RL 393:20.
