---
title: 'CHAPTER 521-A INTERPRETERS FOR THE DEAF'
---

TITLE LIII
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN COURT
====================

CHAPTER 521-A
                                             
INTERPRETERS FOR THE DEAF
-------------------------

### Section 521-A:1

 **521-A:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
                                             
 I. "Appointing authority'' means the presiding justice of any court,
the chairman of any board, commission or authority, and the director or
commissioner of any department or agency, or any other person presiding
at any hearing or other proceeding wherein a qualified interpreter is
required pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 II. "Deaf person'' means any person whose hearing is so impaired as
to seriously prohibit the person from processing linguistic information
through hearing, with or without amplification, so as to require the use
of an interpreter. This includes, but is not limited to, persons who are
deaf, deaf and blind, or severely hard of hearing.
                                             
 III. "Principal party in interest'' means a person in any proceeding
in which he is a named party or a person with respect to whom the
decision or action which may be taken in any proceeding directly
affects.
                                             
 IV. "Qualified interpreter'' means an interpreter licensed under RSA
326-I.

**Source.** 1977, 542:1. 1989, 51:2, 3. 2001, 232:4, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 521-A:2

 **521-A:2 Interpreter Required. –** At all stages of any proceeding
before any court, department, board, commission, agency or licensing
authority of the state; any political subdivision of the state; or any
department, board, commission, agency or licensing authority of a
political subdivision in which a deaf person is a principal party in
interest the appointing authority shall appoint, upon request of the
deaf principal, a qualified interpreter to interpret or to translate the
proceedings to the deaf person and to interpret or translate his
testimony.

**Source.** 1977, 542:1, eff. Sept. 13, 1977.

### Section 521-A:3

 **521-A:3 Interpreter Required in Criminal Matters. –** Whenever a
deaf person is arrested for any alleged violation of criminal law where
the penalty may include imprisonment or fine in excess of 
                                             $100 or both,
no attempt to interrogate or take a statement from such person shall be
permitted until a qualified interpreter is appointed for said person and
then only through the use of such interpreter.

**Source.** 1977, 542:1, eff. Sept. 13, 1977.

### Section 521-A:4

 **521-A:4 Preliminary Determination. –** No qualified interpreter
shall be appointed in any case until the appointing authority makes a
preliminary determination that the qualified interpreter is able to
accurately communicate with and translate information to and from the
deaf person involved in the case.

**Source.** 1977, 542:1, eff. Sept. 13, 1977.

### Section 521-A:5

 **521-A:5 Interpreter to be Provided. –** Whenever any deaf person
is a party to or receiving services from any health, welfare, or
educational agency under the authority of the state or political
subdivision of the state or municipality, the appointing authority shall
appoint a qualified interpreter for the deaf to interpret or translate
the actions of any personnel providing such service and to assist the
deaf person in communicating with each person.

**Source.** 1977, 542:1, eff. Sept. 13, 1977.

### Section 521-A:6

 **521-A:6 Notice; Proof of Disability. –** Every deaf person whose
appearance before a proceeding entitles him to an interpreter shall
notify the appointing authority of his disability prior to any
appearance and shall request at such time the services of an
interpreter. An appointing authority may require a person requesting the
appointment of an interpreter to furnish reasonable proof of his
disability when the appointing authority has reason to believe that the
person is not so disabled.

**Source.** 1977, 542:1, eff. Sept. 13, 1977.

### Section 521-A:7

 **521-A:7 Coordination of Interpreter Requests. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2001,
232:5, I, eff. July 1, 2001.
                                             ]

### Section 521-A:8

 **521-A:8 Compensation. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2001, 232:5, II, eff. July 1,
2001.
                                             ]

### Section 521-A:9

 **521-A:9 Interpreter Permitted. –** Whenever a deaf person is
interested in any administrative or judicial proceeding in which an
interpreter would be required for a principal party in interest, he
shall be entitled to utilize an interpreter to translate the proceeding
for him and to assist him in presenting his testimony or comment.

**Source.** 1977, 542:1, eff. Sept. 13, 1977.

### Section 521-A:10

 **521-A:10 Oath of Interpreter. –** Every interpreter appointed
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, before entering upon his
duties, shall take oath that he will make a true interpretation in an
understandable manner to the person for whom he is appointed and that he
will repeat the statements of such person in the English language to the
best of his skill and judgment.

**Source.** 1977, 542:1, eff. Sept. 13, 1977.

### Section 521-A:11

 **521-A:11 Privileged Communications. –** Whenever a deaf person
communicates through an interpreter to any person under such
circumstances that the communication would be privileged and said person
could not be compelled to testify as to the communications, said
privilege shall apply to the interpreter as well.

**Source.** 1977, 542:1, eff. Sept. 13, 1977.

### Section 521-A:12

 **521-A:12 Compensation. –** A qualified interpreter appointed under
this chapter shall be reimbursed by the appointing authority at a fixed
rate reflecting the most recent fee schedule approved by the department
of education, bureau of vocational rehabilitation. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit any state department, board,
commission, agency, or appointing authority, or any political
subdivision of the state from employing a qualified interpreter on a
full-time basis or under contract at a mutually agreed upon compensation
rate.

**Source.** 2008, 6:1, eff. July 4, 2008.
