---
title: CHAPTER 522 BLOOD TEST TO DETERMINE PATERNITY
---

TITLE LIII
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN COURT
====================

CHAPTER 522
                                             
BLOOD TEST TO DETERMINE PATERNITY
---------------------------------

### Section 522:1

 **522:1 Authority for Test. –**
                                             
 I. In a civil action in which paternity is a contested and relevant
issue, the mother, child, and putative father shall submit to blood,
tissue typing, and/or genetic marker tests which may include, but are
not limited to, tests of red cell antigens, serum proteins, and
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) analysis. The genetic samples collected
shall be subject to safeguarding and confidentiality procedures and used
exclusively for purposes of paternity testing. Testing shall be ordered
as follows:
                                             
 (a) The court may order genetic paternity testing upon the motion
of any party or upon its own initiative. If the court determines that a
motion for testing is made for the purpose of delay, the court may deny
the motion. The court may order payment of costs related to testing. If
any party refuses to submit to such tests, the court may resolve the
question of paternity against such party.
                                             
 (b) The department of health and human services (the department)
may order genetic paternity testing upon agreement of the parties or
upon the request of any party, if the request is supported by a sworn
statement alleging paternity and setting forth facts which reasonably
establish the requisite sexual contact; or denying paternity and setting
forth facts which reasonably establish a lack of the requisite sexual
contact. The state shall pay the costs related to such testing, subject
to recoupment from the father if paternity is established.
                                             
 II. For genetic paternity testing pursuant to RSA 522:1, I(b) the
following administrative procedures apply:
                                             
 (a) The department shall serve the parties with notice and order
for genetic paternity testing. Unless the order is contested by any
party, the order is effective as to the party served, upon the
expiration of 11 days after service. Service of the notice and order
shall be by certified mail or other method as provided by law and shall
include:
                                             
 (1) The names and dates of birth of the individuals to be
tested pursuant to the order;
                                             
 (2) A statement explaining the rights and responsibilities
associated with paternity establishment;
                                             
 (3) A copy of the order including an appointment with the
date, time, and place for collecting the genetic samples;
                                             
 (4) A statement of the administrative and judicial procedures
available to contest the order.
                                             
 (b) Any party may request a supervisory review of the order. The
request must be in writing and received by the department within 10 days
of the date that the party received service of the notice and order.
Issues that may be considered on review are limited to mistake of fact.
Within 10 days of the review, the person conducting the review shall
issue a written decision and forward it to the parties.
                                             
 (c) Within 10 days of the written decision pursuant to the
supervisory review, any party may request an administrative hearing. The
hearing shall be conducted by a hearings officer according to the rules
for fair hearings adopted by the commissioner pursuant to RSA 541-A.
Issues that may be considered at the administrative hearing are limited
to mistake of fact. Within 10 days of the administrative hearing, the
person conducting the hearing shall issue a written decision and forward
it to the parties.
                                             
 (d) Within 10 days of the written decision of the hearings
officer, any party may appeal to the superior court. Such appeal shall
be restricted to a review of the record. Upon review the court may
request the submission of additional evidence and order a hearing.
                                             
 (e) Nothing in this section shall preclude any party from filing
a petition to determine paternity directly with the court and seeking a
judicial determination.

**Source.** 1953, 126:1. RSA 522:1. 1988, 234:5. 1990, 149:1. 1997,
263:31, eff. Aug. 18, 1997.

### Section 522:2

 **522:2 Selection of Experts. –** The tests shall be made by experts
qualified as examiners of blood, tissue types and/or genetic markers who
shall be appointed by the court. The experts may be called by the court
as witnesses to testify to their findings and, if called, shall be
subject to cross-examination by the parties. Any party or person at
whose suggestion the tests have been ordered may demand that other
experts, qualified as examiners of blood, tissue types and/or genetic
markers, perform independent tests under order of court, the results of
which may be offered in evidence. The number and qualifications of such
experts shall be determined by the court.

**Source.** 1953, 126:2. RSA 522:2. 1988, 234:6. 1990, 149:2, eff. June
18, 1990.

### Section 522:3

 **522:3 Compensation of Expert Witnesses. –** The compensation of
each expert witness appointed by the court shall be fixed at a
reasonable amount. It shall be paid as the court shall order. The court
may order that it be paid by the parties in such proportions and at such
times as it shall prescribe, or that the proportion of any party be paid
by the county, and that, after payment by the parties or the county or
both, all or part or none of it be taxed as costs in the action. The fee
of an expert witness called by a party but not appointed by the court
shall be paid by the party calling him but shall not be taxed as costs
in the action.

**Source.** 1953, 126:3, eff. April 29, 1953.

### Section 522:4

 **522:4 Effect of Test Results. –**
                                             
 I. Tests taken pursuant to RSA 522:1 shall have the following
effect:
                                             
 (a) If the court finds that the conclusion of all the experts, as
disclosed by the evidence based upon the tests, is that the alleged
father is not the parent of the child, the question of paternity shall
be resolved accordingly.
                                             
 (b) If the experts disagree in their findings or conclusions, the
question shall be weighed with other competent evidence of paternity.
                                             
 (c) If the blood, tissue and/or genetic marker tests show that
the alleged father is not excluded and that the probability of the
alleged father's paternity is less than 97 percent, this evidence shall
be admitted by the court and shall be weighed with other competent
evidence of paternity.
                                             
 (d) If the blood, tissue and/or genetic marker tests show that
the alleged father is not excluded and that the probability of the
alleged father's paternity is 97 percent or higher, the alleged father
is presumed to be the father, and this evidence shall be admitted. This
presumption may be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence.
                                             
 II. Notarized documentation of the chain of custody of the blood,
tissue and/or genetic marker samples is competent evidence to establish
the chain of custody.
                                             
 III. A notarized report of the blood, tissue and/or genetic marker
tests, prepared by the appointed experts, shall be admitted at trial as
evidence of paternity without the need for foundation testimony or other
proof of authenticity or accuracy, unless a written challenge to the
testing procedure or results of the blood, tissue and/or genetic marker
tests has been filed with the court and delivered to opposing counsel at
least 30 days before any hearing set to determine the issue of
paternity. Failure to make that timely challenge constitutes a waiver of
the right to have the experts appear in person and shall not be grounds
for a continuance of the hearing to determine paternity.
                                             
 IV. If the court's notice of hearing is issued less than 40 days
before the hearing to determine paternity, then upon motion by a party
setting forth the party's intention to challenge the blood test result,
the hearing shall be continued for 45 days.

**Source.** 1953, 126:4. RSA 522:4. 1988, 234:7. 1990, 149:3. 1994,
260:5, eff. Oct. 1, 1994.

### Section 522:4-a

 **522:4-a Admissible Evidence. –**
                                             
 I. Evidence relating to paternity may include, but is not limited
to:
                                             
 (a) An expert's opinion concerning the time of conception.
                                             
 (b) Evidence of sexual intercourse between the mother and alleged
father at any possible time of conception.
                                             
 (c) Medical, scientific, or genetic evidence relating to the
alleged father's paternity of the child based upon tests performed by
experts.
                                             
 (d) The statistical probability of the alleged father's paternity
based upon the blood, tissue and/or genetic marker tests.
                                             
 II. Testimony relating to sexual relations or possible sexual
relations of the mother at any time other than the probable time of
conception of the child is inadmissible in evidence, unless offered by
the mother.

**Source.** 1988, 234:8. 1990, 149:4, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 522:5

 **522:5 Effect of Court's Finding on Presumption of Legitimacy. –**
The presumption of legitimacy of a child born during wedlock is overcome
if the court finds that the conclusions of all the experts, as disclosed
by the evidence based upon the tests, show that the husband is not the
father of the child.

**Source.** 1953, 126:5, eff. April 29, 1953.

### Section 522:6

 **522:6 Applicability to Criminal Actions. –** This chapter shall
apply to criminal cases subject to the following limitations and
provisions: (a) An order for the tests shall be made only upon
application of a party or on the court's initiative; (b) the
compensation of the experts shall be paid by the county under order of
court; (c) the court may direct a verdict of acquittal upon the
conclusions of all the experts under the provisions of RSA 522:4,
otherwise the case shall be submitted for determination upon all the
evidence.

**Source.** 1953, 126:6, eff. April 29, 1953.

### Section 522:7

 **522:7 Uniformity of Interpretation. –** This chapter shall be so
interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to make
uniform the law of those states which enact it.

**Source.** 1953, 126:7, eff. April 29, 1953.

### Section 522:8

 **522:8 Severability Clause. –** If any part of this chapter is
declared invalid the remaining portion shall continue in full force and
effect and shall be construed as being the entire act.

**Source.** 1953, 126:8, eff. April 29, 1953.

### Section 522:9

 **522:9 Short Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the Uniform
Act on Blood Tests to Determine Paternity.

**Source.** 1953, 126:9, eff. April 29, 1953.

### Section 522:10

 **522:10 Repeal. –** All acts or parts of acts which are
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.

**Source.** 1953, 126:10, eff. April 29, 1953.
