---
title: CHAPTER 523 EVIDENCE OF DEATH OR OTHER STATUS INCIDENT TO HOSTILITIES
---

TITLE LIII
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN COURT
====================

CHAPTER 523
                                             
EVIDENCE OF DEATH OR OTHER STATUS INCIDENT TO HOSTILITIES
---------------------------------------------------------

### Section 523:1

 **523:1 Official Findings of Death; Effect of. –** A written finding
of presumed death, made by the secretary of war, the secretary of the
navy, or other officer or employee of the United States authorized to
make such finding, pursuant to the Federal Missing Persons Act (56 Stat.
143, 1092, and P.L. 408, Ch. 371, 2d Sess. 78th Cong.; 50 U.S.C. App.
Supp. 1001-17), as now or hereafter amended, or duly certified copy of
such finding, shall be received in any court, office or other place in
this state as prima facie evidence of the death of the person therein
found to be dead, and the date, circumstances and place of his
disappearance.

**Source.** 1945, 55:1 par. 1, eff. March 15, 1945.

### Section 523:2

 **523:2 Missing in Action. –** An official written report or record,
or duly certified copy thereof, that a person is missing, missing in
action, interned in a neutral country, or beleaguered, besieged or
captured by an enemy, or is dead, or is alive, made by an officer or
employee of the United States authorized by the act referred to in
section 1 or by any other law of the United States to make same, shall
be received in any court, office or other place in this state as prima
facie evidence that such person is missing, missing in action, interned
in a neutral country, or beleaguered, besieged or captured by an enemy,
or is dead, or is alive, as the case may be.

**Source.** 1945, 55:1 par. 2, eff. March 15, 1945.

### Section 523:3

 **523:3 Prima Facie Evidence of Signature. –** For the purposes of
RSA 523:1 and RSA 523:2 hereof any finding, report or record, or duly
certified copy thereof, purporting to have been signed by such an
officer or employee of the United States as is described in said
sections, shall prima facie be deemed to have been signed and issued by
such an officer or employee pursuant to law, and the person signing same
shall prima facie be deemed to have acted within the scope of his
authority. If a copy purports to have been certified by a person
authorized by law to certify the same, such certified copy shall be
prima facie evidence of his authority so to certify.

**Source.** 1945, 55:1 par. 3, eff. March 15, 1945.
