---
title: 'CHAPTER 524-A REVISED UNIFORM ENFORCEMENT OF FOREIGN JUDGMENTS ACT'
---

TITLE LIII
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN COURT
====================

CHAPTER 524-A
                                             
REVISED UNIFORM ENFORCEMENT OF FOREIGN JUDGMENTS ACT
----------------------------------------------------

### Section 524-A:1

 **524-A:1 Definition. –** In this chapter, "foreign judgment'' means
any judgment, decree, or order of a court of the United States or of any
other court which is entitled to full faith and credit in this state.

**Source.** 1994, 266:1, eff. June 6, 1994.

### Section 524-A:2

 **524-A:2 Filing and Status of Foreign Judgments. –** A copy of any
foreign judgment authenticated in accordance with the act of Congress or
the statutes of this state may be filed in the office of the clerk of
any district or superior court of this state. The clerk shall treat the
foreign judgment in the same manner as a judgment of the district or
superior court of this state. A judgment so filed has the same effect
and is subject to the same procedures, defenses and proceedings for
reopening, vacating, or staying as a judgment of a district or superior
court of this state and may be enforced or satisfied in like manner.

**Source.** 1994, 266:1, eff. June 6, 1994.

### Section 524-A:3

 **524-A:3 Notice of Filing. –**
                                             
 I. At the time of the filing of the foreign judgment, the judgment
creditor or his lawyer shall make and file with the clerk of court an
affidavit setting forth the name and last known post office address of
the judgment debtor, and the judgment creditor.
                                             
 II. Promptly upon the filing of the foreign judgment and the
affidavit, the clerk shall mail notice of the filing of the foreign
judgment to the judgment debtor at the address given and shall make a
note of the mailing in the docket. The notice shall include the name and
post office address of the judgment creditor and the judgment creditor's
lawyer, if any, in this state. In addition, the judgment creditor may
mail a notice of the filing of the judgment to the judgment debtor and
may file proof of mailing with the clerk. Lack of mailing notice of
filing by the clerk shall not affect the enforcement proceedings if
proof of mailing by the judgment creditor has been filed.
                                             
 III. No execution or other process for enforcement of a foreign
judgment filed under this section shall issue until 15 days after the
date the judgment is filed.

**Source.** 1994, 266:1, eff. June 6, 1994.

### Section 524-A:4

 **524-A:4 Stay. –**
                                             
 I. If the judgment debtor shows the district or superior court that
an appeal from the foreign judgment is pending or will be taken, or that
a stay of execution has been granted, the court shall stay enforcement
of the foreign judgment until the appeal is concluded, the time for
appeal expires, or the stay of execution expires or is vacated, upon
proof that the judgment debtor has furnished the security for the
satisfaction of the judgment required by the state in which it was
rendered.
                                             
 II. If the judgment debtor shows the district or superior court any
ground upon which enforcement of a judgment of any district or superior
court of this state would be stayed, the court shall stay enforcement of
the foreign judgment for an appropriate period, upon requiring the same
security for satisfaction of the judgment which is required in this
state.

**Source.** 1994, 266:1, eff. June 6, 1994.

### Section 524-A:5

 **524-A:5 Fees. –** Fees for filing a foreign judgment shall be set
in accordance with RSA 490:26-a.

**Source.** 1994, 266:1, eff. June 6, 1994.

### Section 524-A:6

 **524-A:6 Optional Procedure. –** The right of a judgment creditor
to bring an action to enforce his judgment instead of proceeding under
this chapter remains unimpaired.

**Source.** 1994, 266:1, eff. June 6, 1994.

### Section 524-A:7

 **524-A:7 Uniformity of Interpretation. –** This chapter shall be so
interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to make
uniform the law of those states which enact it.

**Source.** 1994, 266:1, eff. June 6, 1994.

### Section 524-A:8

 **524-A:8 Short Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the Uniform
Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act.

**Source.** 1994, 266:1, eff. June 6, 1994.
