---
title: CHAPTER 524 JUDGMENTS
---

TITLE LIII
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN COURT
====================

CHAPTER 524
                                             
JUDGMENTS
------------

### Section 524:1

 **524:1 Form; Interest. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1963, 293:2, eff. July 3,
1963.
                                             ]

### Section 524:1-a

 **524:1-a Interest to be Added. –** In the absence of a demand prior
to the institution of suit, in any action on a debt or account stated or
where liquidated damages are sought, interest shall commence to run from
the time of the institution of suit. This statute shall be inapplicable
where the party to be charged pays the money into court in accordance
with the rules of the superior court.

**Source.** 1957, 201:1, eff. Aug. 30, 1957.

### Section 524:1-b

 **524:1-b Interest From Date of Writ. –** In all other civil
proceedings at law or in equity in which a verdict is rendered or a
finding is made for pecuniary damages to any party, whether for personal
injuries, for wrongful death, for consequential damages, for damage to
property, business or reputation, for any other type of loss for which
damages are recognized, there shall be added forthwith by the clerk of
court to the amount of damages interest thereon from the date of the
writ or the filing of the petition to the date of judgment even though
such interest brings the amount of the judgment beyond the maximum
liability imposed by law.

**Source.** 1957, 201:1. 1963, 293:1. 1967, 407:1. 1969, 187:2; 358:1.
2001, 160:1, eff. July 5, 2001.

### Section 524:1-c

 **524:1-c Entry of Judgment. –** Upon a general verdict of a jury,
or upon a decision by the court, that a party shall recover only a sum
certain or costs or that all relief shall be denied, the clerk, unless
the court otherwise orders, shall forthwith, sign, and enter the
judgment upon motion of the prevailing party without awaiting any
direction by the court. In all other civil cases, the court shall
promptly approve the form of the judgment, and the clerk shall thereupon
enter it as of the judgment day next following the return of verdict or
filing of findings. The entry of judgment shall not prejudice the rights
of any party to undertake further proceedings in the same cause on the
basis of exceptions previously preserved.

**Source.** 1969, 358:2, eff. date, see note set out under RSA 524:1-b.

### Section 524:2

 **524:2 Recoupment for Improvements. –** Any person against whom an
action is brought for the recovery of real estate may, with the plea,
file a brief statement, setting forth that such person and the persons
under whom such person makes the claim have been in the actual peaceable
possession of such real estate, under a supposed legal title, for more
than 6 years before the action was begun, and that the value of the real
estate has been increased by them by buildings or other improvements.

**Source.** RS 190:5. CS 203:5. GS 213:6. GL 232:6. PS 228:2. PL 340:2.
RL 396:2. 1996, 35:1, eff. June 23, 1996.

### Section 524:3

 **524:3 Findings as to Increased Value. –** The jury, if they find a
verdict for the plaintiff, shall determine whether the lands have been
so possessed and improved, and the amount of the increased value
thereof, after allowing for any waste or injury the same may have
sustained.

**Source.** RS 190:6. CS 203:6. GS 213:7. GL 232:7. PS 228:3. PL 340:3.
RL 396:3.

### Section 524:4

 **524:4 Increased Value; Judgment. –** If a judgment is rendered for
the plaintiff, it shall be conditional upon the plaintiff's payment of
the amount of the increased value of the real estate. The payment shall
be made within one year of the verdict to the clerk of court for the use
of the defendant. If the condition is met, a writ of possession shall be
issued to the plaintiff. If the condition is not met, the plaintiff's
right to the real estate is barred.

**Source.** RS 190:7. CS 203:7. GS 213:8. GL 232:8. PS 228:4. PL 340:4.
RL 396:4. 1996, 35:2, eff. June 23, 1996.

### Section 524:5

 **524:5 Civil Forfeitures. –** In actions for the recovery of a
penalty or forfeiture, in a recognizance in a civil case, or in an
obligation or contract under seal, the court shall render judgment for
such amount as is equitably due, or as will indemnify the plaintiff for
the damages sustained by the breach of the condition.

**Source.** RS 190:8. CS 203:8. 1861, 2497:2. GS 213:9. GL 232:9. PS
228:5. PL 340:5. RL 396:5.

### Section 524:6

 **524:6 Penalty: Several Obligations. –** If the penalty or
forfeiture is designed to secure the performance of several things to be
done at different times, or as security to or for the use of several
persons, judgment shall be rendered for the whole of the penalty or
forfeiture, and the court shall award execution for so much only as is
justly due at that time.

**Source.** RS 190:9. CS 203:9. GS 213:10. GL 232:10. PS 228:6. PL
340:6. RL 396:6.

### Section 524:6-a

 **524:6-a Periodic Payment of Judgments. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever judgment is rendered against any person in this state,
the court in which the judgment is rendered shall either at the time of
rendition of the judgment inquire of the defendant as to the defendant's
ability to pay the judgment in full or, upon petition of the plaintiff
after judgment, order the defendant to appear in court for such inquiry.
The court may at either time order the defendant to make such periodic
payments as the court in its discretion deems appropriate. If the court
orders the defendant to make periodic payments at the time of rendition
of judgment, the order shall not provide for payments to begin until
after the appeal period has expired. Failure to make such periodic
payments shall constitute civil contempt of court unless the judge, upon
inquiry, finds that the failure was the result of a change in
circumstances, or the failure was not intentional or in bad faith, or
for other good cause. The court may order the appropriate agencies to
make an investigation and recommendation as to the defendant's ability
to pay the judgment. The judgment may be enforced against any property
of any kind of the debtor, except such income and property as is now
exempt from attachment or execution. Unless the parties otherwise agree,
after an order for periodic payments has been issued by the court, no
writ of execution shall be issued by the court without prior notice to
the defendant.
                                             
 II. Any income from a retirement plan or arrangement qualified for
tax exemption purposes, as defined by RSA 511:2, XIX, shall be exempt
from periodic payments up to the amount of 50 times the minimum hourly
wage as established by the Fair Labor Standards Act, per week. If the
defendant shares income and expenses with another person with whom he or
she lives, and both people receive income from such a retirement plan or
arrangement, any income from such a retirement plan or arrangement and
belonging to either person shall be exempt from periodic payments up to
the amount of 100 times the minimum hourly wage as established by the
Fair Labor Standards Act, in total, per week.

**Source.** 1975, 143:1. 1977, 434:1. 1985, 325:3. 1996, 35:3. 2001,
238:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2002. 2009, 128:1, eff. June 29, 2009. 2014, 186:1,
eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 524:7

 **524:7 Scire Facias. –** The plaintiff or the plaintiff's
administrator, and any other persons interested, may, from time to time,
have scire facias upon such judgment, and execution shall be awarded
them for any further sums which may be equitably due.

**Source.** RS 190:10. CS 203:10. GS 213:11. GL 232:11. PS 228:7. PL
340:7. RL 396:7. 1996, 35:4, eff. June 23, 1996.

### Section 524:8

 **524:8 Mortgages; Judgments. –** A judgment in an action on a
mortgage shall be conditional upon payment of the sum due, as determined
by the court, by the mortgagor or person holding the mortgagor's right,
to the mortgagee or person holding the mortgagee's right. The payment
shall be made within 2 months after judgment is rendered, with interest.
If the condition is met by timely payment, the judgment shall be void.
If the condition is not met, the court shall issue a writ of possession.

**Source.** RS 190:11. CS 203:11. GS 213:12. GL 232:12. PS 228:8. PL
340:8. RL 396:8. 1996, 35:5, eff. June 23, 1996.

### Section 524:9

 **524:9 Copy of Note. –** The court may allow a copy of a note or
other instrument to be filed in a suit for the purpose of rendering
judgment thereon.

**Source.** 1859, 2214:1. GS 213:13. GL 232:13. 1879, 48:1. PS 228:9. PL
340:9. RL 396:9. RSA 524:9. 1967, 132:31, eff. July 18, 1967.

### Section 524:10

 **524:10 Suit and Foreclosure. –** Any person who holds a note
secured by a mortgage, or partially secured by a mortgage, shall have
the right to bring suit upon the note without losing the security upon
the mortgaged property, and a suit upon the note and a suit to foreclose
the mortgage may be maintained at the same time.

**Source.** 1917, 131:1. PL 340:10. RL 396:10. 1996, 35:6, eff. June 23,
1996.

### Section 524:11

 **524:11 Canadian Judgments. –** In suits on judgments rendered in
the courts of the Dominion of Canada or any province thereof, said
judgments shall be given such faith and credit as is given in the courts
of the Dominion of Canada or any province thereof to the judgments
rendered in the courts of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1957, 171:1, eff. Aug. 9, 1957.

### Section 524:12

 **524:12 Judgments for Failure to Pay Income Tax on Pensions. –**
All property in this state of a judgment debtor where the judgment is in
favor of any state for failure to pay that state's income tax assessed
on benefits received from a pension or other retirement plan, or with
respect to income earned by an employee at the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard
of Portsmouth, New Hampshire shall be exempt from attachment,
garnishment of wages, trustee process, or forced sale under process of
any court, and no such judgment or execution based thereon shall be a
lien on such property.

**Source.** 1994, 170:1, eff. May 23, 1994.

### Section 524:13


                                             


                                             [RSA 524:13 effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **524:13 Post-Judgment Real Estate Liens. –**
                                             
 I. A judgment entered by any court in this state may be secured
against real estate by recording or re-recording, at any time during the
duration of the judgment, a certified copy of the judgment, along with
an affidavit in accordance with paragraph II, with the registry of deeds
of the county in which the real estate is located.
                                             
 II. At the time of recording, the plaintiff shall mail a copy of all
documents mailed to the registry of deeds to the defendant's address of
record with the court, by first class mail, or if the defendant is
represented by counsel, a copy shall be mailed to counsel in the same
manner.
                                             
 III. The recording of the certified copy of the judgment, along with
the affidavit attesting to compliance with paragraph II, shall create a
judgment lien on all real estate of the defendant in the county of
recording. The judgment lien shall be subject to all applicable
exemptions from attachment and execution and shall be subordinate to any
other liens of record entitled to priority on the date of recording.
                                             
 IV. Unless the judgment is satisfied or discharged or the lien is
otherwise removed or altered, the judgment lien created under paragraphs
I through III shall remain in force and effect for as long as a suit may
be maintained upon the judgment under RSA 508:5.
                                             
 V. When a judgment secured by a judgment lien under this section is
satisfied, the plaintiff or his or her attorney shall deliver to the
defendant or owner of the encumbered real estate a discharge thereof.
The defendant or owner shall cause the discharge to be recorded and
shall pay the register of deeds the recording fee established pursuant
to RSA 478:17-g. If the plaintiff fails to comply with this paragraph,
the defendant shall be entitled to recover the amount of reasonable
costs and legal fees incurred as a result.
                                             
 VI. (a) If the plaintiff fails to deliver the discharge of a
satisfied judgment within 30 days from receipt of a request to deliver
such discharge, or if other exigent circumstances require an immediate
discharge, such discharge may be issued by the court in which the
judgment was rendered upon presentation of proof that the judgment has
been paid in full, in the form of either a bank check, a certified
check, an attorney's client funds account check which bears no
indication of a stop payment order or return for insufficient funds, or
by other equivalent documentary evidence of such receipt of payment.
                                             
 (b) The discharge shall include the names of the plaintiff and
the defendant, the date and amount of the judgment, the name of the
underlying case and case number, if any, and the book and page of
recording of the judgment lien.
                                             
 (c) The discharge, when recorded, shall constitute a complete
release of the lien created by the recording of the judgment.
                                             
 (d) Any person who induces a court to execute a discharge in
accordance with this paragraph on the basis of information and
statements known to the person to be false shall be responsible for all
costs and fees incurred by the opposing party as a result and such
additional sanctions as the court in its discretion deems appropriate.

**Source.** 2016, 80:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.
