---
title: 'CHAPTER 525-A CIVIL LEGAL ASSISTANCE'
---

TITLE LIII
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN COURT
====================

CHAPTER 525-A
                                             
CIVIL LEGAL ASSISTANCE
----------------------

### Section 525-A:1

 **525-A:1 Civil Legal Assistance. –** Funds appropriated to New
Hampshire Legal Assistance for the purposes of civil legal assistance
shall be used only for the provision of civil legal representation to
low-income persons in this state. New Hampshire Legal Assistance shall
make reports to the judicial council by June 30 and December 31 of each
year on its use of state funds.

**Source.** 1997, 351:4, eff. July 1, 1997.

### Section 525-A:2

 **525-A:2 Civil Legal Services Fund. –** There is established in the
office of the state treasurer a separate fund to be known as the civil
legal services fund. The money in this fund shall be distributed to New
Hampshire Legal Assistance to be used to establish and operate offices
in the cities of Nashua and Concord to provide civil legal services to
low-income persons in the cities of Nashua and Concord and the
surrounding areas, and to provide additional attorneys, paralegals, or
both, to the staff of the New Hampshire Legal Assistance offices in
Manchester, Claremont, Portsmouth, and Littleton. These civil legal
services shall include services related to such issues as housing,
social security and other government benefits, health care, domestic
violence, and consumer issues. New Hampshire Legal Assistance shall
report semi-annually to the judicial council as to its use of these
funds in accordance with RSA 525-A:1.

**Source.** 2005, 177:154, eff. July 1, 2005. 2007, 145:1, eff. July 1,
2007.
