---
title: 'CHAPTER 201-D STATEWIDE LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT SYSTEM'
---

TITLE XVI
                                             
LIBRARIES
==========

CHAPTER 201-D
                                             
STATEWIDE LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT SYSTEM
------------------------------------

### Section 201-D:1

 **201-D:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Accredited library'' means a member library which meets the
standards of the highest category of affiliation, including providing
specified services to other area libraries.
                                             
 II. "Associate library'' means a member library which meets the
basic standards for affiliation.
                                             
 III. "Certified library'' means a member library which meets the
standards for the middle category of affiliation, including providing
specified services to nearby libraries.
                                             
 IV. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of cultural resources.
                                             
 V. "Cooperative'' means any joint effort by 2 or more libraries to
improve library service.
                                             
 VI. "Development system'' means the statewide library development
system, a network of public and other than public libraries cooperating
in communities, regions and statewide to provide better library
service.
                                             
 VII. "Member library'' means a public library which has been granted
associate, certified, or accredited status by the commissioner.
                                             
 VIII. "Public library'' means a library which provides customary
services, without charge, to all the residents of a town, city, or
larger area.
                                             
 IX. "Other than public library'' means a school, college or
university, medical, business or other special library.

**Source.** 1981, 499:2. 1985, 268:6, I(b), 25. 1990, 73:1. 1998, 363:3,
eff. Aug. 25, 1998.

### Section 201-D:2

 **201-D:2 Member Libraries. –** There shall be 3 categories of
member libraries: associate, certified, and accredited. The
commissioner, through his rulemaking authority established under RSA
201-D:10, shall set affiliation standards for each category. The
commissioner may establish subcategories. Any public library may become
a member library by meeting the standards for any of the categories and
following the application procedures set by the commissioner.
Application for membership or change in status shall require the
approval of the local library trustees. The commissioner may revoke the
membership or change the category of any library which no longer meets
the affiliation standards or which requests a change in status. Any
affected library has the right to appeal a commissioner decision on
membership.

**Source.** 1981, 499:2. 1985, 268:6, I(b).

### Section 201-D:3

 **201-D:3 State Aid. –** Each member library shall receive an annual
allocation of state funds to supplement the local appropriation and
other income. Library cooperatives which include member libraries may
receive state aid. The state aid shall be used only to support library
services in member libraries and in cooperatives including member
libraries. The amount of the allocation for each library shall be based
on specified local expenditures for the library, and on its membership
category. The commissioner shall set an allocation rate for each
category, with progressively higher rates for certified and accredited
libraries in recognition of service beyond their own towns or cities.

**Source.** 1981, 499:2. 1985, 268:6, I(b).

### Section 201-D:4

 **201-D:4 State Services. –** The state library shall provide
services to member libraries within the funds available and in keeping
with the goal of efficient use of library resources in the state.

**Source.** 1981, 499:2, eff. Aug. 28, 1981.

### Section 201-D:5

 **201-D:5 State Library Staff. –** The state library shall employ
consultants and other staff to promote the development system by working
with library forums, cooperatives, and other groups which include member
libraries.

**Source.** 1981, 499:2, eff. Aug. 28, 1981.

### Section 201-D:6

 **201-D:6 Areas. –** The state shall be divided into 4 or more
library areas. These areas shall coincide geographically with the local
automated systems. Each area may include one or more cooperatives. The
commissioner shall set the number and boundaries of the areas as the
automated networks develop. The goal of these decisions shall be to
promote cooperative efforts on a local basis and to promote the most
efficient use of local and state library resources.

**Source.** 1981, 499:2. 1985, 268:6, I(b). 1987, 7:1, eff. May 22,
1987.

### Section 201-D:7

 **201-D:7 Library Forums. –** Each library area shall have a library
forum consisting of one representative from each public library, at
least one representative from each school district, and a representative
of each other than public library which chooses to participate. The
state library shall be represented on each forum.

**Source.** 1981, 499:2, eff. Aug. 28, 1981.

### Section 201-D:8

 **201-D:8 Selection of Representatives. –** The board of trustees of
each public library, and the governing body of each other than public
library, shall select its representative to the area library forum.

**Source.** 1981, 499:2, eff. Aug. 28, 1981.

### Section 201-D:9

 **201-D:9 Purposes. –** The purposes of the library forums are to:
                                             
 I. Encourage information sharing between area libraries.
                                             
 II. Promote cooperative planning and services among area libraries.
                                             
 III. Provide liaison between area libraries and the state library.
                                             
 IV. Communicate with the commissioner on local needs and state
library services.

**Source.** 1981, 499:2. 1985, 268:6, I(b).

### Section 201-D:10

 **201-D:10 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules under
RSA 541-A and after public hearing, and subject to ratification by the
state library council, relative to:
                                             
 I. Standards for the associate, certified and accredited categories,
and for any subcategory, concerning any or all of the following:
                                             
 (a) Level of service;
                                             
 (b) Evaluation and planning;
                                             
 (c) Cooperation with other libraries;
                                             
 (d) Participation in the library forum and statewide programs;
                                             
 (e) Personnel qualifications;
                                             
 (f) Organization of materials; and
                                             
 (g) Physical facilities.
                                             
 II. Allocation of state aid and other funds to individual libraries,
cooperatives and other groups, and library areas. For state aid, this
shall include setting the allocation rate for each membership category
and the local library expenditures to be counted in applying the rate.
                                             
 III. Requirements that member libraries adopt written policies
concerning any or all of the following:
                                             
 (a) General objectives;
                                             
 (b) Organization of materials;
                                             
 (c) Materials selection and collection development;
                                             
 (d) Personnel;
                                             
 (e) Public relations; and
                                             
 (f) Cooperation with public school libraries.
                                             
 IV. Reporting requirements for funded programs and services.
                                             
 V. Number and boundaries of library areas.
                                             
 VI. Democratic procedures for library forums.

**Source.** 1981, 499:2. 1985, 268:26.

### Section 201-D:11

 **201-D:11 Library User Records; Confidentiality. –**
                                             
 I. Library records which contain the names or other personal
identifying information regarding the users of public or other than
public libraries shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed except
as provided in paragraph II. Such records include, but are not limited
to, library, information system, and archival records related to the
circulation and use of library materials or services, including records
of materials that have been viewed or stored in electronic form.
                                             
 II. Records described in paragraph I may be disclosed to the extent
necessary for the proper operation of such libraries and shall be
disclosed upon request by or consent of the user or pursuant to
subpoena, court order, or where otherwise required by statute.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any
library from releasing statistical information and other data regarding
the circulation or use of library materials provided, however, that the
identity of the users of such library materials shall be considered
confidential and shall not be disclosed to the general public except as
provided in paragraph II.

**Source.** 1989, 184:3, eff. July 21, 1989. 2009, 273:1, eff. July 29,
2009.
