---
title: 'CHAPTER 201-E MUSEUM PROPERTY ACT'
---

TITLE XVI
                                             
LIBRARIES
==========

CHAPTER 201-E
                                             
MUSEUM PROPERTY ACT
-------------------

### Section 201-E:1

 **201-E:1 Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the "Museum
Property Act''.

**Source.** 1989, 87:2, eff. June 30, 1989.

### Section 201-E:2

 **201-E:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Loan'' means a deposit of property not accompanied by a transfer
of title to the property.
                                             
 II. "Museum'' means an institution located in New Hampshire operated
by a nonprofit corporation or a public agency, primarily for
educational, scientific, historic preservation, or aesthetic purposes,
which owns, cares for, exhibits, studies, archives, or catalogs
property. "Museum'' includes, but is not limited to, historical
societies, historic sites or landmarks, parks, monuments, and
libraries.
                                             
 III. "Property'' means a tangible object, animate or inanimate,
under a museum's care which has intrinsic historic, artistic,
scientific, or cultural value.

**Source.** 1989, 87:2, eff. June 30, 1989.

### Section 201-E:3

 **201-E:3 Property Held Without a Loan Agreement. –** Any property
held by a museum within the state, other than by terms of a loan
agreement, that has been held for 5 years or more and has remained
unclaimed shall be deemed to be abandoned. Such property shall become
the property of the museum, if the museum has given notice pursuant to
RSA 201-E:5 and no assertion of title has been filed for the property
within 90 days from the date of the second published notice.

**Source.** 1989, 87:2, eff. June 30, 1989.

### Section 201-E:4

 **201-E:4 Property Held Subject to a Loan Agreement. –**
                                             
 I. Property subject to a loan agreement which is on loan to a museum
shall be deemed to be donated to the museum if no claim is made or
action filed to recover the property after termination or expiration of
the loan and if the museum has given notice under RSA 201-E:5 and no
assertion of title has been filed within 90 days from the date of the
second published notice.
                                             
 II. A museum may terminate a loan of property if the property was
loaned to the museum for an indefinite term and the property has been
held by the museum for 5 years or more. Property on "permanent loan''
shall be considered loaned for an indefinite term.
                                             
 III. If property was loaned to the museum for a specified term, the
museum may give notice of termination of the loan at any time after
expiration of the specified term.
                                             
 IV. It is the responsibility of the owner of property on loan to a
museum to notify the museum promptly in writing of any change of address
or change in ownership of the property.
                                             
 V. When a museum accepts a loan of property, the museum shall inform
the owner in writing of the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1989, 87:2, eff. June 30, 1989.

### Section 201-E:5

 **201-E:5 Notice Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. When a museum is required to give notice of abandonment of
property or of termination of a loan, the museum shall mail such notice
by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known owner at
the most recent address of such owner as shown on the museum's records.
If the museum has no address on record, or the museum does not receive
written proof of receipt of the mailed notice within 30 days of the date
the notice was mailed, the museum shall publish notice, at least once
each week for 2 consecutive weeks, in a newspaper of general circulation
in both the county in which the museum is located and the county in
which the last known address, if available, of the owner is located.
                                             
 II. The published notice shall contain:
                                             
 (a) A description of the unclaimed property;
                                             
 (b) The name and last known address of the owner;
                                             
 (c) A request that all persons who may have any knowledge of the
whereabouts of the owner provide written notice to the museum; and
                                             
 (d) A statement that if written assertion of title is not
presented by the owner to the museum within 90 days from the date of the
second published notice, the property shall be considered abandoned or
donated and shall become the property of the museum.
                                             
 III. For purposes of this chapter, if the loan of property was made
to a branch of a museum, the museum shall be considered to be located in
the county in which the branch is located. Otherwise the museum is
located in the county in which it has its principal place of business.

**Source.** 1989, 87:2, eff. June 30, 1989.

### Section 201-E:6

 **201-E:6 Property Vested In Museum. –**
                                             
 I. If no written assertion of title has been presented by the owner
to the museum within 90 days from the date of the second published
notice, title to the property shall vest in the museum, free of all
claims of the owner and of all persons claiming under the owner.
                                             
 II. One who purchases or otherwise acquires property from a museum
acquires good title to the property if the museum has acquired title to
the property under this chapter.

**Source.** 1989, 87:2, eff. June 30, 1989.

### Section 201-E:7

 **201-E:7 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of the department of
cultural resources shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 I. The form of written notification to persons loaning property
under RSA 201-E:4, V.
                                             
 II. Procedures for recordkeeping.

**Source.** 1989, 87:2. 1990, 73:1. 1998, 363:3, eff. Aug. 25, 1998.
