---
title: |
    CHAPTER 202-B NEW HAMPSHIRE STATE GOVERNMENT INFORMATION DISSEMINATION
    AND ACCESS ACT
---

TITLE XVI
                                             
LIBRARIES
==========

CHAPTER 202-B
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE STATE GOVERNMENT INFORMATION DISSEMINATION AND ACCESS ACT
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 202-B:1

 **202-B:1 Policy Statement; Short Title. –** The legislature finds
that providing citizens with access to public documents will allow
increased citizen involvement in state policies and empower citizens to
participate in state policy decision making. To this end, the
legislature hereby declares that a system of dissemination and access to
state government information be administered by the state library. This
chapter may be referred to as the "New Hampshire State Government
Information Dissemination and Access Act.''

**Source.** 2001, 281:4, eff. Sept. 14, 2001.

### Section 202-B:2

 **202-B:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Component of state government'' means any state government
department, independent regulatory agency, state government corporation,
state controlled corporation, or other establishment in the executive,
legislative, or judicial branch.
                                             
 II. "Dissemination'' means the act of distributing tangible state
government information products to program libraries, or the act of
making state government information products accessible to program
libraries and the general public via a state government electronic
information service.
                                             
 III. "Program library'' means a library designated under the
provisions of this chapter which maintains tangible state government
information products for use by the general public, offers professional
assistance in locating and using state government information, and
provides local capability for the general public to access state
government electronic information services. These libraries shall be
known as "New Hampshire state government information access
libraries.''
                                             
 IV. "State government electronic information service'' means the
system or method by which a component of state government or its
authorized agent disseminates state government information products to
the public via a telecommunications network or successor technology.
                                             
 V. "State government information'' means that information,
regardless of form or format, which is created or compiled by employees
of the judicial, legislative, and executive branches of government, or
at state expense, or as required by law; except that information which
is required for official use only, is for strictly administrative or
operational purposes having no public interest or educational value or
otherwise excluded by state law.
                                             
 VI. "State government information product'' means a state
publication or other discrete compilation of state government
information of general public interest, either conveyed in a tangible
physical format including electronic media, or disseminated via a state
government electronic information service.
                                             
 VII. "Tangible state government information product'' means any
state information product that can be distributed to program libraries
in a physical format.

**Source.** 2001, 281:4, eff. Sept. 14, 2001.

### Section 202-B:3

 **202-B:3 State Government Information Access Libraries Designated.
–** The state librarian is authorized to designate no more than 25
public and academic libraries as state government information access
libraries. In designating program libraries, the state librarian shall
take into account geographic representation, population served, and
capability of the library to carry out the program.

**Source.** 2001, 281:4, eff. Sept. 14, 2001.

### Section 202-B:4

 **202-B:4 Copies of State Government Information Products. –**
                                             
 I. Each agency component of state government shall produce 25 copies
of its tangible state government information products for deposit with
the state librarian. The state librarian shall make tangible products
available through distribution to program libraries and shall ensure
program libraries and general public access to state information
products available via state electronic information services as soon as
practicable.
                                             
 II. Each agency component of state government shall provide the
state librarian with access to all state government electronic
information services falling within the scope of this section.
                                             
 III. The state library shall provide cataloging and locator services
that shall assist program libraries and the general public in accessing
all government information products, regardless of form or format.
                                             
 IV. All government information products which are required by law to
be deposited with the state library shall be deposited without any cost
or charge to the state library.

**Source.** 2001, 281:4, eff. Sept. 14, 2001.

### Section 202-B:5

 **202-B:5 Distribution Not Required. –** The state librarian shall
not distribute copies of:
                                             
 I. The state reporter and reports provided under RSA 505.
                                             
 II. Intra-office or inter-office publications and forms.

**Source.** 2001, 281:4, eff. Sept. 14, 2001.

### Section 202-B:6

 **202-B:6 Duties of Program Libraries. –** Program libraries shall
make government information products received or accessed through the
program available for the free use of the general public. They shall
organize the tangible information products in an acceptable fashion.

**Source.** 2001, 281:4, eff. Sept. 14, 2001.

### Section 202-B:7

 **202-B:7 Preservation. –** The state librarian shall coordinate
with each component of state government, the program libraries, and the
state archivist to establish a system whereby state government
information products available via state government electronic
information services shall be maintained permanently for program library
and general public access.

**Source.** 2001, 281:4, eff. Sept. 14, 2001.

### Section 202-B:8

 **202-B:8 Planning. –**
                                             
 I. The state librarian shall, in cooperation with all branches and
agencies of state government, develop and publish annually a plan to
increase the quality and quantity of state government information
available in electronic format incrementally beginning with information
that is most used and readily available. A copy of the plan shall be
delivered to the governor, president of the senate, speaker of the
house, and the chief justice.
                                             
 II. All components of state government within the executive branch
shall cooperate with the state librarian providing public information,
access to public information and assistance as may be requested for
achieving the purposes of this chapter. All other components of state
government may cooperate with the state librarian in providing public
information, access to public information and assistance as may be
requested.

**Source.** 2001, 281:4, eff. Sept. 14, 2001.
