---
title: CHAPTER 229 HIGHWAY SYSTEM IN THE STATE
---

TITLE XX
                                             
TRANSPORTATION
==============

CHAPTER 229
                                             
HIGHWAY SYSTEM IN THE STATE
---------------------------

### Section 229:1

 **229:1 Highways Defined. –** Highways are only such as are laid out
in the mode prescribed therefor by statute, or roads which have been
constructed for public travel over land which has been conveyed to a
city or town or to the state by deed of a fee or easement interest, or
roads which have been dedicated to the public use and accepted by the
city or town in which such roads are located, or roads which have been
used as such for public travel, other than travel to and from a toll
bridge or ferry, for 20 years prior to January 1, 1968, and shall
include the bridges thereon.

**Source.** RS 53:7. CS 57:7. GS 68:8. GL 74:8. PS 67:1. PL 74:1. RL
90:1. 1943, 57:1. 1945, 188:1, part 1:1. RSA 230:1. 1967, 283:1. 1981,
87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 229:2

 **229:2 Primary Highway System. –** There shall be a system of
highways known as the "Primary State Highways System'' which shall
consist of all existing or proposed highways designated on a map
entitled "Primary State Highway System, 1945,'' prepared by the
commissioner and filed in the office of the secretary of state.

**Source.** 1945, 188:1, part 1:2. RSA 230:2. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20,
1981.

### Section 229:3

 **229:3 Turnpikes and System of Interstate and Defense Highways. –**
The turnpikes, as established by RSA 237, and the approved national
system of interstate and defense highways, shall be a part of the
primary state highway system.

**Source.** RSA 230:2-a. 1961, 4:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 229:4

 **229:4 Secondary System. –** There shall be a system of highways
known as the "Secondary State Highway System'' which shall consist of
all existing or proposed highways designated on a map entitled
"Secondary State Highway System, 1945,'' prepared by the commissioner
and filed in the office of the secretary of state.

**Source.** 1945, 188:1, part 1:3. RSA 230:3. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20,
1981.

### Section 229:5

 **229:5 Classification. –** Highways of the state shall be divided
into 7 classes as follows:
                                             
 I. Class I highways shall consist of all existing or proposed
highways on the primary state highway system, excepting all portions of
such highways within the compact sections of the cities and towns listed
in RSA 229:5, V, provided that the portions of the turnpikes and the
national system of interstate and defense highways within the compact
sections of these cities and towns shall be class I highways.
                                             
 II. Class II highways shall consist of all existing or proposed
highways on the secondary state highway system, excepting all portions
of such highways within the compact sections of the cities and towns
listed in RSA 229:5, V.
                                             
 III. Class III highways shall consist of all recreational roads
leading to, and within, state reservations designated by the
legislature.
                                             
 III-a. Class III-a highways shall consist of new boating access
highways from any existing highway to any public water in this state.
All class III-a highways shall be limited access facilities as defined
in RSA 230:44. Class III-a highways shall be subject to the layout,
design, construction, and maintenance provisions of RSA 230:45-47 and
all other provisions relative to limited access facilities, except that
the executive director of the fish and game department shall have the
same authority for class III-a highways that is delegated to the
commissioner of the department of transportation for limited access
facilities. A class III-a highway may be laid out subject to the
condition that it shall not be maintained during the winter months. A
class III-a highway may be laid out subject to gates and bars or
restricted to the accommodation of persons on foot, or certain vehicles,
or both, if federal funds are not used. The executive director of fish
and game may petition the governor and council to discontinue any class
III-a highway.
                                             
 IV. Class IV highways shall consist of all highways within the
compact sections of cities and towns listed in RSA 229:5, V. The compact
section of any such city or town shall be the territory within such city
or town where the frontage on any highway, in the opinion of the
commissioner of transportation, is mainly occupied by dwellings or
buildings in which people live or business is conducted, throughout the
year and not for a season only. Whenever the commissioner reclassifies a
section of a class I or class II highway as a class IV highway, the
commissioner shall prepare a statement of rehabilitation work which
shall be performed by the state in connection with the turnback. No
highway reclassification from class I or II to class IV shall take
effect until all rehabilitation needed to return the highway surface to
reputable condition has been completed by the state. Rehabilitation
shall be completed during the calendar year preceding the effective date
of the reclassification. A copy of the commissioner's statement of work
to be performed by the state shall be attached to the notification of
reclassification to class IV, and receipt of said statement shall be
acknowledged, in writing, by the selectmen of the town, or the mayor of
the city, affected by the reclassification.
                                             
 V. The commissioner of transportation may establish compact sections
in the following cities and towns:

    Amherst Keene 
    Bedford Laconia 
    Berlin Lebanon 
    Claremont Londonderry
    Concord Manchester 
    Derry Merrimack 
    Dover Milford 
    Durham Nashua 
    Exeter Pelham 
    Franklin Portsmouth 
    Goffstown Rochester 
    Hampton Salem 
    Hanover Somersworth
    Hudson 


                                             
 VI. Class V highways shall consist of all other traveled highways
which the town has the duty to maintain regularly and shall be known as
town roads. Any public highway which at one time lapsed to Class VI
status due to 5-years' nonmaintenance, as set forth in RSA 229:5, VII,
but which subsequently has been regularly maintained and repaired by the
town on more than a seasonal basis and in suitable condition for
year-round travel thereon for at least 5 successive years without being
declared an emergency lane pursuant to RSA 231:59-a, shall be deemed a
Class V highway.
                                             
 VII. Class VI highways shall consist of all other existing public
ways, and shall include all highways discontinued as open highways and
made subject to gates and bars, except as provided in paragraph III-a,
and all highways which have not been maintained and repaired by the town
in suitable condition for travel thereon for 5 successive years or more
except as restricted by RSA 231:3, II.

**Source.** 1925, 110:1. PL 83:22. RL 99:24. 1943, 123:1. 1945, 188:1,
part 1:4. 1951, 30:1. RSA 230:4. 1955, 333:2. 1957, 181:1, 2, 3. 1961,
4:2. 1973, 418:1-3. 1975, 249:1-3. 1979, 216:1. 1981, 87:1; 443:1. 1983,
131:1. 1985, 235:1-4; 402:6, I(b)(1). 1992, 265:8-10. 1995, 77:1. 1999,
109:1. 2000, 24:1, eff. May 28, 2000.

### Section 229:6

 **229:6 Roads Laid Out by Courts of Common Pleas or County
Commissioners. –** All roads laid out by the courts of common pleas or
the county commissioners, which have not been maintained by them for at
least 20 years, are town-owned rights-of-way and are legally subject to
the actions of the town's legislative body.

**Source.** 1997, 78:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1997.
