---
title: 'CHAPTER 231-A MUNICIPAL TRAILS'
---

TITLE XX
                                             
TRANSPORTATION
==============

CHAPTER 231-A
                                             
MUNICIPAL TRAILS
----------------

### Section 231-A:1

 **231-A:1 Class A and B Trails. –**
                                             
 I. A class A trail shall be a full public right-of-way, of
indefinite duration subject to public trail use restrictions. It shall
not have the status of a publicly approved street, and shall not be used
as a vehicular access for any new building or structure, or for the
expansion, enlargement, or increased intensity of use of any existing
building or structure. It may, however, be used by the owners of land
abutting on such trail, or land served exclusively by such trail, to
provide access for such nondevelopment uses as agriculture and forestry,
or for access to any building or structure existing prior to its
designation as a trail, and such owners' access for such uses shall be
exempt from applicable public trail use restrictions, subject only to
reasonable time, season and manner regulations imposed by the local
governing body. The municipality shall bear no responsibility for
maintaining the trail for such uses by abutting owners. Such owners
shall, prior to excavation, construction or disturbance of a class A
trail, obtain permission from the municipal officers, in the same manner
prescribed for highways in RSA 236:9-11.
                                             
 II. A class B trail shall be a full public right-of-way of
indefinite duration subject to public trail use restrictions. It shall
not have the status of a publicly approved street, shall not be used as
a vehicular access for any new or existing building or structure, and
shall not be used by the owners of land served by or abutting on such
trail in any manner inconsistent with applicable public trail use
restrictions.

**Source.** 1993, 60:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 231-A:2

 **231-A:2 Reclassification of Highways; Damages. –**
                                             
 I. Any class V or VI highway may be reclassified as a class A or
class B trail, and any class A trail may be reclassified as a class B
trail, by vote of the local legislative body.
                                             
 II. In accordance with RSA 231:43, no highway of any class which
provides the sole access to any land shall be reclassified as a class B
trail without the written consent of the owner of that land.
                                             
 III. Whenever a reclassification is made under this section, any
aggrieved landowner may appeal, or may petition for the assessment of
damages, in the same manner as in the discontinuance of highways
pursuant to RSA 231:48 and 231:49, and the amount of damages, if any,
shall reflect the landowner use provisions set forth in RSA 231-A:1.

**Source.** 1993, 60:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 231-A:3

 **231-A:3 Reclassification of Trails as Highways. –**
                                             
 I. Any class A or class B trail which was previously a class V or
class VI highway may be reclassified pursuant to RSA 231:22-a as a class
V or class VI highway, and any class B trail may be reclassified as a
class A trail, by vote of the local legislative body.
                                             
 II. No reclassification under this section shall entitle any party
to damages.
                                             
 III. The reclassification of any trail to a class V highway may be
made subject to conditions, as in the case of reclassifying as a class
VI highway pursuant to RSA 231:22-a.
                                             
 IV. No trail established by acquisition under RSA 231-A:5 shall be
reclassified under this section if such reclassification would violate a
use restriction or other provision imposed by deed at the time of
acquisition.

**Source.** 1993, 60:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 231-A:4

 **231-A:4 Public Trail Use Restrictions. –** In this chapter "public
trail use restrictions'' means any restrictions upon use of a trail by
the general public. Such restrictions may be imposed by a landowner as a
condition of grant or dedication of a trail acquired under RSA 231-A:5,
or by vote of the local legislative body or its designee at or
subsequent to the time the trail is established, or by the local
governing body under RSA 41:11. Such restrictions may include, but are
not limited to, prohibition of motor vehicles, prohibition of wheeled
vehicles, prohibition of off highway recreational vehicles, or
restriction to specified modes of travel such as horse, bicycle, or
foot. Such restrictions, if posted using legible signs at entrances to
the trail from public highways, or at any property boundaries where new
or different restrictions become applicable, shall be enforceable in the
same manner as traffic violations as set forth in RSA 265. Any person
violating such restrictions shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1993, 60:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 231-A:5

 **231-A:5 Acquisition of New Trails. –**
                                             
 I. Municipalities shall not use the power of eminent domain to
establish trails.
                                             
 II. A class A or B trail may be established by the local legislative
body or its designee over any land previously acquired by the
municipality, including land acquired by the conservation commission
pursuant to RSA 36-A:4, or town forests established pursuant to RSA
31:110, unless the establishment of such trail would violate any right
or interest reserved or retained by a prior grantor or held by a third
party.
                                             
 III. The local legislative body or its designee may acquire, by
dedication and acceptance or by gift, purchase, grant or devise:
                                             
 (a) Any class A or B trail, subject to such public trail use
restrictions as may be imposed by deed by the owner or grantor; or
                                             
 (b) Any lesser interest in land for trail purposes, including but
not limited to a revocable easement, revocable license, lease or
easement of finite duration, or conservation restriction, subject to
such public trail use restrictions and such reserved rights as may be
imposed by or agreed upon with the owner or grantor.
                                             
 IV. A properly established conservation commission may utilize RSA
36-A:4 for the acquisition of trails.

**Source.** 1993, 60:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 231-A:6

 **231-A:6 Discontinuance. –** Any class A or B trail may be
discontinued by vote of the town, and such discontinuance shall have the
same legal effect as the discontinuance of a public highway, provided
however that the discontinuance of a class B trail shall not entitle any
owner of land abutting or served by the trail to any damages.

**Source.** 1993, 60:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 231-A:7

 **231-A:7 Management. –** Unless otherwise specified by vote of the
local legislative body, or by the terms of a deeded interest affecting
the property, the local governing body or its designee shall have
supervision over management or maintenance of all trails, including
signs. Such management may be delegated to a volunteer of a nonprofit
organization or association, or a town committee or commission, by means
of a written cooperative agreement.

**Source.** 1993, 60:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 231-A:8

 **231-A:8 Liability Limited. –**
                                             
 I. All trails established under this chapter shall be deemed to
constitute land open without charge for recreational or outdoor
educational purposes pursuant to RSA 212:34 and RSA 508:14, I, and the
liability of owners, lessees or occupants of land affected by a trail,
and of the municipality establishing the trail, shall be limited as set
forth in those statutes.
                                             
 II. The liability of any person performing volunteer management or
maintenance activities for or upon any trail established under this
chapter, with the prior written approval of the body or organization
with supervision over trail management pursuant to RSA 231-A:7, shall be
limited as set forth in RSA 508:17, and such management shall not be
deemed "care of the organization's premises'' under RSA 508:17, IV.

**Source.** 1993, 60:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.
