---
title: 'CHAPTER 236 HIGHWAY REGULATION, PROTECTION AND CONTROL REGULATIONS'
---

TITLE XX
                                             
TRANSPORTATION
==============

CHAPTER 236
                                             
HIGHWAY REGULATION, PROTECTION AND CONTROL REGULATIONS
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 236:1

 **236:1 Regulation. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner may regulate the use of class I, class II, and
class III highways in towns or cities without compact sections and in
other towns and cities outside the compact portion thereof as determined
by him, including the use of rights-of-way.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may establish stop intersections, erect stop
signs, yield right-of-way signs, or other traffic devices or signals
thereon or upon any way entering thereon.

**Source.** 1921, 32:1. PL 91:5. 1935, 117:1. RL 107:7. 1945, 188:1,
part 19:1. RSA 249:5. 1955, 178:1; 333:4. 1957, 181:5. 1973, 418:5.
1975, 249:5. 1977, 75:1. 1981, 87:1; 443:5. 1985, 235:6; 305:1, 3. 1986,
136:5, eff. May 27, 1986.

### Section 236:2

 **236:2 Control Regulations Filed. –** Regulations controlling
traffic by such stop signs, devices, or signals shall be filed with the
department of transportation and shall be open to public inspection.

**Source.** 1921, 32:1. PL 91:6. 1935, 117:1. 1937, 25:1. 1941, 42:1. RL
107:8. 1945, 188:1, part 19:2. RSA 249:6. 1977, 75:2. 1981, 87:1. 1985,
402:6, I(a)(7). 2008, 141:1, eff. Aug. 5, 2008.

### Section 236:3

 **236:3 Other Regulations. –** Other regulations, seasonal or
otherwise, shall be posted on every such highway affected thereby.

**Source.** 1937, 25:2. RL 107:9. 1945, 188:1, part 19:3. RSA 249:7.
1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:3-a

 **236:3-a Exclusion From Seasonal Highway Weight Limit for Certain
Vehicles. –** Notwithstanding any provision of law or rule to the
contrary, the following vehicles shall be excluded from the seasonal
highway weight limit regulations with the approval of the district
engineer, department of transportation:
                                             
 I. Heating fuel delivery vehicles.
                                             
 II. Trucks delivering processed milk products.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. Trucks carrying sap for maple syrup production.
                                             
 V. Septic pumper trucks and accompanying supply trucks.

**Source.** 1998, 306:6, eff. Aug. 25, 1998. 2010, 126:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2011; 126:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2013. 2015, 61:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016. 2016,
124:1, eff. July 19, 2016.

### Section 236:4

 **236:4 Penalty and Liability. –** Any person violating the
provisions of such posted regulations shall be guilty of a violation if
a natural person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other person. Any
person shall be liable for all damage occasioned thereby.

**Source.** 1921, 32:1; 61:1. PL 91:7. 1935, 117:1. RL 107:10. 1945,
188:1, part 19:4. RSA 249:8. 1973, 530:24. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20,
1981.

### Section 236:5

 **236:5 Stop Signs and Signals; Presumption of Legality. –** Every
stop sign, traffic device, or traffic signal erected on any public
highway shall be deemed lawfully erected and maintained and to conform
to standards set by the commissioner of transportation and approved by
him as to type, size, installation and method of operation, until the
contrary is proven, in all cases, civil or criminal.

**Source.** 1945, 188:1, part 19:5. RSA 249:9. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6,
I(b)(7).

### Section 236:6

 **236:6 When Not Erected by Officials; Penalty. –** If any person,
except a public officer or official or a person acting under his
direction or order, erects on any public highway a stop sign, traffic
device, or traffic signal, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1945, 188:1, part 19:6. RSA 249:10. 1973, 528:130. 1981,
87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:7

 **236:7 Establishment of Speed Zones. –** Whenever the commissioner
of transportation shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation, or in the event of vehicle or weather
emergencies, that any prima facie speed limit set forth in RSA 265:60 is
greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to
exist at any intersection or other place, or upon any part of a class I,
class II or class III highway, outside the compact part of cities or
towns, said commissioner may determine and declare a reasonable and safe
prima facie speed limit thereat which shall be effective when
appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected at such intersection
or other place or part of said highway. Such signs may carry either a
fixed speed limit legend or a changeable message so designed as to
permit display of different speed limits at various times of the day or
night. Such a prima facie speed limit may be declared to be effective at
all times or at such times as are indicated upon said signs. The
commissioner shall keep and maintain a full and complete record of all
speed zones established by him and all alterations, amendments or
removal thereof.

**Source.** 1949, 286:3. 1950, 5:1, part 9:1, par. 2. RSA 249:11. 1981,
87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7). 1999, 73:3, eff. July 27, 1999.

### Section 236:8

 **236:8 Damaging Guard Rails or Highway Signs; Penalty. –** Any
person who willfully removes, injures, defaces or damages any guard
rail, guide board, sign, post, marker, or the letters or figures
thereon, or any traffic device or traffic signal, or any design, marking
or wording used to designate a highway route or painted on the highway
to control traffic, erected, painted or maintained by the state or a
city or town, on any public highway, or any snow fence on any such
highway or land adjacent thereto, shall be guilty of a violation if a
natural person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other person.

**Source.** 1917, 91:1, 2. PL 91:8, 9. RL 107:11, 12. 1945, 188:1, part
19:7. RSA 249:12. 1973, 530:25. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

Excavations and Driveways
-------------------------

### Section 236:9

 **236:9 Excavation; Permit; Emergency. –** It shall be unlawful to
excavate or disturb the shoulders, ditches, embankments or the surface
improved for travel of any class I or class III highway or
state-maintained portion of any class II highway for any purpose
whatever without written permission from the commissioner of
transportation or his district engineer, or any other highway without
written permission from the selectmen or highway agent of the town, or
the mayor and aldermen or street commissioner of the city; provided that
in cases of emergency where the public health or safety is endangered
such immediate action as may be necessary may be taken without such
permission, but in such cases the person directing or taking such action
shall at once notify the official empowered to give written permission.

**Source.** 1917, 96:1. PL 91:1. RL 107:1. 1945, 188:1, part 19:8. 1950,
5:1, part 9:1, par. 2. RSA 249:13. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).
1990, 39:1, eff. May 22, 1990.

### Section 236:10

 **236:10 Regulations; Bond. –** The person or entity giving such
written permission may make rules and regulations to govern the
excavation and restoration of such highway and may require that a bond
satisfactory to such person or entity be furnished to the state, city,
or town providing for the satisfactory restoration of the highway. The
bond requirements shall be equitably and reasonably applied to other
bonded vehicles using the highway. The type of commodity being
transported shall not be the determining factor for requiring a bond or
the dollar amount of the bond. The person or entity providing the bond
shall determine the type of bond furnished and it may be in the form of
cash, letter of credit from a bank or lending institution licensed in
New Hampshire and acceptable to the person giving written permission, or
a bond furnished by an insurance company. The person or entity granting
permission shall not arbitrarily withhold funds from any cash bond or
letter of credit, but shall first make a good faith effort to resolve
any differences with the contractor doing the excavation or restoration.

**Source.** 1917, 96:2. PL 91:2. RL 107:3. 1945, 188:1, part 19:9. RSA
249:14. 1981, 87:1. 2006, 177:1, eff. July 24, 2006. 2011, 85:1, eff.
July 15, 2011.

### Section 236:11

 **236:11 Restoration. –** Any person, entity, or corporation who
excavates or disturbs the shoulders, ditches, embankments, or the
surface improved for travel of any highway shall restore such highway to
a condition at least equal to the condition that was present before the
excavation or disturbance.

**Source.** 1945, 188:1, part 19:10. RSA 249:15. 1981, 87:1. 2006,
177:2, eff. July 24, 2006.

### Section 236:12

 **236:12 Exception. –** The foregoing provisions shall not apply to
railroads when making necessary repairs or improvements within their
rights-of-way at points where the same are crossed by a highway; but no
such repairs or improvements, if they involve excavating or disturbing
the surface of any highway, shall be made without written permission
from the department of transportation.

**Source.** 1917, 96:4. PL 91:4. RL 107:6. 1945, 188:1, part 19:11. RSA
249:16. 1981, 87:1. 1990, 39:2, eff. May 22, 1990.

### Section 236:13

 **236:13 Driveways and Other Accesses to the Public Way. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be unlawful to construct, or alter in any way that
substantially affects the size or grade of, any driveway, entrance,
exit, or approach within the limits of the right-of-way of any class I
or class III highway or the state-maintained portion of a class II
highway that does not conform to the terms and specifications of a
written permit issued by the commissioner of transportation.
                                             
 II. Pursuant to this section, a written construction permit
application must be obtained from and filed with the department of
transportation by any abutter affected by the provisions of paragraph I.
Before any construction or alteration work is commenced, said permit
application shall have been reviewed, and a construction permit issued
by said department. Said permit shall:
                                             
 (a) Describe the location of the driveway, entrance, exit, or
approach. The location shall be selected to most adequately protect the
safety of the traveling public.
                                             
 (b) Describe any drainage structures, traffic control devices,
and channelization islands to be installed by the abutter.
                                             
 (c) Establish grades that adequately protect and promote highway
drainage and permit a safe and controlled approach to the highway in all
seasons of the year.
                                             
 (d) Include any other terms and specifications necessary for the
safety of the traveling public.
                                             
 III. For access to a proposed commercial or industrial enterprise,
or to a subdivision, all of which for the purposes of this section shall
be considered a single parcel of land, even though acquired by more than
one conveyance or held nominally by more than one owner:
                                             
 (a) Said permit application shall be accompanied by engineering
drawings showing information as set forth in paragraph II.
                                             
 (b) Unless all season safe sight distance of 400 feet in both
directions along the highway can be obtained, the commissioner shall not
permit more than one access to a single parcel of land, and this access
shall be at that location which the commissioner determines to be
safest. The commissioner shall not give final approval for use of any
additional access until it has been proven to him that the 400-foot all
season safe sight distance has been provided.
                                             
 (c) For the purposes of this section, all season safe sight
distance is defined as a line which encounters no visual obstruction
between 2 points, each at a height of 3 feet 9 inches above the
pavement, and so located as to represent the critical line of sight
between the operator of a vehicle using the access and the operator of a
vehicle approaching from either direction.
                                             
 IV. No construction permit shall allow:
                                             
 (a) A driveway, entrance, exit, or approach to be constructed
more than 50 feet in width, except that a driveway, entrance, exit, or
approach may be flared beyond a width of 50 feet at its junction with
the highway to accommodate the turning radius of vehicles expected to
use the particular driveway, entrance, exit or approach.
                                             
 (b) More than 2 driveways, entrances, exits or approaches from
any one highway to any one parcel of land unless the frontage along that
highway exceeds 500 feet.
                                             
 V. The same powers concerning highways under their jurisdiction as
are conferred upon the commissioner of transportation by paragraphs I,
II, III, and IV shall be conferred upon the planning board or governing
body in cities and towns in which the planning board or governing body
has been granted the power to regulate the grading and improvement of
streets within a subdivision as provided in RSA 674:35, and they shall
adopt such regulations as are necessary to carry out the provisions of
this section. Such regulations may delegate administrative duties,
including actual issuance of permits, to a highway agent, board of
selectmen, or other qualified official or body. Such regulations, or any
permit issued under them, may contain provisions governing the breach,
removal, and reconstruction of stone walls or fences within, or at the
boundary of, the public right of way, and any landowner or landowner's
agent altering a boundary in accordance with such provisions shall be
deemed to be acting under a mutual agreement with the city or town
pursuant to RSA 472:6, II(a).
                                             
 VI. The commissioner of transportation or planning board shall
retain continuing jurisdiction over the adequacy and safety of every
existing driveway, entrance, exit, and approach to a highway, whether or
not such access was constructed or installed pursuant to a permit under
this section, and, unless the access is a public highway, the owners of
property to which the access is appurtenant shall have continuing
responsibility for the adequacy of the access and any grades, culverts,
or other structures pertaining to such access, whether or not located
within the public right of way. If any such access is or becomes a
potential threat to the integrity of the highway or its surface,
ditches, embankments, bridges, or other structures, or a hazard to the
safety of the traveling public, by reason of siltation, flooding,
erosion, frost action, vegetative growth, improper grade, or the failure
of any culvert, traffic control device, drainage structure, or any other
feature, the commissioner of transportation or planning board or their
designee may issue an order to the landowner or other party responsible
for such access to repair or remove such hazardous condition and to
obtain any and all permits required therefor. The order shall describe
the hazard, prescribe what corrective action or alteration in the
location or configuration of such access shall be required, and set a
reasonable time within which the action shall be completed. Such an
order shall be sent by certified mail, and shall be enforceable to the
same extent as a permit issued under this section. If the order is not
complied with within the time prescribed, the commissioner or planning
board or their designee may cause to be taken whatever action is
necessary to protect the highway and the traveling public, and the owner
or other responsible party shall be civilly liable to the state or
municipality for its costs in taking such action.

**Source.** 1939, 109:1. RL 107:4. 1945, 188:1, part 19:12. 1950, 5:1,
part 9:1, par. 2. RSA 249:17. 1969, 254:1. 1971, 302:1. 1981, 87:1.
1985, 103:4; 402:6, I(a)(7), (b)(7). 1997, 52:1, 2, eff. July 18, 1997.
2014, 125:1, eff. Aug. 15, 2014.

### Section 236:14

 **236:14 Penalty. –** Any person who violates any provision of this
subdivision or the rules and regulations made under authority thereof
shall be guilty of a violation if a natural person, or guilty of a
misdemeanor if any other person; and, in addition, shall be liable for
the cost of restoration of the highway to a condition satisfactory to
the person empowered to give such written permission.

**Source.** 1917, 96:3. PL 91:3. 1939, 109:2. RL 107:5. 1945, 188:1,
part 19:13. RSA 249:18. 1973, 530:26. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

Obstructions and Encroachments
------------------------------

### Section 236:15

 **236:15 Purprestures; Barbed Wire. –** If any building, structure
or fence is erected or continued upon or over any highway, or if any
fence, any part of which within 6 feet from the ground is barbed wire,
is erected, maintained or continued adjoining or adjacent to any street
or highway within the compact part of any town or within the limits of
any village district or city, it shall be deemed a public nuisance.
Cornices or other projections upon buildings, extending a reasonable
distance into a highway, 12 feet or more above the surface of the
highway, shall not be considered obstructions within the meaning of this
section. Superstructures from one building to another, extending over a
highway, not less than 16 feet above the surface of the highway,
approved by the governing body of a municipality charged with the duty
of inspection or supervision of buildings, shall not be considered
obstructions within the meaning of this section.

**Source.** RS 60:1. CS 64:1. 1862, 2622:3. GS 70:10, 11. GL 76:10, 11.
PS 77:8. 1899, 59:1. 1921, 157:1. PL 92:8. RL 108:8. 1945, 188:1, part
19:14. RSA 249:19. 1961, 110:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:16

 **236:16 Penalty. –** Any person so erecting or continuing any
building, structure or fence, so as to interfere with, hinder or
obstruct the public travel, shall be guilty of a violation, and the
superior court may order such building, structure or fence to be
removed, if it be found that the same does so obstruct or lessen the
full breadth of the highway, or is dangerous to public travel thereon.

**Source.** RS 60:1. CS 64:1. 1862, 2622:3. GS 70:10, 11. GL 76:10, 11.
PS 77:8. 1899, 59:1. 1921, 157:1. PL 92:9. RL 108:9. 1945, 188:1, part
19:15. RSA 249:20. 1973, 531:74. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:17

 **236:17 Exceptions. –** Watch-houses and structures for public use
erected by authority of the town or by its selectmen, and signs and
awnings put up in conformity with the police regulations in force in the
town, are excepted from the provisions of RSA 236:16.

**Source.** RS 60:2. CS 64:2. GS 70:12. GL 76:12. PS 77:9. PL 92:10. RL
108:10. 1945, 188:1, part 19:16. RSA 249:21. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20,
1981.

### Section 236:18

 **236:18 Right to Air Space Above and Below Certain Highways. –**
The state shall have exclusive rights, insofar as they do not conflict
with any federal statute, to build into, lease or utilize for any public
purpose the air space directly above or below the toll highways and the
interstate system highways within this state. These rights to said air
space shall extend upward or downward so far as is practical and
reasonable for all purposes of the state and it shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to violate said air space except as allowed by the
state. The department of transportation shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this section. Nothing in this section
shall be construed as prohibiting aircraft from flying through the air
space above the herein mentioned highways. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, public utilities shall have the right to erect lines through
said air space in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
relative thereto.

**Source.** RSA 249:21-a. 1969, 144:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(a)(7).

### Section 236:19

 **236:19 Obstructing Water; Penalty. –** Any person who shall place,
or suffer to be placed or to remain, any logs, earth or other substances
within the limits of a highway, or upon land in the vicinity of a
highway by which the water in a stream, pond or ditch is turned upon the
highway and injures or renders it unsuitable for public travel, shall be
guilty of a violation if a natural person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if
any other person. If such highway is maintained by the town, the fine
shall be for the use of the town and if such highway is maintained by
the state, the fine shall be for the use of the department of
transportation. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting the placing of snow within the limits of a highway for the
purpose of crossing or recrossing by sleds, logging or farming
equipment.

**Source.** 1881, 50:1. PS 77:12. PL 92:13. 1941, 41:1. RL 108:13. 1945,
188:1, part 19:17. RSA 249:22. 1973, 530:27. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6,
I(a)(7).

### Section 236:20

 **236:20 Snow Obstruction. –** Any person who shall put or place or
cause to be put or placed any snow or ice upon the surface of the
traveled portion of any class I, class III, or class III-a highway or
state maintained portion of any class II highway for any purpose, except
to provide a place necessary for crossing, recrossing and traveling upon
said highways by sleds, logging or farm equipment, shall be guilty of a
violation if a natural person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other
person. The provisions of this section shall not apply where snow or ice
is pushed across the traveled surface of said highways for the purpose
of snow removal from land adjoining said highways.

**Source.** 1941, 57:1. RL 107:2. 1945, 188:1, part 19:18. RSA 249:23.
1973, 530:28. 1981, 87:1. 1992, 265:15, eff. July 1, 1992.

### Section 236:21

 **236:21 Covering Fire Hydrant; Penalty. –** Any person who shall
purposely or knowingly put or place or cause to be put or placed any
snow, ice or other debris which covers a fire hydrant so as to make it
inaccessible for immediate use in the event of a fire, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor. For the purpose of this section "person'' excludes
agents of the state or any political subdivision engaged in the
operation of snow removal from the traveled portion of any class of
highway or the adjacent sidewalk.

**Source.** RSA 249:23-a. 1977, 209:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:22

 **236:22 Removal of Fences Obstructing. –** Fences shall not be
removed for highway purposes until 10 days' notice in writing of the
intention to remove the same has been given to the owner or occupant of
the land enclosed by such fence, or to his agent.

**Source.** 1945, 188:1, part 19:19. RSA 249:24. 1981, 87:1, eff. April
20, 1981.

### Section 236:23

 **236:23 Service of Notice. –** Such notice may be served by any
agent of the department of transportation on such owner or occupant or
his agent.

**Source.** 1945, 188:1, part 19:20. RSA 249:25. 1981, 87:1. 1985,
402:6, I(a)(7).

### Section 236:24

 **236:24 Time of Removal. –** All such fences shall be removed
within the time designated, and, if not removed by the date stated in
such notice, they may be forthwith removed by said department at the
expense of the owner.

**Source.** 1945, 188:1, part 19:21. RSA 249:26. 1981, 87:1, eff. April
20, 1981.

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 236:25

 **236:25 Officials. –** State and local law enforcement officials
are authorized to enforce the provisions of RSA 211:17-b, RSA 211:62-c,
RSA 236:21 and RSA 236:26.

**Source.** 1959, 306:5. 1965, 157:2. RSA 249:27-a. 1977, 209:2. 1981,
87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:26

 **236:26 Refuse on Private Land. –** Any person other than the owner
or his agent who shall put or place without permission, or cause to be
put or placed without permission, in or upon any private property, any
bottles, glass, crockery, cans, scrap metal, junk, paper, garbage, old
automobiles or parts thereof or refuse of any nature whatsoever or any
other noxious material, shall be guilty of a violation if a natural
person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other person.

**Source.** RSA 249:27-b. 1965, 148:1. 1973, 530:29. 1981, 87:1, eff.
April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:27

 **236:27 Unauthorized Posting and Advertising. –** If any person
shall in any manner paint, put upon or affix to a bridge, fence, or
other structure, or upon a rock or other natural object, the property of
another, without his consent, any device, trademark, advertisement, or
notice, he shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1864, 4032. GS 263:6. 1878, 10:1. GL 281:8. PS 266:27. PL
380:35. RL 442:34. RSA 572:43. 1973, 532:12. RSA 249:27-c. 1981, 87:1,
eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:28

 **236:28 Leaving Trigs, Etc.; Penalty. –** If any person shall leave
or suffer or allow to be left, on any public street or highway or in any
gutter or drain adjacent to the same, anything which has been used in
aiding to repair or trig any vehicle, he shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1897, 61:2. 1923, 79:1. PL 92:17, 18. RL 108:17, 18. 1945,
188:1, part 19:23. RSA 249:28. 1973, 531:75. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20,
1981.

### Section 236:29

 **236:29 Removal of Obstructions. –** The department of
transportation may remove all obstructions in class I, class II, class
III, or class III-a highways, and the highway agent of any city or town
may remove all obstructions on any other highway and on town maintained
portions of class II highways.

**Source.** 1917, 154:1. PL 91:10. RL 107:13. 1945, 188:1, part 19:24.
RSA 249:29. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(a)(7). 1992, 265:16, eff. July 1,
1992.

### Section 236:30

 **236:30 No Adverse Right. –** No person shall acquire, as against
the public, any right to any part of a highway by enclosing or occupying
it adversely for any length of time.

**Source.** 1862, 2622:1. GS 70:8. GL 76:8. PS 77:7. PL 92:7. RL 108:7.
1945, 188:1, part 19:25. RSA 249:30. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:31

 **236:31 Evasion of Tolls and Charges. –**
                                             
 I. For purposes of this section:
                                             
 (a) "Department'' means the department of transportation.
                                             
 (b) "Driver'' means driver as defined in RSA 259:25.
                                             
 (c) "Electronic toll collection'' means the collection of tolls
or charges by electronically transmitting information from a device on a
motor vehicle to receiving equipment located in a toll collection
facility, in order to charge a valid electronic toll account holder the
appropriate toll or charge for use of the highway or bridge.
                                             
 (d) "Toll collection monitoring system'' means a system that
produces at least one photograph, microphotograph, videotape, recorded
image, or written record of a portion of the vehicle when the vehicle is
used or operated contrary to the toll collection system rules or when
there is no cash option in the toll lanes.
                                             
 (e) "License'' means license as defined in RSA 259:48.
                                             
 (f) "Owner'' means owner as defined in RSA 259:72.
                                             
 (g) "Pay'' means the transfer of funds in cash or by instructions
to a financial service allowing withdrawal by debit or credit to an
account maintained to satisfy the obligation to pay a toll or charge
established by law for use of a highway or bridge in this state.
                                             
 (h) "Violation'' means to fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the
toll or charge for the use of a bridge, highway, or part thereof, by a
motor vehicle.
                                             
 (i) "Toll collection system'' means a system for collecting tolls
or charges, including but not limited to cash and electronic or
image-based tolls or charges, for the use of the highway or bridge.
                                             
 II. No person shall fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the toll or
charge for the use of any bridge, highway, or part thereof; or use, or
attempt to use, any device or method which results in a toll collection
monitoring system being unable to accurately assess or collect the toll
or charge due or to detect the non-payment of the toll or charge. Any
person violating this section shall be subject to the provisions of this
section and to an order of suspension pursuant to RSA 263:56-f.
                                             
 III. The owner of a vehicle using a bridge or highway subject to a
toll or charge shall be responsible for payment of the toll and charges
due, plus any administrative fees the department assesses in accordance
with its rules, and to an order of suspension under RSA 263:56-f,
unless:
                                             
 (a) The vehicle was taken without owner's consent, pursuant to
RSA 262:12, or was a stolen vehicle at the time of the violation and the
owner provides to the department, or its designee, upon receipt of
notice of a violation of this section, a copy of a report of the
unauthorized taking or theft made to a law enforcement agency; or
                                             
 (b) The vehicle was leased or rented to another person, and the
owner submits to the department, or its designee, a copy of the rental
agreement, lease, or other contract document covering the vehicle on the
date of the violation with the name and address of the renter or lessee
clearly legible; at which time the renter or lessee of the vehicle on
the date of the violation shall be deemed to be the owner of the vehicle
for the purposes of this section, and shall be subject to the notice and
order of suspension under RSA 263:56-f.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding RSA 237:16-d, the department shall adopt rules
under RSA 541-A for the implementation of a system to detect, record,
verify, and administratively enforce violations of this section, or
collect payment when there is no cash payment option in the toll lanes.
The rules shall include:
                                             
 (a) The criteria used to establish that a toll or charge has not
been paid.
                                             
 (b) A procedure to promptly resolve inadvertent violations in the
accounts of electronic toll customers otherwise in good standing.
                                             
 (c) A procedure for processing all other violations of this
section, which shall require the department, or its designee, to send by
regular mail, or other agreed upon method, an advisory and payment
request to the owner of the vehicle, within 30 days of the date of the
violation. The advisory and payment request shall notify the owner of
the date, time, and location of the alleged violation, give the owner
the opportunity to resolve the alleged violation by payment of the toll
or charge due and a reasonable administrative fee, and advise the owner
that failure to pay the required toll or charge and administrative fee
within 60 days of the date of the violation shall cause the department
to file a report with the department of safety, division of motor
vehicles, seeking an order of suspension pursuant to RSA 263:56-f.
                                             
 (d) A schedule of administrative fees to be imposed upon those
who violate this section. Such administrative fees shall be set from
time to time in an amount sufficient to permit the department to fully
recover its costs, and the costs incurred by the department of safety,
to administer, maintain, and upgrade the violation enforcement system.
All funds received under this section shall be deposited in the turnpike
fund. The department of transportation may, with the approval of the
fiscal committee of the general court and the governor and council, draw
from the turnpike fund to administer the toll collection system.
                                             
 V. Any toll collection monitoring equipment acquired, operated by,
or used by the department, or its designee, shall be designed to make a
record of the front, or rear, or both, portions of the vehicle,
including any registration plates affixed to the vehicle. Such equipment
shall not be designed to produce a photograph, microphotograph,
videotape, or other recorded image of the face of the operator or any
passenger in the motor vehicle, unless the production of such image is
unavoidable because the operator or passenger is not in a passenger
compartment, as on a motorcycle.
                                             
 VI. (a) The department, and any designee of the department, shall
maintain the confidentiality of all information acquired in connection
with the administration and enforcement of toll evasion, including but
not limited to credit and account data, photographs or other images, and
all personally identifying information obtained relative to owners of
vehicles. Such information shall not be a public record subject to
disclosure under RSA 91-A and shall be used solely for enforcement of
this section.
                                             
 (b) The department, or any agent that has contracted with the
department to gather, collect, maintain, store, or collate any
information acquired in connection with the administration and
enforcement of toll collection, shall not use, share, reveal, duplicate,
sell, provide access to, or by any other means use, or allow other
entities to use, such information.
                                             
 VII. The transponders and the monitoring system used in a toll
collection system shall not be used to track or determine the location
of a vehicle or be used to collect information, including but not
limited to the name, street address, post office box number, license, or
billing information, about the individual and vehicle associated with
the transponder, except at each point where a toll is collected or
incurred.
                                             
 VIII. Nothing in this section shall prevent access to the data
collected in the administration and enforcement of toll collection by a
certified law enforcement officer conducting an investigation undertaken
pursuant to a court order, or in exigent circumstances.
                                             
 IX. The information and data referred to in this section shall not
include any motor vehicle records obtained from the department of safety
pursuant to RSA 260:14, III-a or RSA 260:14, III-c, whose use and
release shall be in strict accordance with RSA 260:14.

**Source.** RSA 249:30-a. 1957, 40:1. 1973, 531:76. 1981, 87:1. 2004,
241:1. 2007, 286:1, eff. Sept. 1, 2007. 2013, 186:1-8, eff. Aug. 31,
2013. 2015, 242:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2015.

### Section 236:31-a

 **236:31-a Failure to Pay a Highway Toll. –** Any person passing
through a toll facility or any lane of a toll facility that is not
equipped with a toll collection monitoring system who fails, neglects,
or refuses to pay the toll or charge for the use of any bridge, highway,
or part thereof shall have an image taken of the vehicle registration
plate and be subject to the provisions of RSA 236:31.

**Source.** 2006, 116:1, eff. May 10, 2006. 2013, 186:9, eff. Aug. 31,
2013.

### Section 236:31-b

 **236:31-b Failure to Pay a Highway Toll. –** Any person who fails,
neglects, or refuses to pay the toll or charge for the use of any
bridge, highway, or part thereof, or utilizes a toll facility that is
equipped with a toll collection monitoring system without having an E-Z
Pass transponder mounted on the vehicle, shall have an image taken of
the vehicle registration plate and be subject to the provisions of RSA
236:31. When a full cash payment is made at the tollbooth, and the
vehicle exits the toll booth, the image (i) shall not be retained for
more than 3 seconds, after which it shall be irretrievably destroyed,
and no record of the image or its destruction shall be kept; (ii) shall
not be made available or disclosed to any individual, person, entity, or
government or any component thereof; and (iii) shall not be subject to a
subpoena or any administrative or court order.

**Source.** 2006, 211:3, eff. June 1, 2006. 2013, 186:9, eff. Aug. 31,
2013. 2014, 317:6, eff. Aug. 1, 2014.

Encumbrances on Highways
------------------------

### Section 236:32

 **236:32 Removal. –** If any timber, lumber, stone or other thing is
upon a state-maintained highway, encumbering it, the department of
transportation may immediately remove the encumbrance, and, if upon any
other highway, the highway agent of the city or town may immediately
remove the encumbrance, and the official shall hold the same in his
possession until the costs of removal are paid.

**Source.** RS 59:1. CS 63:1. 1864, 2897:1. GS 70:1. GL 76:1. PS 77:1.
PL 92:1. RL 108:1. 1945, 188:1, part 19:26. RSA 249:31. 1981, 87:1.
1985, 402:6, I(a)(7).

### Section 236:33

 **236:33 Disposal. –** He shall deliver to the owner the encumbrance
removed, on being paid the cost of removing and keeping it, within 30
days after its removal; if the cost is not so paid he may sell the same,
on giving 4 days' notice thereof, by posting notices in 2 public places
in the town.

**Source.** 1864, 2897:2. GS 70:2. GL 76:2. PS 77:2. PL 92:2. RL 108:2.
1945, 188:1, part 19:27. RSA 249:32. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:34

 **236:34 Proceeds of Sale. –** The official shall pay to the owner
of such encumbrance the balance of the money received on the sale
thereof after deducting his costs of removal, keeping and sale.

**Source.** 1864, 2897:3. GS 70:3. GL 76:3. PS 77:3. PL 92:3. RL 108:3.
1945, 188:1, part 19:28. RSA 249:33. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:35

 **236:35 Notice; Complaint. –** The official may, if he chooses,
give reasonable notice to the owner or person leaving any such
encumbrance to remove the same; and upon his neglect or refusal, or if
he is unknown, may make complaint thereof to a justice of the peace.

**Source.** RS 59:2. CS 63:2. GS 70:4. GL 76:4, PS 77:4. PL 92:4. RL
108:4. 1945, 188:1, part 19:29. RSA 249:34. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20,
1981.

### Section 236:36

 **236:36 Hearing; Order. –** The justice shall cause notice to be
given to the owner or person leaving the same, if known, of the time
appointed by him to view the encumbrance, and, after hearing such party
if he attend, may upon his own view issue his warrant to the official to
remove the same so far as he shall judge necessary for the public
convenience, and to sell so much thereof as may be necessary to pay the
legal costs, taxed by him, and 3 times the price of the labor of
removing the same, to be estimated by the justice.

**Source.** RS 59:3. CS 63:3. GS 70:5. GL 76:5. PS 77:5. PL 92:5. RL
108:5. 1945, 188:1, part 19:30. RSA 249:35. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20,
1981.

### Section 236:37

 **236:37 Authority to Sell; Deficit. –** The official shall have the
same powers in making such sale as a collector of taxes has in the sale
of property distrained by him, and shall be governed by the same rules;
and, if the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the sums
specified in the warrant, he may recover the balance unpaid by action on
the case against the person leaving the same.

**Source.** RS 59:4. CS 63:4. GS 70:6. GL 76:6. PS 77:6. PL 92:6. RL
108:6. 1945, 188:1, part 19:31. RSA 249:36. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20,
1981.

Liability for Obstruction or Injury to Highway
----------------------------------------------

### Section 236:38

 **236:38 Damaging Highway; Penalty. –** If any person, without
authority, willfully injures any highway or bridge thereon by destroying
or taking away any plank, timber, stone or other material thereof, or by
digging any pit therein, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** RS 58:1. CS 62:1. GS 66:26. GL 72:26. PS 77:13. PL 92:14. RL
108:14. 1945, 188:1, part 19:32. RSA 249:37. 1973, 528:131. 1981, 87:1,
eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:39

 **236:39 Civil Liability. –** If any person, without authority,
shall place any obstruction in a highway, or cause any defect,
insufficiency, or want of repair of a highway which renders it
unsuitable for public travel, he or she shall be liable to the state for
all damages to the highway, including replacement costs of protective
barriers, when maintained by the state, or to the municipality for all
damages to a highway, including replacement costs of protective
barriers, when maintained by the municipality, and for all damages and
costs which the state or municipality shall be compelled to pay to any
person injured by such obstruction, defect, insufficiency, or want of
repair as established through an appropriate contribution claim or under
the rules of joint and several liability.

**Source.** RS 59:5. CS 63:5. GS 70:7. GL 72:27; 76:7. PS 77:14. PL
92:15. RL 108:15. 1945, 188:1, part 19:33. RSA 249:38. 1981, 87:1. 2007,
332:1. 2008, 184:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

Marking the Location of Public and Historic Incidents
-----------------------------------------------------

### Section 236:40

 **236:40 Historic Markers. –** The commissioner of transportation
may erect historic markers or signs within the right-of-way of any class
I, II, or III highway. He shall put up a marker upon the petition of 20
or more state citizens. Up to 10 historic markers may be erected in one
year. No marker shall be put up which would interfere with reasonable
use of the highway.

**Source.** RSA 249:38-a. 1955, 199:1. 1961, 31:1. 1969, 455:1. 1981,
87:1; 90:4, 9. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).

### Section 236:41

 **236:41 Historic Preservation Office. –** The state historic
preservation office established under RSA 227-C shall consult with the
commissioner of transportation on the marker program. Before placing any
marker, the commissioner shall secure the state historic preservation
office's approval of the marker, its location and its wording. The state
historic preservation office shall make any investigation needed to
obtain information on the event to be commemorated and on the
appropriate location for the marker, including consulting historians and
holding public hearings.

**Source.** RSA 249:38-b. 1955, 199:1. 1961, 31:1. 1981, 87:1; 90:4, 9.
1983, 422:7. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).

### Section 236:42

 **236:42 Expenses. –** The expense of putting up historic markers
under this subdivision shall be a charge on the highway fund. The
commissioner of transportation may accept grants from interested persons
to be applied to the expense of this program.

**Source.** RSA 249:38-c. 1955, 199:1. 1981, 87:1; 90:4, 9. 1985, 402:6,
I(b)(7).

### Section 236:43

 **236:43 Permits. –** Selectmen of towns may permit the erection of
monuments, tablets and markers by individuals or societies in public
highways or other public grounds, in such places and of such character
as may be approved by the selectmen, for the purpose of indicating the
occurrence of historic events and matters of public interest; provided,
that the reasonable use of such highway or other public place shall not
be interfered with thereby.

**Source.** 1909, 12:1. PL 92:19. RL 108:19. 1945, 188:1, part 19:34.
RSA 249:39. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:44

 **236:44 Cooperative Markers. –** The state historic preservation
office may enter into cooperative agreements with any town, city, or
historical society to place an historic marker within the right-of-way
of any class IV or V highway. The agreement shall provide for reasonable
sharing of the initial expense and for the town, city or society to
maintain and care for the marker.

**Source.** RSA 249:39-a. 1969, 455:2. 1981, 87:1; 90:5, 9. 1983, 442:8,
eff. June 24, 1983.

### Section 236:45

 **236:45 Damages. –** If any person shall be damaged in his estate
by the erection of such monument, tablet or marker he may apply to the
selectmen within 6 months after such erection, but not afterwards, to
assess his damages, and thereupon proceedings shall be had, as in the
case of assessment of damages in laying out highways by selectmen.

**Source.** 1909, 12:2. PL 92:20. RL 108:20. 1945, 188:1, part 19:35.
RSA 249:40. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:46

 **236:46 Change of Location. –** Any person whose rights or
interests shall be affected by such location may, within 60 days after
the approval of the selectmen, as provided in RSA 236:43, but not
afterwards, petition the selectmen for such changes in the terms of the
location as he may desire; and, after notice to parties and hearing, the
selectmen may alter or revoke said location as justice may require.

**Source.** 1909, 12:3. PL 92:21. RL 108:21. 1945, 188:1, part 19:36.
RSA 249:41. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:47

 **236:47 Petition to Court. –** If the selectmen shall neglect or
refuse after 30 days to decide and make return of their proceedings upon
any petition addressed to them under the provisions of the preceding
section, or if any party whose interests are affected by such decision
is dissatisfied therewith, the petitioner or party so dissatisfied may
apply to the superior court for relief within 60 days thereafter; and
like proceedings shall thereupon be had as in the case of appeals from
the laying out of highways by selectmen.

**Source.** 1909, 12:5. PL 92:22. RL 108:22. 1945, 188:1, part 19:37.
RSA 249:42. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:48

 **236:48 Return; Record; Fees. –** The selectmen shall, within 30
days, make a return of their proceedings and decision upon every
petition presented to them and of every location by them approved under
the provisions of this subdivision, and shall cause the same to be
recorded by the town clerk. The fees of the selectmen and town clerk
shall be paid by the petitioner.

**Source.** 1909, 12:4. PL 92:23. RL 108:23. 1945, 188:1, part 19:38.
RSA 249:43. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

DWI Victim Fatality Sign Program
--------------------------------

### Section 236:48-a

 **236:48-a DWI Victim Fatality Sign Program. –**
                                             
 I. A next of kin may apply to the department of transportation to
sponsor a sign memorializing an individual who was fatally injured in a
traffic accident, occurring after July 1, 2006, in which there is
substantial evidence gathered by law enforcement that another driver
caused the accident while driving in violation of RSA 265-A:2 or RSA
265-A:3. The applicant shall complete a DWI victim fatality sign
application furnished by the department. The applicant shall include
with the application:
                                             
 (a) The date of the accident.
                                             
 (b) The location of the accident.
                                             
 (c) The name of the driver driving while intoxicated or under the
influence of drugs.
                                             
 (d) An affidavit by the applicant that the individual to be
memorialized was fatally injured in the traffic accident and that there
is substantial evidence gathered by law enforcement that the other
driver was at fault and that drugs or alcohol were involved.
                                             
 (e) The name of the individual who was fatally injured as it
should appear on the name plaque.
                                             
 II. Within 60 days, or as soon as practical, after the department of
transportation receives a correctly completed application submitted
under paragraph I and the department has inspected the proposed site for
the sign, the department shall send a written decision to the applicant
as to whether the proposed sign installation is in compliance with this
section.
                                             
 III. (a) A sign that the department approves under this section
shall be placed in the state-maintained highway right-of-way, at cost to
an applicant, near the location of the accident and facing the oncoming
traffic, without obstructing the visibility of an existing traffic
sign.
                                             
 (b) Signs shall not be placed within an interstate right-of-way,
or on-ramps and off-ramps of such highways.
                                             
 (c) The department shall furnish, install, and retain ownership
of the DWI fatality sign.
                                             
 IV. If a sign is applied for under paragraph I and approved by the
department, the department shall install a DWI fatality sign that reads
"PLEASE DON'T DRINK AND DRIVE'' and a separate name plaque that reads
"IN MEMORY OF (the victim's name).''
                                             
 V. No more than 4 name plaques of victims may appear below the DWI
fatality sign on a single sign installation. If there were more than 4
victims fatally injured in the traffic accident, the department of
transportation may install additional signs in the vicinity of the
accident.
                                             
 VI. Unless it determines that public safety requires removal, the
department shall keep a sign installation in its designated location for
2 years after the date of its installation. After the 2-year period
ends, the department shall remove the sign. No petition for time
extension or re-erection of such sign shall be accepted.

**Source.** 2010, 80:1, eff. May 19, 2010.

Drive-In Theatres
-----------------

### Section 236:49

 **236:49 Permit Required. –** It shall be unlawful to construct a
drive-in theatre with direct access to or from any class I, II or III
highway, without first obtaining a written permit from the commissioner
of transportation covering access provisions and such additional
provisions as may be required to promote safety on the adjoining
highways.

**Source.** RSA 249:44. 1955, 135:1, par. I. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6,
I(b)(7).

### Section 236:50

 **236:50 Hearing. –** Said commissioner is authorized to conduct a
public hearing, if deemed that the public good requires, or the
individual requesting permit files written demand for same, to be held
before the commissioner or the assistant commissioner of transportation,
and the director of the division of motor vehicles of the department of
safety and the director of the division of state police of the
department of safety, or their authorized representatives, acting in an
advisory capacity to the commissioner or assistant commissioner of
transportation. Written notice of such hearing shall be given to the
applicant or applicants and the town authorities, and notice to the
public posted in a public place in the town where construction is
proposed, at least 2 weeks prior to date of hearing.

**Source.** RSA 249:45. 1955, 135:1, par. II. 1961, 166:3. 1981, 87:1.
1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).

### Section 236:51

 **236:51 Provisions of Permit. –** Said commissioner, with the
advice of the director of the division of motor vehicles of the
department of safety and director of the division of state police of the
department of safety, may issue a permit in each case containing such
requirements and provisions as will protect the safety of the traveling
public. He may provide that the screen of a drive-in theatre be so
placed as will prevent the view of the picture face of same from said
highways or provide that suitable screening be placed as will obstruct
said view if topography does not allow such placement. He may provide
that in any location where the free flow of traffic from the highway to
a drive-in theatre is prevented by the operation of ticket sellers,
parking attendants or in any other manner, there shall be provided an
adequate storage area for vehicles between the highway pavement and the
location of ticket booths, parking area, or other cause of traffic
stoppage and delay, to prevent backing up of vehicles on the highway
pavement. He may provide that traffic control devices or warning signals
be installed, meeting his approval, located within the establishment as
well as similar devices controlling the state highway. Application for
permit by the owner or owners shall be made at least 60 days before
proposed construction. A plot plan of proposed establishment shall be
included with the application for said permit.

**Source.** RSA 249:46. 1955, 135:1, par. III. 1961, 166:3. 1981, 87:1,
eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:52

 **236:52 Appeal. –** Any party aggrieved by the decision of the
commissioner may appeal said decision under procedure as provided by RSA
541.

**Source.** RSA 249:47. 1955, 135:1, par. IV. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20,
1981.

### Section 236:53

 **236:53 Penalty. –** Any person who violates any provision of this
subdivision or RSA 236:54 hereof or the requirements or provisions of
permits thereunder, shall be guilty of a violation if a natural person,
or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other person, and shall cease
operation of any offending establishment pending fulfillment of
requirements and special provisions.

**Source.** RSA 249:48. 1955, 135:1, par. VI. 1973, 530:30. 1981, 87:1,
eff. April 20, 1981.

Roadside Advertising
--------------------

### Section 236:54

 **236:54 Location. –** It shall be unlawful to erect any roadside
advertising within a distance of 400 feet of any highway intersection of
class I and II highways or railroad grade crossings thereon when said
advertising obstructs the view of said intersections and crossings,
rendering the approach to same by vehicular traffic hazardous.

**Source.** RSA 249:49. 1955, 135:1, par. V. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20,
1981.

Lights Along Highways
---------------------

### Section 236:55

 **236:55 Prohibition. –** It shall be unlawful to place any light
along a highway so positioned as to blind or dazzle the vision of
travelers on the adjacent highway. The commissioner of transportation
shall enforce provisions of this section for lights along class I, II or
III highways and the selectmen shall enforce the provisions hereof on
class IV, V and VI highways. Whenever a person shall violate the
provisions of this section he shall be given written notice to correct
the location of the light. If he does not so correct the location of the
light within a period of 30 days from the date of written notice to do
so, he shall be prosecuted for violation of the provisions hereof.
Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
violation if a natural person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other
person; and in either case shall cease all operation of such offending
light.

**Source.** RSA 249:50. 1957, 159:1. 1973, 530:31. 1981, 87:1. 1985,
402:6, I(b)(7).

Operation of Certain Vehicles
-----------------------------

### Section 236:56

 **236:56 Prohibition of Certain Vehicles Within Highway
Rights-of-Way. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall operate a motorbike, motorcycle, trail bike,
snowmobile, all terrain vehicle including 4-wheel drive vehicles or
other motorized 2 or 3 wheel trail type vehicle and track type vehicles
within or upon the rights-of-way adjacent to the traveled way of the
interstate highway system, toll roads, or limited access highways of
this state, except as authorized pursuant to RSA 215-A:9 and RSA
215-C:9.
                                             
 II. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorbike,
motorcycle, trail bike, snowmobile, all terrain vehicle, including
4-wheel drive vehicles or other motorized 2 or 3 wheeled trail type
vehicles and track type vehicles within or upon highway easements or
rights-of-way adjacent to the traveled way of any class I, class III, or
class III-a highway or state maintained portion of any class II highway
with the following exceptions:
                                             
 (a) Emergency. In the event of an emergency, a person may operate
one of the above motor vehicles in the right-of-way portion of such
public highways; provided, however, that a vehicle not registered for
highway use shall not be operated on the main traveled portion and paved
shoulders of said highway.
                                             
 (b) Adjacent to Public Highways. Solely by approvals granted
pursuant to RSA 215-A:3, VI and RSA 215-C:2, VII may OHRVs and
snowmobiles be operated within the right-of-way adjacent and parallel to
class I, II, and III public highways. This provision shall also apply to
the operation of such vehicles to the point where the same are unloaded,
from motorized conveyance to the area where the vehicle is to be
operated, or from the area where operated to a motorized conveyance when
such loading and unloading can not be effected in the immediate vicinity
of the area of operation without causing a hazard to vehicular traffic
approaching from either direction on said highway. Such loading or
unloading must be accomplished with due regard to safety at the nearest
possible point to the area of operation.
                                             
 (c) Crossing Highways. In crossing public highways, properly
registered motorbikes, motorcycles, trail bikes, snowmobiles, all
terrain vehicles, including 4-wheel drive vehicles or other motorized 2
or 3 wheeled trail type vehicles and track type vehicles may cross the
rights-of-way adjacent to the public highway as directly as possible,
preferably at right angles provided that such crossing can be made in
safety and does not interfere with the free movement of vehicular
traffic approaching from either direction on such public highways. It
shall be the responsibility of the operator of such vehicles to yield
the right-of-way to all vehicular traffic upon any such way before
crossing same.
                                             
 (d) Trail Connectors. All OHRVs and snowmobiles may be operated
within specified trail connectors and pursuant to the provisions of RSA
215-A:9 or RSA 215-C:9. The commissioner of the department of
transportation may limit the operation of specified types of OHRVs and
snowmobiles when the commissioner feels this is necessary in matters of
safety and maintenance of trail corridors or at the suggestion of the
chief supervisor of the bureau of trails. Trail connectors, as defined
in RSA 215-A:1, in Coos county and in Grafton county shall be exempt
from the provisions of RSA 215-A:42 and RSA 215-A:43.
                                             
 (e) Sidewalks. The operation of OHRVs and snowmobiles may be
allowed on sidewalks adjacent to class I, II, III, and III-a highways
upon the request of a town or city after consultation with the bureau of
trails and with the approval of the department of transportation.

**Source.** RSA 249:52. 1971, 157:1. 1981, 87:1. 1983, 449:23. 1989,
179:6, 7. 1992, 265:17. 1993, 53:12. 1996, 78:3. 2005, 210:37, eff. July
1, 2006. 2010, 253:1, eff. Sept. 4, 2010. 2012, 84:2, eff. May 23, 2012.
2016, 318:2, eff. June 24, 2016.

### Section 236:57

 **236:57 Penalty. –** Any person who violates the provisions of RSA
236:56 shall be guilty of a violation if a natural person, or guilty of
a misdemeanor if any other person; and, in addition, shall be liable for
the cost of restoration of damages to the easement or right-of-way.

**Source.** RSA 249:53. 1971, 157:1. 1973, 530:33. 1981, 87:1, eff.
April 20, 1981.

Camping Along Highways and on Public Property
---------------------------------------------

### Section 236:58

 **236:58 Camping Restricted. –** No person shall pitch a tent or
place or erect any other camping device or sleep on the ground within
the public right-of-way or on public property unless permission is
received from the governing board of the governmental authority having
jurisdiction over such public right-of-way or property.

**Source.** RSA 249:54. 1975, 335:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:59

 **236:59 Penalty. –** Any person who violates RSA 236:58 shall be
guilty of a violation if a natural person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if
any other person; and, in addition, shall be liable for the cost of
restoration for any damage caused to a highway easement or right-of-way.

**Source.** RSA 249:55. 1975, 335:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

Use of Highways By Travelers
----------------------------

### Section 236:60

 **236:60 Period of Lighting. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1982, 41:17, I, eff. May
28, 1982.
                                             ]

### Section 236:61

 **236:61 Penalty. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1982, 41:17, II, eff. May 28,
1982.
                                             ]

### Section 236:62

 **236:62 Party Responsible. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1982, 41:17, III, eff.
May 28, 1982.
                                             ]

### Section 236:63

 **236:63 Enforcement. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1982, 41:17, IV, eff. May 28,
1982.
                                             ]

Snow Fences
-----------

### Section 236:64

 **236:64 Erection by Department of Transportation. –** The
department of transportation may, after October 15, erect a fence upon
property adjacent to any class I, II or III highway in order to prevent
snow from drifting thereon. The view from the landowner's buildings
shall not be obstructed by such fence unless he consents, and the fence
shall be removed on or before May 1.

**Source.** 1927, 119:1, 2. RL 109:38. 1945, 188:1, part 10:13. 1951,
31:1. RSA 248:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(a)(7).

### Section 236:65

 **236:65 Damages. –** The landowner shall be entitled to damages
sustained by the erection, maintenance, and removal of such fence. If
the commissioner of transportation and the landowner are unable to agree
on such damages the commissioner of transportation shall assess the
damages sustained.

**Source.** 1927, 119:1. RL 109:39. 1945, 188:1, part 10:14. 1950, 5:1,
part 9:1, par. 2. RSA 248:2. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).

### Section 236:66

 **236:66 Appeal. –** The landowner may petition for the assessment
of damages to the superior court in the county in which such land is
situate within 60 days, and not thereafter, from his receipt of notice
of the assessment of damages, and the court shall assess such damages,
if any, by jury.

**Source.** 1945, 188:1, part 10:15. RSA 248:3. 1981, 87:1, eff. April
20, 1981.

### Section 236:67

 **236:67 Erection by City or Town. –** Any city or town may, after
October 15, erect a fence upon property adjacent to a public highway in
order to prevent snow from drifting thereon. The view from the
landowner's buildings shall not be obstructed by such fence unless he
consents, and the fence shall be removed on or before May 1.

**Source.** 1927, 119:1, 2. RL 109:38. 1945, 188:1, part 16:26. 1951,
31:2. RSA 248:4. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:68

 **236:68 Damages. –** The landowner shall be entitled to damages
occasioned by the erection, maintenance and removal of such fence.
Either party may apply to the selectmen or the city council for the
assessment of damages, and such proceedings shall be had as in the
assessment of damages for the laying out of highways by selectmen.

**Source.** 1927, 119:1. RL 109:39. 1945, 188:1, part 16:27. RSA 248:5.
1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

Outdoor Advertising
-------------------

### Section 236:69

 **236:69 Policy. –** It is hereby declared to be the policy of this
state and in the public interest to provide for maximum visibility along
the interstate system, federal aid primary system, and turnpike system,
and connecting roads or highways; to prevent unreasonable distraction of
operators or motor vehicles; to prevent confusion with regard to traffic
lights, signs or signals or other interference with the effectiveness of
traffic regulations; to promote maximum safety, comfort and well-being
of users of the interstate system, federal aid primary system, and
turnpike system; to preserve and enhance the natural scenic beauty or
the aesthetic features of the interstate system, federal aid primary
system, turnpike system and adjacent areas; to promote the reasonable,
orderly and effective display of advertising devices along such systems;
and to regulate advertising devices along such systems in a manner
consistent with customary use in this state. To implement this declared
policy and cooperate with the United States government in the
construction and maintenance of public highways in accordance with Title
23, United States Code as amended and supplemented, this subdivision
provides for the regulation of advertising devices on the interstate and
federal aid primary highway systems.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:1. 1961, 269:1. 1969, 429:1. 1971, 245:1. 1981,
87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:70

 **236:70 Definitions. –** As used in this subdivision:
                                             
 I. The words "advertising device'' shall include any billboard,
outdoor sign, notice, poster, display figure, painting, message, placard
or any other device which is designated or intended to attract or which
does attract the attention of operators of motor vehicles on the
interstate system, federal aid primary system, and turnpike system and
shall include a structure erected or used in connection with the display
of any such device and all lighting or other attachments used in
conjunction therewith.
                                             
 II. The words "on-premise signs'' shall mean advertising devices
which are to be erected and maintained on property for the following
purposes:
                                             
 (a) To set forth the name and address of the owner, lessee, or
occupant of such property;
                                             
 (b) To list information required by law to be posted or displayed
thereon;
                                             
 (c) To set forth the name of the business or profession conducted
on such property, or to identify the goods or services produced or sold
on such property;
                                             
 (d) To indicate the sale or leasing of the real property upon
which they are placed.
                                             
 III. The words "directional and informational signs'' shall mean
directional and informational signs in the specific interest of the
traveling public, or other official signs and signals erected or
maintained by state or other public agencies having jurisdiction,
provided the erection of such signs is not inconsistent with the
standards to be promulgated by the United States Secretary of
Transportation under section 131(f) of the Federal Highway
Beautification Act of 1965, or provided they are business directional
signs established as official signs to provide directional information
for eligible motorist-oriented privately owned businesses. For the
purposes hereof, informational signs are deemed to be in the specific
interest of the traveling public only if they contain information about
public places operated by federal, state or local governments, natural
phenomena, historic sites, areas of natural scenic beauty or naturally
suited for outdoor recreation, and places for camping. The commissioner
of transportation is vested with authority to determine whether
informational signs are in the specific interest of the traveling
public.
                                             
 IV. The words "interstate system'' shall mean all highways which are
a part of the national system of interstate and defense highways
described in subsection (e) of section 103 of Title 23, United States
Code, and such highways as may be so reclassified from time to time as
provided in subsection (f) of section 103 of Title 23, United States
Code.
                                             
 V. The words "federal aid primary system'' shall mean all highways
which are a part of the federal aid system described in subsection (b)
of section 103 of Title 23, United States Code, and such highways as may
be so reclassified from time to time as provided by subsection (f) of
section 103 of Title 23, United States Code that were in existence on
June 1, 1991, and any highway which was not on the system but was
included in the National Highway System as defined in section 1046(c) of
the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991.
                                             
 VI. "Commercial or industrial activities'' shall mean those
activities generally recognized as business, industrial or commercial by
zoning authorities in this state, except that none of the following
activities shall be considered commercial or industrial:
                                             
 (a) Outdoor advertising structures;
                                             
 (b) Agricultural, forestry, grazing, farming and related
activities, including but not limited to wayside fresh produce stands;
                                             
 (c) Transient or temporary activities;
                                             
 (d) Activities conducted in a building used principally as
residence;
                                             
 (e) Railroad tracks and minor sidings; and
                                             
 (f) Activities which are not visible from the main traveled way.
                                             
 VII. The words "zoned commercial or industrial areas'' shall mean
those areas zoned for business, industrial or commercial use pursuant to
a municipal zoning ordinance, regulation or bylaw.
                                             
 VIII. The words "unzoned commercial or industrial area'' shall mean
any area not zoned by any municipality in which, if an advertising
device is or might be located therein, such device is or would be so
located that there are at any time 2 or more separate businesses,
industrial or commercial activities of a permanent nature conducted no
greater than 1,000 feet apart; such 1,000 feet being measured between
points on the outer edge of the regularly used buildings, parking lots,
or storage or parking areas, provided, however, that no such advertising
device may be located more than 500 feet from the nearest such business,
industrial or commercial activity measuring from the point on the outer
edge of the regularly used buildings, parking lots, storage or
processing areas of such activity nearest to such device.
                                             
 IX. The word "erect'' shall mean to construct, build, raise,
assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw, or in any other way
bring into being or establish; but it shall not include any of the
foregoing activities when performed as an incident to a change of
advertising message or customary maintenance or replacement of the sign
structure.
                                             
 X. The word "maintain'' shall mean to allow to exist.
                                             
 XI. The words "federal highway adjacent area'' shall mean an area
which is adjacent to and within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the
right-of-way of any interstate or federal aid primary highway, which 660
foot distance shall be measured horizontally along a line normal or
perpendicular to the center line of the highway, or which is visible
from the main traveled way.
                                             
 XII. The words "political sign'' shall mean an advertising device
intended to promote the candidacy or election of any public official
which device is basically impermanent in nature.
                                             
 XIII. The words "turnpike system'' shall mean any portion of the
Spaulding turnpike or the F. E. Everett turnpike, as established by RSA
237, which are not defined as an interstate system or a federal aid
primary system in paragraphs IV and V of this section, or any other
turnpike which may be constructed or established in this state.
                                             
 XIV. The words "turnpike adjacent area'' shall mean an area which is
adjacent to and within 660 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way
of any turnpike system, as defined in paragraph XIII of this section,
which 660 foot distance shall be measured horizontally along a line
normal or perpendicular to the center line of the highway, or which is
visible from the main traveled way.
                                             
 XV. The words "primary or secondary highways and roads of and within
the state'' shall mean all highways and roads within the state whether
they be highways which are considered as being within the interstate
system, the federal aid primary system or roads or highways within the
federal highway adjacent area turnpike system or turnpike adjacent
area.
                                             
 XVI. "Federal aid secondary system'' means all highways which are a
part of the federal aid system described in subsection (c) of section
103 of Title 23, United States Code, and such highways as may be so
reclassified from time to time as provided in subsection (f) of section
103 of Title 23, United States Code.
                                             
 XVII. "Urban area'' means an area with a population of 5,000 or more
persons as delineated on the urban area boundary maps on file with the
department of transportation and as established by the commissioner of
the department of transportation and responsible local officials of the
state of New Hampshire, and which have been approved by the secretary of
the United States department of transportation or his designee.
                                             
 XVIII. The words "nonconforming sign'' shall mean any advertising
device which was lawful when erected and which complies with all
sections of this subdivision except RSA 236:73 or 74.
                                             
 XIX. The words "farm sign'' shall mean an advertising device
displaying information relating to the promotion, production or selling
of New Hampshire grown or locally processed agricultural products, which
is further differentiated from other advertising devices displaying
similar information by additional restriction in size, and lesser
restrictions in location and spacing.
                                             
 XX. The words "recreational and cultural interest area sign'' shall
mean a sign that meets the physical standards set by the federal
government in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices'' (MUTCD),
which shall be used as destination, directional, informational, or
supplemental guide signs. Recreational and cultural interest area signs
shall be available to alpine and nordic ski areas that are recognized by
the state in state-sponsored publications and shall be used on the
primary or secondary highways and roads of and within the state.
Recreational and cultural interest area signs shall be designed to
direct the traveling public to the recreational facility. The ski area
listed on the sign shall pay for all costs associated with signs
approved under this section.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:2. 1961, 269:1. 1969, 429:1. 1971, 245:1. 1973,
360:2. 1975, 21:1. 1977, 87:1. 1979, 242:2. 1981, 87:1; 476:2. 1985,
402:6, I(a)(7), (b)(7). 1987, 209:3-5. 1999, 288:3. 2003, 67:2, eff.
July 26, 2003.

### Section 236:71

 **236:71 Licenses. –** No person shall erect or maintain more than
10 advertising devices in federal highway or turnpike adjacent areas
other than such devices described in RSA 236:73, III, IV and V without
first obtaining a license from the commissioner of transportation. The
fee for such license shall be paid annually in advance. The fee for
persons erecting or maintaining 50 or more advertising devices shall be

                                             $150 and for persons erecting or maintaining less than 50 but more than
10 such devices, the fee shall be 
                                             $100. An application for a license or
renewal of a license shall contain the name and residence or principal
address of the applicant and such other reasonable information as the
commissioner may from time to time require and shall be accompanied by
the annual fee. Licenses granted under this section shall expire on
April 1 following the date of issue, and fees therefor shall not be
prorated. All applications for renewal of licenses shall be filed with
the commissioner on or prior to March 15 preceding their expiration.
Applications for a license or renewal of a license shall be granted
except as otherwise provided in RSA 236:78. All fees collected hereunder
shall be deposited in the highway fund.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:3. 1961, 269:1. 1963, 3:1. 1969, 429:1. 1971,
245:1. 1977, 563:45. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).

### Section 236:72

 **236:72 Permits. –** No advertising device other than such a device
described in RSA 236:73, III, IV and V shall be erected or maintained in
a federal highway or turnpike adjacent area without a permit issued by
the commissioner of transportation. Application for a permit or renewal
of a permit shall contain the name and residence or principal business
address of the applicant, the location of the device to be permitted and
its size, excluding border and trim, base or apron, supports and other
structural members, the number of faces carrying advertising, a signed
statement of the owner of the property upon which the device to be
permitted is or will be located that he has consented to such device,
the amount of rental compensation being paid to the said owner, and such
other reasonable information or requirements as the commissioner may
require. However, on an application for renewal of a permit the
commissioner may waive the requirement for furnishing a signed consent
statement from the owner of the property on which the device is located.
Permits shall expire on April 1 following the date of issue and fees
shall not be prorated. Applications for renewal of a permit shall be
filed prior to March 15 preceding expiration of the permit. Only one
permit shall be required for double face or v-type devices, but fees
shall be charged with respect to each face used for advertising.
Advertising copy may be changed at any time without requiring a new
permit. Applications for a permit or renewal of a permit shall be
granted except as provided in RSA 236:78, and each application shall be
accompanied by fees in accordance with the following schedule:
                                             
 I. For sign faces of 50 square feet or less, 
                                             $50.
                                             
 II. For sign faces of more than 50 square feet but less than 350
square feet, 
                                             $75.
                                             
 III. For sign faces of 350 square feet or more, 
                                             $100.
                                             
All fees collected hereunder shall be deposited in the highway fund.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:4. 1961, 269:1. 1969, 429:1. 1971, 245:1. 1977,
563:46. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7). 1990, 3:102, eff. Feb. 20,
1990.

### Section 236:72-a

 **236:72-a Business Directional Sign Permit Fee. –** For any new
official business directional signs authorized after July 14, 1987, and
beginning April 1, 1988, for all official business directional signs
authorized by the commissioner to serve privately owned businesses, an
annual permit fee of 
                                             $10 shall be collected by the commissioner.
Permits shall expire on April 1 following the date of issue or renewal
and fees shall not be pro-rated. All fees collected under this section
shall be deposited in the highway fund.

**Source.** 1987, 209:8, eff. July 14, 1987.

### Section 236:73

 **236:73 Restriction of Advertising. –** After January 1, 1970, no
advertising devices shall be erected or maintained within a federal
highway adjacent area and after January 1, 1972, no advertising devices
shall be erected or maintained within a turnpike adjacent area except
the following:
                                             
 I. Advertising devices located in a zoned area erected and
maintained without violation of RSA 236:71, 72 and 74 follows:
                                             
 (a) Adjacent to segments of the interstate system legally zoned
on September 21, 1959, as commercial or industrial, except that after
July 1, 1977, no such advertising devices shall be maintained outside
urban areas in locations beyond 660 feet from the highway right-of-way
and visible from the main traveled way.
                                             
 (b) Along the federal aid primary and turnpike systems in a zoned
commercial or industrial area, except that after July 1, 1977, no such
advertising devices shall be maintained outside urban areas in locations
beyond 660 feet from the highway right-of-way and visible from the main
traveled way.
                                             
 II. Advertising devices located along the federal aid primary or
turnpike systems in an unzoned commercial or industrial area and erected
and maintained without violation of RSA 236:71, 72 and 74 other than
such devices located in such an area determined by the commissioner of
transportation to be predominantly residential, except that after July
1, 1977, no such advertising devices shall be maintained outside urban
areas in locations beyond 660 feet from the highway right-of-way and
visible from the main traveled way.
                                             
 III. On premise signs which are to be erected and maintained on the
property for the purpose of setting forth:
                                             
 (a) The name and address of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the
property;
                                             
 (b) Information required by law to be posted or displayed on the
property;
                                             
 (c) The name of the business or profession conducted on the
property, or an identification of the goods or services produced or sold
on such property, provided, not more than one such sign, visible to
traffic proceeding in any one direction on any one interstate, federal
aid primary or turnpike highway and advertising activities being
conducted on the real property where the sign is located shall be
permitted more than 50 feet from the advertised activity; and
                                             
 (d) Advertising devices indicating the sale or leasing of the
real property upon which they are placed, provided, not more than one
such sign advertising the sale or lease of the same property shall be
permitted in such a manner as to be visible to traffic proceeding in any
one direction on any one interstate, federal aid primary or turnpike
highway.
                                             
 IV. Directional, informational or official signs:
                                             
 (a) Within the right-of-way as determined by the commissioner of
transportation to be in the specific interest of the traveling public
and which conform to national standards as promulgated by the Secretary
of Transportation; and
                                             
 (b) Off the right-of-way as may be permitted under rules adopted
by the commissioner of transportation. Such signs may include signs
directing the traveling public to privately owned resorts, hotels,
restaurants or other commercial establishments catering to the traveling
public where the commissioner of transportation determines that such a
sign is necessary to the continued operation of such commercial
establishment and that traffic safety is best served by providing such a
sign to the traveling public thereby avoiding confusion on the part of
the motorist. Any such directional sign shall be erected and maintained
by the commercial establishment involved under rules adopted by the
commissioner, and which conform to national standards as promulgated by
the Secretary of Transportation; or
                                             
 (c) Within the right-of-way or off the right-of-way of primary or
secondary highways and roads of and within the state, but not highways
on the interstate system or turnpike system, business directional signs
subject to specific approval and issuance of permit by the commissioner
of transportation, provided that any such business directional sign
shall be erected and maintained by the applicant under rules adopted by
the commissioner pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 V. Political signs which are placed within a federal highway or
turnpike adjacent area by supporters of the candidate shall be subject
to removal at any time by the department of transportation if such signs
create a traffic hazard; provided, the areas allowed shall be restricted
to federal aid primary and turnpike highways and not interstate
highways. The candidate shall cause such political signs to be removed
within the period specified for their removal in RSA 664:17.
                                             
 V-a. Farm signs located in federal highway adjacent areas except
interstate highway adjacent areas, provided that such signs shall be
maintained without violation of RSA 236:71, 72, and 74, and further
provided that such signs may be erected and maintained only by farms
actively engaged in the production, processing, or selling of New
Hampshire grown agricultural products.
                                             
 VI. No sign which is to be permitted under paragraphs II, IV and V
of this section may be permitted to be erected or maintained, in any
manner inconsistent with standards, criteria, and rules and regulations
to be promulgated by the commissioner of transportation that are
necessary in order to meet the requirements of section 131 of Title 23,
United States Code. No advertising device, notwithstanding any other
provision of this subdivision, will be permitted which does not conform
to the national standards found in chapter 1, part 20 of Title 23, Code
of Federal Regulations.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:5. 1961, 269:1. 1963, 3:2. 1969, 429:1. 1971,
245:1. 1975, 448:2. 1977, 87:2. 1981, 87:1; 476:3. 1985, 402:6, I(a)(7),
(b)(7). 1987, 209:9, eff. July 14, 1987.

### Section 236:73-a

 **236:73-a "RV Friendly'' Markers. –**
                                             
 I. Subject to the prior approval of the Federal Highway
Administration, the department of transportation shall incorporate the
use of "RV friendly'' markers on specific business directional signs for
business establishments that cater to the needs of persons driving
recreational vehicles. A business establishment that qualifies for a
business directional sign and that also qualifies as "RV friendly'' may
request that an "RV friendly'' marker be displayed immediately adjacent
to such establishment's business logo sign on the appropriate background
sign panel. The business applicant shall pay all costs of the "RV
friendly'' marker. For purposes of this section, the "RV friendly''
marker to be displayed shall be such marker as may be approved by the
Federal Highway Administration in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
                                             
 II. In accordance with the provisions of RSA 21-L:12, and subject to
the approval of the Federal Highway Administration, the department shall
adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, necessary to implement the
provisions of this section, including rules setting forth the minimum
requirements for business establishments to qualify as "RV friendly.''
Such requirements shall include, but shall not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) Roadways shall be hard surface, such as gravel, compacted
stone dust, pavement, or other firm surface, and at least 12 feet wide
with a minimum swing radius of 50 feet for entering and exiting the
facility.
                                             
 (b) Roadway access and parking facilities shall be free of any
obstructions up to 14 feet above the surface.
                                             
 (c) Facilities requiring short-term parking shall have 2 or more
spaces that are 12 feet wide and 65 feet long with a swing radius of 50
feet to enter and exit the spaces.
                                             
 (d) Fueling facilities with canopies shall have a 14-foot
clearance and facilities selling diesel fuel shall have pumps with
non-commercial nozzles.
                                             
 (e) Fueling facilities shall allow for pull-through with a swing
radius of 50 feet.
                                             
 (f) Campgrounds shall have 2 or more spaces that are 18 feet wide
and 45 feet long.

**Source.** 2007, 87:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 236:73-b

 **236:73-b Liquor Stores. –** The department of transportation shall
design, locate, and erect along state highways suitable signs to
advertise nearby state liquor stores.

**Source.** 2009, 144:152, eff. July 1, 2009.

### Section 236:74

 **236:74 Regulation of Erection and Maintenance of Certain
Advertising Devices. –** Subject to the provisions of RSA 236:71, 72 and
73 and except as otherwise provided in RSA 236:77, after January 1,
1970, erection and maintenance of advertising devices located in federal
highway adjacent areas and after January 1, 1972, erection and
maintenance of advertising devices located in turnpike adjacent areas,
other than such devices permitted under RSA 236:73, III, IV and V shall
be governed by the following provisions:
                                             
 I. General. With respect to advertising devices located in federal
highway or turnpike adjacent areas:
                                             
 (a) No device may be erected or maintained that is inconsistent
with the following:
                                             
 (1) No sign may be permitted which attempts or appears to
attempt to direct the movement of traffic or which interferes with,
imitates or resembles any official traffic sign, signal or device.
                                             
 (2) No sign may be permitted which prevents the driver of a
vehicle from having a clear and unobstructed view of official signs and
approaching or merging traffic.
                                             
 (3) No lighting may be permitted to be used in any way in
connection with any sign unless it is so effectively shielded as to
prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the
main traveled way of the interstate, federal aid primary or turnpike
highways, or is of such low intensity or brilliance as not to cause
glare or not to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle, or
does not otherwise interfere with any driver's operation of a motor
vehicle.
                                             
 (4) No sign may be permitted to be erected or maintained upon
trees, or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features, or upon
utility poles.
                                             
 (5) No sign may be permitted which is obsolete, not clean and
in good repair, or that is not securely affixed to a substantial
structure.
                                             
 (6) No advertising device which is not in conformance with
state law shall be permitted to be re-erected if destroyed or abandoned.
An exception may be granted by the commissioner for advertising devices
destroyed due to acts of vandalism or other criminal or tortious acts.
                                             
 (b) An advertising device shall not be maintained without the
attachment thereto of a weatherproof label, which label shall be
provided by the commissioner of transportation, and shall contain the
number of the permit.
                                             
 (c) An advertising device shall not be maintained unless the name
of the permittee appears legibly thereon. Whether a name appears legibly
shall be determined by the commissioner of transportation in accordance
with such standards as he may from time to time prescribe.
                                             
 II. Size. With respect to advertising devices located in federal
highway or turnpike adjacent areas or in view of any interstate, federal
aid primary or turnpike highway:
                                             
 (a) Advertising devices may be erected with, but only with, an
area not exceeding 750 square feet and with a maximum height of 20 feet
and a maximum length of 50 feet, excluding border and trim, base or
apron, supports and other structural members; provided that the
commissioner shall permit the maintenance of devices of larger size if
lawfully erected prior to January 1, 1970 and otherwise permitted by the
provisions of this subdivision.
                                             
 (b) The maximum size limitations shall apply to each facing. Two
advertising devices not exceeding 350 square feet each may be erected in
a facing.
                                             
 (c) Farm signs maintained under RSA 236:73, V-a may be erected
with an area not exceeding 48 square feet and with a maximum height of 8
feet and maximum length of 12 feet, excluding border and trim, base or
apron, supports, and other structural members; provided that the maximum
size limitation shall apply to each facing. Two farm signs not exceeding
24 square feet each may be erected in a facing.
                                             
 III. Lighting. Advertising devices located in federal highway or
turnpike adjacent areas may be lighted, subject only to such restriction
with respect to devices to be erected as may from time to time be
prescribed by the commissioner.
                                             
 IV. Location. With respect to advertising devices located in federal
highway or turnpike adjacent areas:
                                             
 (a) Advertising devices shall not be erected or maintained in
such a manner as to obscure or otherwise physically interfere with an
official traffic sign, signal or device or to obstruct or physically
interfere with the driver's view of approaching, merging, or
intersecting traffic, as determined by the commissioner.
                                             
 (b) Required spacing for advertising devices to be erected or
maintained on one side of an interstate, turnpike or limited access
federal aid primary highway shall be not less than 500 feet provided,
however, that such spacing shall not apply to devices which are
separated by a building or other obstruction in such manner that only
one such device is visible from such highway at any one time.
                                             
 (c) No advertising device may be erected with respect to an
interstate, limited access federal aid primary, or turnpike highway
within 500 feet of an interchange or safety rest area located on the
same side of the highway on which such sign might otherwise be erected.
For purposes of RSA 236:74, IV(c) such distance of 500 feet shall be
measured along the edge of the main traveled way of any such highway
from the point of beginning or ending of pavement widening with respect
to an exit from, or an entrance to, such main traveled way, to or from
an interchange or a safety rest area, provided, however, that with
respect to an interchange which consists of an entrance or an exit only,
such distance shall be measured from the center line of the highway
intersected by any such highway in the direction from such interchange
in which there is no entrance or exit, as the case may be.
                                             
 (d) Required spacing for advertising devices to be erected or
maintained on one side of a nonlimited access federal aid primary
highway in municipalities of 4,000 population or more shall be:
                                             
 (1) One hundred feet where the distance between center lines
of 2 highways intersecting any such highway is less than 1,000 feet
provided that not more than 3 devices shall be erected or maintained
between such intersecting highways; and
                                             
 (2) Three hundred feet where the distance between center lines
of intersecting highways is 1,000 feet or more.
                                             
 (e) Required spacing for advertising devices to be erected or
maintained on both sides of a nonlimited access federal aid primary
highway in municipalities of less than 4,000 population shall be 300
feet.
                                             
 (f) In this paragraph, the following shall apply: Back-to-back
advertising devices, devices erected on a v-type structure, and 2
devices erected in a single facing shall be considered one advertising
device. The word "highways'' or the words "intersecting highways'' shall
not include alleys, undeveloped rights-of-way, private ways or
driveways. Distances from advertising devices which are erected or
maintained or are able to be erected, or distances to such devices,
shall be measured along the edge (nearest to any such devices or any
locations in which such devices are able to be erected) of the main
traveled way of an interstate, federal aid primary or turnpike highway
from or to points on such edge directly opposite such devices or
locations. Advertising devices permitted under RSA 236:73, III, IV, and
V shall not be considered advertising devices for purposes of any
measurement or determination made under this paragraph, or for purposes
of any other requirements of this paragraph. Advertising devices
permitted under RSA 236:73, V-a shall not be considered advertising
devices for purposes of any measurement or determination made under
subparagraph (b), (d), or (e), but for such advertising devices to be
erected or maintained on both sides of a federal aid primary highway,
the required spacing shall be 1,000 feet.
                                             
 (g) Farm signs to be erected or maintained under RSA 236:73, V-a
shall be located not farther than 10 miles from the property where the
advertised activities are located.
                                             
 V. Height. With respect to advertising devices located adjacent to
any interstate, federal aid primary, or turnpike highway, no advertising
device shall exceed a height of 50 feet from the base of the structure.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:6. 1961, 269:1. 1969, 429:1. 1971, 245:1. 1981,
87:1; 476:4, 5. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7). 2000, 109:1, 2, eff. July 7, 2000.

### Section 236:75

 **236:75 No Advertisements of Any Kind Upon Certain Objects. –**
Notwithstanding any provisions of the law to the contrary, it shall be
unlawful to affix, attach or display any advertisement upon any object
of nature, utility pole, telephone booth, or highway sign, directly in
such a manner that the object of nature, utility pole, telephone booth,
or highway sign, is utilized as an integral part of the sign's support
as distinguished from being only incidentally a support to the sign,
such as the earth or ground upon which a sign is affixed. This
prohibition shall extend to all primary and secondary highways and roads
of and within the state without exception for any type of advertising.
The owner of an object upon which an advertisement is placed in
violation of this section shall be entitled to remove and destroy the
advertisement and the advertisement owner shall not be entitled to
damages or compensation therefor. The object owner shall be entitled to
collect the costs associated with the removal and destruction from the
advertisement owner or the person who is responsible for placing the
advertisement on the object in violation of this section.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:6-a. 1973, 360:3. 1981, 87:1. 2003, 136:1, eff.
Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 236:76

 **236:76 Highways in Juxtaposition. –** Nothing herein shall prevent
an owner of land from using, or permitting the use of, his land for
outdoor advertising purposes where said owner's land abuts a highway
parallel to, or nearly parallel to and less than 660 feet from the edge
of right-of-way of an interstate, federal aid primary or turnpike
highway provided that the advertising or informative contents of
advertising devices erected and maintained on said land shall not be
visible from the main traveled way of an interstate, federal aid primary
or turnpike highway.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:7. 1961, 269:1. 1969, 429:1. 1971, 245:1. 1981,
87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:77

 **236:77 Nonconforming Signs Lawfully Erected. –** At any time
following the end of the fifth year after a sign becomes nonconforming
the commissioner of transportation may, by registered or certified mail,
revoke the permit and order the removal of such nonconforming sign,
which order shall be final on the date of mailing. Until the end of said
5-year period no nonconforming sign may be ordered to be removed unless
it violates RSA 236:74, I(a), (b) or (c). In no event, however, may a
nonconforming sign be ordered removed from a federal highway adjacent
area if its removal would require just compensation to be paid pursuant
to RSA 236:80 and the federal share of just compensation to be paid
under section 131 of Title 23, United States Code, is not available to
make such payment.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:8. 1961, 269:1. 1969, 429:1. 1971, 245:1. 1979,
242:3. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).

### Section 236:78

 **236:78 Denial or Revocation of License or Permit; Nuisances;
Orders for Removal. –**
                                             
 I. A license under this subdivision may be denied or revoked, or a
renewal denied, only: (a) for false or misleading information given in
the application for such license or renewal or (b) for the erection or
maintenance of advertising devices in violation of the provisions of
this subdivision or rules and regulations of the commissioner of
transportation adopted pursuant to this subdivision. A permit under this
subdivision may be denied or revoked, or a renewal denied only: (a)
pursuant to RSA 236:77 or (b) for failure to obtain or have a license,
or (c) for false or misleading information given in the application for
such permit or renewal, or (d) for the erection or maintenance of the
advertising device permitted or to be permitted in violation of the
provisions of this subdivision or rules and regulations adopted by the
commissioner of transportation. The department shall notify an
applicant, licensee, or permittee of a denial, nonrenewal, or revocation
30 days prior to taking final action. The applicant, licensee, or
permittee may, within that 30 days, correct such information or
violation, in which case the application, license, or permit shall be
renewed or shall not be denied or revoked. The applicant, licensee, or
permittee may also appeal the decision or action to the commissioner or
designee within the 30-day period after such notice. Denial, revocation,
and nonrenewal shall become final 30 days after such notice unless an
appeal is filed. Hearings on denials, revocations, or nonrenewals shall
be held in accordance with RSA 541-A. If a revocation of a license or
permit or a determination that there should be a denial of a license or
permit, or renewal thereof, is made after such a hearing the licensee or
permittee, or applicant for such license or permit, or renewal thereof,
shall have a right to a rehearing and a right of appeal as provided in
RSA 541.
                                             
 II. Any advertising device, other than a nonconforming sign or any
other advertising device maintained under permit, which is erected or
maintained in violation of this subdivision or the rules and regulations
of the commissioner of transportation adopted pursuant hereto shall be
deemed a nuisance. A determination that an advertising device is a
nuisance and an order for its removal shall be made by the commissioner
only after a hearing upon 30 days' notice in writing to the owner of
such device, provided, however, that such a determination and order for
removal may be made without a hearing and without notice where a permit
for such a device has been revoked or denied or renewal of such permit
has been denied. If the commissioner cannot reasonably ascertain the
name and address of the owner of the device, notice may be given by 3
publications of notice in a newspaper in the county where the device is
located once in each week for 3 successive weeks, the last publication
to be at least 30 days prior to such hearing. The owner of the device
may within such 30 days correct any violation of the provisions of this
subdivision or the rules and regulations of the commissioner adopted
pursuant hereto, and in such case the device shall not be required to be
removed and no hearing will be held. Application for a license or permit
within such 30 days shall be deemed a correction of any failure to
obtain such a license or permit. If a determination that an advertising
device is a nuisance is made after such a hearing, the owner of such
device shall have a right to a rehearing and a right of appeal as
provided in RSA 541. Notwithstanding any provisions of RSA 541, no
advertising device shall be required to be removed prior to a final
determination that the license or permit should be denied or revoked or
renewal thereof denied or that such device is a nuisance.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:9. 1961, 269:1. 1969, 429:1. 1971, 245:1. 1979,
242:4. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7). 1997, 34:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 236:79

 **236:79 Removal. –** After an order for removal has become final,
the owner of the advertising device may remove it at his own expense. If
such device has not been removed within 30 days after such an order has
become final, the commissioner of transportation, or his duly authorized
agents, may enter upon the property where it is located and remove it
without incurring any liability by reason of such entry and at the
expense of such owner.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:10. 1961, 269:1. 1969, 429:1. 1971, 245:1. 1981,
87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).

### Section 236:80

 **236:80 Just Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. Just compensation shall be paid to the owner of the advertising
device and to the owner of the land upon which it is located upon the
removal, on or after January 1, 1970, of any such device required to be
removed by reason of nonconformity with the provisions of this
subdivision which is lawfully existing on January 1, 1970 or lawfully
erected thereafter, provided no compensation shall be paid to the owner
of any advertising device or to the owner of the land on which it is
located if the reason for removal was failure to obtain a license or
permit pursuant to RSA 236:71 and 72.
                                             
 II. Each such removal, whether by the owner of the advertising
device, by the commissioner of transportation, or otherwise, shall be
deemed to constitute a taking by the state of the following:
                                             
 (a) From the owner of such device, all right, title and interest
in and to such device, and his leasehold related thereto.
                                             
 (b) From the owner of the real property on which such device is
located, the right to erect and maintain such device.
                                             
 III. The foregoing right to compensation of the owner of land shall
be in lieu of any right to receive or retain rental from the owner of
such device for the sign location for the period after removal of such
device, and such right to receive or retain rental shall terminate upon
such removal.
                                             
 IV. Such compensation shall be paid to the person or persons
entitled thereto upon presentation to the commissioner of such
information as he may reasonably require, provided that the claim for
compensation is filed within 90 days after removal is completed.
                                             
 V. If the commissioner and a claimant do not reach agreement on the
amount of compensation payable to such claimant in respect to any
removal within 120 days after the filing of such claim, the claimant may
institute an action to have such compensation determined as an
assessment of damages suffered by the claimant as of the date of the
removal. Such an action shall be instituted by filing a petition for
assessment of damages in the superior court, in the county wherein the
advertising device and land are located, or wherein the claimant resides
or has its principal place of business in this state. The petition shall
be filed no later than one year after the filing with the commissioner
of such compensation claim. The court shall assess the damages by jury,
or by the court without the jury, and award interest from the date as of
which damages are assessed, and costs, to the claimant.
                                             
 VI. If funds become available, the commissioner of transportation is
authorized to negotiate the removal of advertising devices prior to the
end of the 5-year period and is authorized to pay just compensation.
                                             
 VII. The provisions of RSA 498-A relative to eminent domain
procedures shall not apply to this subdivision.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:11. 1961, 269:1. 1969, 429:1. 1971, 245:1. 1973,
231:1, 2. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).

### Section 236:81

 **236:81 Penalty. –** Whoever erects or maintains an advertising
device in violation of the provisions hereof and required to be removed
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a
felony if any other person.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:12. 1961, 269:1. 1969, 429:1. 1971, 245:1. 1973,
529:43. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:81-a

 **236:81-a Injunctive Relief. –** In addition to any other remedy
provided by this subdivision or by law, the commissioner of the
department of transportation may obtain a mandatory injunction to enjoin
the violation of any provision of this subdivision relative to outdoor
advertising control.

**Source.** 1988, 245:10, eff. June 29, 1988.

### Section 236:82

 **236:82 Acceptance of Federal Funds. –** The commissioner of
transportation may accept any allotment of funds by the United States,
or any department or agency thereof, for the foregoing purposes.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:13. 1969, 429:1. 1971, 245:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985,
402:6, I(b)(7).

### Section 236:83

 **236:83 Agreement With United States Secretary of Transportation
Relating to the Erection of Advertising Devices. –** The commissioner of
transportation may enter into agreements with the Secretary of
Transportation or appropriate federal official of the United States as
provided by section 131 of Title 23, United States Code, provided that
any such agreement shall be consistent with, and not more restrictive
than, the provisions of this subdivision, except that the
reclassification of the federal aid systems from time to time shall not
be considered more restrictive than the provisions of this subdivision,
and except that the agreement executed by the former commissioner of
public works and highways and the federal highway administrator on June
14, 1963, under the provisions of this subdivision is hereby reaffirmed
so that the commissioner of transportation may maintain the control
required to receive and to continue to receive bonus payments from the
federal government with respect to the control of outdoor advertising on
the interstate system. Any expenditures of money by the commissioner in
connection with agreements authorized by the section shall be payable
from any funds available to the commissioner.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:14. 1969, 429:1. 1971, 245:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985,
402:6, I(b)(7). 1987, 209:6, eff. July 14, 1987.

### Section 236:84

 **236:84 Rulemaking. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of transportation may adopt rules under RSA
541-A which are reasonable and consistent with, but not more restrictive
than, the provisions of this subdivision relative to:
                                             
 (a) Informational and directional signs; provided that the
commissioner shall adopt rules relative to signs for churches.
                                             
 (b) Applications for sign licenses.
                                             
 (c) Applications for sign permits.
                                             
 (d) Procedures relative to signs placed in accordance with RSA
236:88-a.
                                             
 (e) Any other matters required in administering this
subdivision.
                                             
 II. The reclassification of a highway to or from the interstate,
federal aid primary, or federal aid secondary system, or the designation
of a highway to or from the turnpike system, shall not constitute the
adoption of a rule under this section.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:15. 1969, 429:1. 1971, 245:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985,
402:6, I(b)(7). 1987, 209:7. 2000, 65:1. 2001, 200:1, eff. Sept. 3,
2001.

### Section 236:85

 **236:85 Separability. –** If any provisions of this subdivision or
the application of such provisions to any person or circumstances shall
be held invalid, the validity of the remainder of this subdivision and
applicability of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall
not be affected thereby.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:16. 1969, 429:1. 1971, 245:1. 1981, 87:1, eff.
April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:86

 **236:86 Information Sites. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of transportation shall, in consultation with
the Secretary of Transportation or appropriate federal official of the
United States as provided by subsection (f) of section 131 of Title 23,
United States Code, provide within the rights-of-way for areas at
appropriate distances from interchanges on the interstate system, on
which signs, displays and devices giving specific information in the
interest of the traveling public may be erected and maintained. Such
signs shall conform to national standards.
                                             
 II. The development of a cooperative information service at any rest
area is authorized, subject to approval of the Secretary of
Transportation or appropriate federal official, where applicable, in
accordance with subsection (i) of section 131, of Title 23, United
States Code. Such service shall be coordinated and controlled through
the division of travel and tourism development, department of resources
and economic development, with the cooperation of the department of
transportation, and these agencies shall have the responsibility of
training any personnel which may be hired. Expanded information services
may include, but not necessarily be limited to, sign plazas, racks of
advertising brochures, computers, and equipment deemed by the division
of travel and tourism development as necessary for the distribution of
tourist-related information to the traveling public.
                                             
 III. The fees collected pursuant to RSA 230:52, II shall be
deposited in a special account for the division of travel and tourism
development to be expended to create and maintain the cooperative
information services, and for this purpose are hereby continually
appropriated.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs II and III, the
division of travel and tourism development may utilize funds from the
sale of posters, advertising, and promotional materials to purchase
additional materials for resale. Any profit accruing from these sales
shall be deposited to unrestricted general fund revenue.
                                             
 V. Individual businesses and organizations may assist in development
of an information service plan, with final approval given by and design
designated by the division of travel and tourism development, and
subject to approval of the Secretary of Transportation or appropriate
federal official, where applicable, in accordance with subsection (i) of
section 131, of Title 23, United States Code.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:17. 1969, 429:1. 1971, 245:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985,
402:6, I(b)(7). 1987, 209:2. 1999, 250:2, eff. July 9, 1999; 317:12,
eff. July 1, 1999.

### Section 236:87

 **236:87 School Bus Shelters. –** School bus shelters for school
children where used for or constructed to carry advertising matter, when
approved by the superintending school committee of the town in which
they are located, and upon payment of applicable license and permit fees
may be placed or maintained outside the right-of-way and carry not more
than 2 panels each thereon for the identification of sponsors. No such
panel shall exceed 32 square feet or extend beyond the sides of such
shelter and at least 60 percent of its area must be devoted to public
service, safety or other noncommercial use. Each such shelter shall, to
the satisfaction of the superintending school committee, be constructed
of durable material, with concrete floor raised above ground level, kept
clean, well painted or otherwise suitably maintained at all times and
kept free from snow, or the commissioner may order its removal.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:18. 1971, 245:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:88

 **236:88 Advertising Devices Within Highway Rights-of-Way. –**
Except as provided in RSA 236:88-a, any advertising device so located as
to be within the right-of-way of any interstate, federal aid primary,
federal aid secondary, or turnpike highway shall be deemed to be
illegally located. Removal and disposal of said device shall be effected
after 10 days' written notice to the owner of said device, provided the
identity and mailing address of the owner are displayed on the device,
by the department of transportation.

**Source.** RSA 249-A:19. 1971, 245:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(a)(7).
2001, 200:2, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 236:88-a

 **236:88-a Location/Direction Signs for Businesses Within Highway
Rights-of-Way. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding RSA 236:88 or any other provision of law to the
contrary, a business owner whose property abuts upon and has legal
driveway access to the right-of-way of any class I, class II, or class
III highway may, upon obtaining the approval of the department, place a
sign within the adjacent right-of-way of his or her business being
conducted at that location. The placement of such sign shall be in
accordance with the Roadside Design Guide published by the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
                                             
 II. Any such sign shall comply with all local municipal rules,
regulations, and other requirements.
                                             
 III. Any such sign shall:
                                             
 (a) Not impose a danger to the traveling public.
                                             
 (b) Not unreasonably interfere with the maintenance of the state
right-of-way.
                                             
 (c) Be permanently affixed to the ground.
                                             
 (d) Meet reasonable size, style, and lighting standards
consistent with the state of development and commercial activity in the
area.
                                             
 (e) Be removed if the business activity is no longer conducted at
that location.
                                             
 IV. The cost of construction, installation, maintenance, disposal,
moving, and removing of such sign shall be at the expense of the
business owner.
                                             
 V. A sign placed in accordance with this section shall not be
construed to give its owner any property or other rights in its
location, and if the state changes or widens the highway, or redesigns
its maintenance practices, the business owner shall move or remove the
sign, as the department may determine necessary.
                                             
 VI. The department shall be authorized to remove any sign if it
determines that the provisions of this section have not been met;
provided that 30 days' notice shall be given to the owner of the sign
unless the sign constitutes a safety hazard.
                                             
 VII. Notwithstanding any law or rule to the contrary, a municipality
may place a sign within the right-of-way of any class I, class II, or
class III highway if such sign meets the requirements of this section
and with the approval of the department of transportation and the
governing body of the municipality.
                                             
 VIII. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to the administration of this section.

**Source.** 2001, 200:3, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 236:89

 **236:89 Restrictions of Advertising on the Federal Aid Secondary
System. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 476:1, eff. Jan. 30, 1984.
                                             ]

Control of Junk Yards and Automotive Recycling Yards
----------------------------------------------------

### Section 236:90

 **236:90 Policy. –** It is hereby declared to be the policy of this
state and in the public interest to provide for effective control of the
establishment, use, and maintenance of junk yards adjacent to the
interstate and turnpike systems in order to protect the public
investment in such highways, to promote the safety and recreational
value of public travel, and to preserve natural beauty.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:1. 1967, 252:1. 1971, 81:1. 1981, 87:1. 2008,
164:1, eff. Aug. 5, 2008.

### Section 236:91

 **236:91 Definitions. –** For the purpose of this subdivision, the
following words and phrases shall be construed as follows:
                                             
 I. "Effective control'' means that by January 1, 1968, all junk
yards located within 1,000 feet from the nearest edge of the
right-of-way or visible from the main traveled way of the interstate and
turnpike systems shall be screened by natural objects, plantings,
fences, or other appropriate means so as not to be visible from the main
traveled way of the system, or shall be removed from sight.
                                             
 II. "Junk'' means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries,
paper, trash, rubber debris, waste, or junked, dismantled, or wrecked
automobiles, or parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap
ferrous or nonferrous material.
                                             
 III. "Automobile graveyard'' means any establishment or place of
business which is maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping,
buying, or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor
vehicles or motor vehicle parts.
                                             
 IV. "Junk yard'' or "automotive recycling yard'' means an
establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated, or
used for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk, or for the
maintenance or operation of an automotive recycling yard, and includes
garbage dumps and sanitary fills. The word does not include any motor
vehicle dealers registered with the director of motor vehicles under RSA
261:104 and controlled under RSA 236:126.
                                             
 V. The words "interstate system'' shall mean any highways which are
a part of the national system of interstate and defense highways
described in subsection (d) of section 103 of Title 23, United States
Code.
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VII. The words "turnpike system'' shall mean all highways within
this state which are a part of the Spaulding and the Central New
Hampshire Turnpike established by RSA 237, and which are not defined as
interstate system in paragraph V of this section.
                                             
 VIII. The words "zoned industrial area'' shall mean those areas
zoned for industrial use pursuant to a municipal zoning ordinance,
regulation or bylaw.
                                             
 IX. The words "industrial activity'' shall mean those activities
generally recognized as heavy industrial by zoning authorities in the
state. Except that none of the following shall be considered industrial
activities:
                                             
 (a) Outdoor advertising structures;
                                             
 (b) Agricultural, forestry, ranching, grazing, farming and
related activities, including, but not limited to wayside fresh produce
stands;
                                             
 (c) Activities normally and regularly in operation less than 3
months of the year;
                                             
 (d) Transient or temporary activities;
                                             
 (e) Activities not visible from the traffic lanes of the main
traveled way;
                                             
 (f) Activities more than 300 feet from the nearest edge of the
main traveled way;
                                             
 (g) Activities conducted in a building principally used as a
residence;
                                             
 (h) Railroad tracks, minor sidings and passenger depots;
                                             
 (i) Junk yards, as defined in section 136, Title 23, United
States Code.
                                             
 X. The words "unzoned industrial area'' shall mean the land occupied
by the regularly used building, parking lot, storage or processing area
of an industrial activity, and that land within 500 feet thereof which
is:
                                             
 (a) Located on the same side of the highway as the principal part
of said activity, and
                                             
 (b) Not used for residential or commercial purposes, and
                                             
 (c) Not zoned by state or local law, regulation or ordinance.

**Source.** 1939, 50:1, 2. RL 165:22, 23. RSA 249-B:2; 267:1(a), 2.
1955, 275:1, pars. 22, 23. 1967, 252:1. 1971, 81:2, 3. 1981, 87:1;
146:5, XII; 146:7, III. 1992, 88:2. 2008, 164:2, 3, 8, eff. Aug. 5,
2008.

### Section 236:92

 **236:92 Rules and Regulations. –** The commissioner of
transportation is authorized to issue reasonable rules and regulations
to provide for effective control of junk yards and automotive recycling
yards in conformance with rules and regulations issued by an appropriate
department or agency of the United States and pursuant to the declared
policy of the state as set forth in RSA 236:90. Such rules and
regulations shall include a regulation that where 2 or more
unregistered, or old motor vehicles, no longer intended or in condition
for legal use on the highways, or used parts or materials from motor
vehicles which, taken together, include in bulk 2 or more vehicles are
held on the property of a person or persons not operating an
establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated, or
used for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk, or for the
maintenance or operation of an automotive recycling yard in violation of
RSA 236:111-129 the commissioner shall enforce the provisions of RSA
236:111-129.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:3. 1967, 252:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).
1992, 88:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 236:93

 **236:93 Requirements for Operation or Maintenance. –** A person
shall not operate, establish or maintain a junk yard or automotive
recycling yard under the provisions of this subdivision until he (1) has
obtained a license to operate a junk yard or automotive recycling yard
business and (2) has obtained a certificate of approval for the location
of the junk yard or automotive recycling yard. Application for the
license and the certificate of approved location shall be made in
writing to the commissioner of transportation or his agent. The
application must contain a description of the land to be included within
the junk yard or automotive recycling yard, by reference to so-called
permanent boundary markers.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:4. 1967, 252:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).
1992, 88:4, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 236:94

 **236:94 Hearing. –** A hearing on the application shall be held
within the municipality. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the
applicant by mail, postage prepaid, to the address given in the
application and the notice shall be published once in a newspaper having
a circulation within the municipality, which publication shall be not
less than 7 days before the date of the hearing.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:5. 1967, 252:1. 1981, 87:1. 2008, 164:4, eff. Aug.
5, 2008.

### Section 236:95

 **236:95 License Requirements. –** At the time and place set for
hearing, the commissioner of transportation or his agent shall hear the
applicant and all other persons wishing to be heard on the application
for a license to operate, establish, or maintain the junk yard or
automotive recycling yard. In passing upon the application, he shall
take into account the suitability of the applicant with reference to his
ability to comply with the fencing requirements or other reasonable
regulations concerning the proposed junk yard or automotive recycling
yard, and to any other matter within the purposes of the subdivision.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:6. 1967, 252:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).
1992, 88:5, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 236:96

 **236:96 Location Requirements. –** At the time and place set for
hearing, the commissioner of transportation or his or her agent shall
hear the applicant and all other persons wishing to be heard on the
application for certificate of approval for the location of the junk
yard or automotive recycling yard. In passing upon the application,
after proof of legal ownership or right to the use of the property by
the applicant for the license period, he or she shall take into account
the nature and development of surrounding property, such as the
proximity of churches, schools, hospitals, public buildings or other
places of public gathering; and whether or not the use of the proposed
location can be reasonably prevented from affecting the public health,
safety, or morals by reason of offensive or unhealthy odors or smoke, or
of other causes. In no case may a license be granted for a new junk yard
or automotive recycling yard located less than 1,000 feet from the
nearest edge of the right-of-way lines and visible from the main
traveled way of the interstate system.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:7. 1967, 252:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).
1992, 88:6. 2008, 164:5, eff. Aug. 5, 2008.

### Section 236:97

 **236:97 Grant or Denial of Application; Appeal. –** After the
hearing the commissioner of transportation shall, within 2 weeks, make a
finding as to whether or not the application should be granted, giving
notice of his finding to the applicant by mail, postage prepaid, to the
address given on the application. If approved by the commissioner of
transportation, the license including the certificate of approved
location shall be forthwith issued to remain in effect until the
following April 1. License approval is personal to the applicant for a
specific location and it is not assignable or transferable. Licenses
shall be renewed annually thereafter on April 1, upon payment of the
annual license fee without a hearing if all provisions of this
subdivision are complied with during the license period, and if the
applicant is not convicted of any type of larceny or of receiving stolen
goods. A writ of certiorari lies from the denial of the application to
the superior court of the county in which the proposed location is
situated.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:8. 1967, 252:1. 1971, 81:4. 1981, 87:1. 1985,
402:6, I(b)(7).

### Section 236:98

 **236:98 License Fees. –** The annual license fee is 
                                             $35 to be paid
at the time the application is made and annually thereafter on April 1
in the event of renewal. If the application is not granted, the fee
shall be returned to the applicant. All fees shall be deposited in the
highway fund.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:9. 1967, 252:1. 1977, 563:47. 1981, 87:1, eff.
April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:99

 **236:99 Established Junk Yards or Automotive Recycling Yards. –**
For the purposes of this subdivision the location of junk yards or
automotive recycling yards already lawfully established are considered
approved by the commissioner of transportation where located and the
owner of the yard considered suitable for the issuance of a temporary
license. Within 60 days from the passage of this subdivision, however,
the owner shall furnish the commissioner of transportation the
information as to location which is required in an application, together
with the license fee, and the commissioner shall issue him a license
valid until April 1, 1968, at which time the owner may apply for a
renewal.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:10. 1967, 252:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).
1992, 88:7, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 236:100

 **236:100 Nonconforming Established Junk Yards or Automotive
Recycling Yards. –** Notwithstanding any provision of this subdivision,
any junk yard or automotive recycling yard in existence on October 22,
1965, which does not conform to the requirements of this subdivision and
which as a practical matter cannot be screened, shall not be required to
be removed until July 1, 1970.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:11. 1967, 252:1. 1981, 87:1. 1992, 88:8, eff. Jan.
1, 1993.

### Section 236:101

 **236:101 Application of Other Statutes. –** If the provisions of
this subdivision or the application of such provisions to any person or
circumstances appear to conflict with the provisions of RSA 236:111-129
then the provisions of this subdivision shall take precedence.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:12. 1967, 252:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.
1999, 288:1, eff. Sept. 14, 1999.

### Section 236:102

 **236:102 Public Land. –** All public land or reservations of the
United States, state, city, town or other political subdivision which
are adjacent to any portion of the interstate and turnpike systems shall
be effectively controlled in accordance with the provisions of this
subdivision.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:13. 1967, 252:1. 1971, 81:5. 1981, 87:1. 2008,
164:6, eff. Aug. 5, 2008.

### Section 236:103

 **236:103 Industrial Areas. –** Notwithstanding any provision of
this subdivision, junk yards, auto graveyards and scrap metal processing
facilities may be operated within areas adjacent to the interstate
system and the turnpike system which are within 1,000 feet of the
nearest edge of the right-of-way and which are within a zoned industrial
area, or which are within an unzoned industrial area but are used for
industrial activities.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:14. 1967, 252:1. 1971, 81:6. 1981, 87:1, eff.
April 20, 1981. 2009, 310:1, eff. Oct. 6, 2009.

### Section 236:104

 **236:104 Compensation. –** Just compensation shall be paid the
owner for the relocation, removal, or disposal of any junk yard lawfully
established under state law, which is required to be removed, relocated,
or disposed of pursuant to 23 U.S.C. § 136. No rights to compensation
accrue until a taking or removal has occurred. Notwithstanding the
foregoing provisions, no junk yard which does not conform with the
provisions of this subdivision or any rule or regulation adopted under
this subdivision, shall be required to be relocated, removed or disposed
of at any time if the federal share of just compensation is not
available to make such payment.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:15. 1967, 252:1. 1979, 146:1. 1981, 87:1, eff.
April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:105

 **236:105 Acceptance of Federal Funds. –** The commissioner of
transportation may accept any allotment of funds by the United States,
or any department or agency thereof, for the foregoing purposes. The
commissioner is authorized to landscape, screen or acquire land or
interest in land as may be required to effectively control junk yards in
accordance with the provisions of this subdivision. The commissioner is
further authorized to expend funds made available for these purposes.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:16. 1967, 252:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).

### Section 236:106

 **236:106 Penalty. –** A person shall be guilty of a violation for
each day or fraction thereof in which he is in violation of the
provisions of this subdivision. All fines collected hereunder shall be
deposited in the highway fund.

**Source.** 1939, 50:4. RL 165:25. RSA 249-B:17; 267:4. 1967, 252:1.
1973, 528:151; 531:77. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:107

 **236:107 Injunction. –** In addition to the penalty in RSA 236:106
the commissioner of transportation may obtain a mandatory injunction to
end the violation.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:18. 1967, 252:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).

### Section 236:108

 **236:108 Limitation on Subdivision. –** The provisions of this
subdivision shall be declared to be null and void by the governor at any
time when such action is recommended by the commissioner of
transportation because the operation of said subdivision is no longer
necessary (1) to comply with federal laws and regulations and such laws
and regulations are supported with federal funds on a matching basis and
(2) to protect the integrity of federal aid highway apportionments or
(3) to insure collection of any bonus funds which may be made available
to the state by the federal government in connection with this
subdivision. After the date so declared by the governor, this
subdivision shall not be effective.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:19. 1967, 252:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).

### Section 236:109

 **236:109 Right to Enter. –** The commissioner of transportation or
his representative at his discretion may enter a junk yard or automotive
recycling yard for inspection without incurring any liability to the
property owner or junk yard or automotive recycling yard owner.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:20. 1971, 81:7. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).
1992, 88:9, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 236:110

 **236:110 Collection and Disposal of Recycling Vehicles. –**
Notwithstanding any provision of this subdivision, the commissioner of
transportation or his representative is authorized to collect and
dispose of individual recycling motor vehicles from private lands
adjacent to and in view of any federal aid highway, provided that owners
agree to such collection and disposal and further agree that in the
future no other recycling vehicles will be placed in the view of the
traveled way, and providing that federal funds are or become available
for this purpose.

**Source.** RSA 249-B:21. 1973, 38:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(7).
1992, 88:10, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

Motor Vehicle Recycling Yards and Junk Yards
--------------------------------------------

### Section 236:111

 **236:111 Purposes. –** This subdivision is adopted under the police
power of the state to conserve and safeguard the public safety, health,
morals, and welfare, and to further the economic growth and stability of
the people of the state through encouragement to the development of the
tourist industry within the state. A clean, wholesome, attractive
environment is declared to be of importance to the health and safety of
the inhabitants and the safeguarding of their material rights against
unwarrantable invasion. In addition, such an environment is considered
essential to the maintenance and continued development of the tourist
and recreational industry which is hereby declared to be of significant
and proven importance to the economy of the state and the general
welfare of its citizens. At the same time, it is recognized that the
maintenance of junk yards as defined in this subdivision, is a useful
and necessary business and ought to be encouraged when not in conflict
with the express purposes of this subdivision.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:1. 1965, 372:1. 1981, 87:1. 1999, 288:2. 2002,
27:1, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 236:111-a

 **236:111-a Scope. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided by paragraphs II and III, the provisions of
this subdivision shall apply to all junk yards, as defined by RSA
236:112, I, including those approved under RSA 149-M and those subject
to regulation under RSA 236:90-110.
                                             
 II. The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to any junk
yard that is also a type of solid waste management facility listed below
and approved under RSA 149-M, including any such solid waste management
facility approved prior to May 1, 1989:
                                             
 (a) Landfills;
                                             
 (b) Incinerators and other processing or treatment facilities,
not including automotive recycling yards; and
                                             
 (c) Transfer stations that collect, store, and transfer municipal
solid waste, whether or not they also collect:
                                             
 (1) Source separated waste derived from motor vehicles, such
as tires, lead acid batteries, or used oil; and/or
                                             
 (2) Common household or commercial machinery, such as
appliances, office equipment, or lawn mowers.
                                             
 III. The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to any
noncommercial antique motor vehicle restoration activities involving
antique motor vehicles over 25 years old, where the owner or lessee
demonstrates that each of the following requirements are met:
                                             
 (a) All antique motor vehicles kept on the premises are owned by
the property owner or lessee; and
                                             
 (b) All antique motor vehicles and parts of antique motor
vehicles are kept out of view of the public and abutters by means of
storage inside a permanent structure, or by suitable fencing which
complies with the fencing requirements of RSA 236:123, or by trees or
shrubbery sufficient to block visual access year round; and
                                             
 (c) Any combination of antique motor vehicles or parts of antique
motor vehicles that are not stored inside a permanent structure shall
otherwise comply with the requirements of this section and shall not
exceed a total amount of 5 vehicles. For purposes of this section, the
sum of the parts of antique motor vehicles that equal in bulk to one
antique motor vehicle shall be counted as one antique motor vehicle;
and
                                             
 (d) All mechanical repairs and modifications are performed out of
view of the public and abutters; and
                                             
 (e) Not more than one unregistered and uninspected motor vehicle
that is not over 25 years old shall be kept on the premises; and
                                             
 (f) The use of the premises is in compliance with all municipal
land use ordinances and regulations.

**Source.** 1989, 95:1. 2002, 27:2, eff. July 1, 2002; 228:1, 2, eff.
July 1, 2002 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 236:112

 **236:112 Definitions. –** For the purposes of this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Junk yard'' means a place used for storing and keeping, or
storing and selling, trading, or otherwise transferring old or scrap
copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris,
waste, or junked, dismantled, or wrecked motor vehicles, or parts
thereof, iron, steel, or other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous
material. As used in this subdivision, the term includes, but is not
limited to, the following types of junk yards:
                                             
 (a) Automotive recycling yards, meaning a motor vehicle junk
yard, as identified in subparagraph (c), the primary purpose of which is
to salvage multiple motor vehicle parts and materials for recycling or
reuse;
                                             
 (b) Machinery junk yards, as defined in paragraph III; and
                                             
 (c) Motor vehicle junk yards, meaning any place, not including
the principal place of business of any motor vehicle dealer registered
with the director of motor vehicles under RSA 261:104 and controlled
under RSA 236:126, where the following are stored or deposited in a
quantity equal in bulk to 2 or more motor vehicles:
                                             
 (1) Motor vehicles which are no longer intended or in
condition for legal use according to their original purpose including
motor vehicles purchased for the purpose of dismantling the vehicles for
parts or for use of the metal for scrap; and/or
                                             
 (2) Used parts of motor vehicles or old iron, metal, glass,
paper, cordage, or other waste or discarded or secondhand material which
has been a part, or intended to be a part, of any motor vehicle.
                                             
 II. "Local governing body'' means the mayor and board of aldermen or
the council of a city, the selectmen of a town, or the commissioners of
a village district.
                                             
 III. "Machinery junk yard'' means any yard or field used as a place
of storage in which there is displayed to the public view, junk
machinery or scrap metal that occupies an area of 500 square feet.
                                             
 IV. "Motor vehicle'' means "motor vehicle'' as defined by RSA
259:60, I, namely, any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively
upon stationary tracks, including ski area vehicles.
                                             
 V. "Motor vehicle dealer.''
                                             
 (a) "New motor vehicle dealer'' means every person principally
engaged in the business of buying, selling or exchanging new and
secondhand motor vehicles, or tractors on commission or otherwise who
maintains in operating condition, and in operation, and at which the
dealer does a major portion of his business a place of business capable
of housing indoors in one building in an area of 1200 square feet, 5
average-sized automobiles, devoted to the motor vehicle, or tractor
business and gives mechanical service on the same and who holds a
written contract with a manufacturer giving such person selling rights
for new motor vehicles, or tractors, or with a distributor of such
vehicles who, as such distributor, holds a manufacturer's franchise or
contract giving selling rights on new motor vehicles, or tractors.
                                             
 (b) "Used motor vehicle dealer'' means every person or firm
principally engaged in the business of buying, selling and exchanging
secondhand motor vehicles or tractors, who maintains in operating
condition and in operation and at which the dealer does the major
portion of his business a place of business capable of housing indoors
in one building, in an area of at least 1200 square feet, 5
average-sized motor vehicles devoted to the used motor vehicles, or
tractor business, and gives mechanical service on the same and at which
the repair of used motor vehicles, or tractors is subordinate or
incidental to the business of buying, selling and exchanging the same.
                                             
 (c) "Junk motor vehicle dealer'' means any person or firm who has
an established place of business at which he is engaged in the business
of buying secondhand motor vehicles for the purpose of taking the same
apart, or buying, and selling parts of secondhand motor vehicles, or
tires, for the assembling of secondhand motor vehicle parts.

**Source.** 1939, 50:1. RL 165:22. RSA 267:1(b); 267-A:2. 1955, 275:1,
par. 22. 1965, 372:1. 1967, 372:2. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 103:7. 2002, 27:3,
4, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 236:113

 **236:113 Minimum Area Waiver Authorized. –** The director of motor
vehicles may in his discretion and after a public hearing waive the
minimum 1200 square foot requirement specified in RSA 236:112, V(a) and
(b).

**Source.** RSA 267-A:2-a. 1975, 121:2. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:114

 **236:114 Requirement for Operation or Maintenance. –** A person
shall not operate, establish, or maintain a junk yard or machinery junk
yard until he (1) has obtained a license to operate a junk yard business
and (2) has obtained a certificate of approval for the location of the
junk yard.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:3. 1965, 372:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:115

 **236:115 Application for License and Certificate of Approval. –**
Application for the license and the certificate of approved location
shall be made in writing to the local governing body of the municipality
where it is proposed to locate the junk yard or automotive recycling
yard. In municipalities having a zoning ordinance and a zoning board of
adjustment, the application must be accompanied by a certificate from
the board of adjustment that the proposed location is not within an
established district restricted against such uses or otherwise contrary
to the prohibitions of the zoning ordinance. The application shall
include:
                                             
 I. A description of the land to be included within the junk yard or
automotive recycling yard, by reference to so-called permanent boundary
markers.
                                             
 II. Certification of compliance with best management practices
established by the department of environmental services, for
applications to establish automotive recycling yards and motor vehicle
junk yards.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:4. 1965, 372:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 103:8. 1992,
88:12. 2006, 100:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 236:116

 **236:116 Time of Hearing. –** A hearing on the application shall be
held within the municipality not less than 2 nor more than 4 weeks from
the date of the receipt of the application by the local governing body.
Notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant by mail, postage
prepaid, to the address given in the application and the notice shall be
published once in a newspaper having a circulation within the
municipality, which publication shall be not less than 7 days before the
date of the hearing.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:5. 1965, 372:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 103:9, eff. Jan.
1, 1986.

### Section 236:117

 **236:117 License Requirements. –** At the time and place set for
hearing, the local governing body shall hear the applicant and all other
persons wishing to be heard on the application for a license to operate,
establish, or maintain the junk yard or automotive recycling yard. In
passing upon the application, it shall take into account the suitability
of the applicant with reference to his ability to comply with the
fencing requirements or other reasonable regulations concerning the
proposed junk yard or automotive recycling yard, to any record of
convictions for any type of larceny or receiving of stolen goods, and to
any other matter within the purposes of this subdivision.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:6. 1965, 372:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 103:10. 1992,
88:13, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 236:118

 **236:118 Location Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. At the time and place set for hearing, the local governing body
shall hear the applicant and all other persons wishing to be heard on
the application for certificate of approval for the location of the junk
yard or automotive recycling yard. In passing upon the application,
after proof of legal ownership or right to the use of the property by
the applicant for the license period, it shall take into account the
nature and development of surrounding property, such as the proximity of
churches, schools, hospitals, public buildings or other places of public
gatherings; and whether or not the use of that proposed location can be
reasonably prevented from affecting the public health, safety, or morals
by reason of offensive or unhealthy odors or smoke, or of other causes.
                                             
 II. In no case may a license be granted for a new junk yard or
automotive recycling yard located less than 1,000 feet from the
right-of-way lines of an interstate highway.
                                             
 III. Unless a lesser setback is allowed by local zoning ordinance,
or an ordinance adopted pursuant to paragraph IV, in no case may a
license be granted for a new junk yard or automotive recycling yard
located:
                                             
 (a) Less than 660 feet from the right-of-way lines of a
non-interstate class I, class II, class III, or class III-a highway; or
                                             
 (b) Less than 300 feet from the right-of-way lines of class IV,
class V, and class VI highways.
                                             
 IV. In a municipality that has not enacted a zoning ordinance, the
local governing body may adopt an ordinance establishing lesser setback
requirements than those established in paragraph III.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:7. 1965, 372:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 103:11. 1992,
265:182; 265:21. 2008, 164:7, eff. Aug. 5, 2008. 2012, 108:1, eff. July
28, 2012.

### Section 236:119

 **236:119 Nuisance. –** Any junk yard or machinery junk yard located
or maintained in violation of the provisions of this subdivision is
hereby declared a nuisance, and the same may be abated on complaint of
any prosecuting officer as provided in RSA 236:128.

**Source.** 1939, 50:3. RL 165:24. RSA 267:3. 1955, 275:1, par. 24.
1981, 87:1. 2003, 118:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 236:120

 **236:120 Aesthetic Considerations. –** At the hearing regarding
location of the junk yard or automotive recycling yard, the local
governing body may also take into account the clean, wholesome, and
attractive environment which has been declared to be of vital importance
to the continued stability and development of the tourist and
recreational industry of the state and the general welfare of its
citizens by considering whether or not the use of the proposed location
can be reasonably prevented from having an unfavorable effect thereon.
In this connection the local governing body may consider collectively
the type of road servicing the junk yard or automotive recycling yard or
from which the junk yard or automotive recycling yard may be seen, the
natural or artificial barriers protecting the junk yard or automotive
recycling yard from view, the proximity of the proposed junk yard or
automotive recycling yard to established tourist and recreational areas
or main access routes thereto, as well as the reasonable availability of
other suitable sites for the junk yard or automotive recycling yard.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:8. 1965, 372:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 103:12. 1992,
88:15, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 236:121

 **236:121 Grant or Denial of Application; Renewal; Appeal. –**
                                             
 I. After the hearing the local governing body shall, within 2 weeks,
make a finding as to whether or not the application should be granted,
giving notice of their finding to the applicant by mail, postage
prepaid, to the address given on the application. If approved, the
license, including the certificate of approved location, shall be
forthwith issued to remain in effect until the following July 1.
Approval is personal to the applicant and is not assignable.
                                             
 II. Licenses shall be renewed thereafter upon payment of the annual
license fee without a hearing, if all provisions of this subdivision are
complied with during the license period, if the junk yard does not
become a public nuisance under the common law or is not a nuisance under
RSA 236:119, and if the applicant is not convicted of any type of
larceny or of receiving stolen goods. In addition, applications to renew
a license to operate an automotive recycling yard or motor vehicle junk
yard shall include certification of compliance with best management
practices established by the department of environmental services for
the automobile salvage industry.
                                             
 III. A writ of certiorari lies from the denial of the application to
the superior court of the county in which the proposed location is
situated.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:9. 1965, 372:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 103:13. 2006,
100:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007. 2009, 120:1, eff. July 1, 2009.

### Section 236:122

 **236:122 License Fees. –** The annual license fee is not more than

                                             $250 to be paid at the time the application is made and annually
thereafter in the event of renewal. If the application is not granted,
the fee shall be returned to the applicant.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:10. 1965, 372:1. 1981, 87:1. 2006, 71:1, eff.
April 25, 2006.

### Section 236:123

 **236:123 Fencing. –** Before use, a new junk yard or automotive
recycling yard shall be completely surrounded with a solidly constructed
fence at least 6 feet in height which substantially screens the area and
with a suitable gate which shall be closed and locked except during the
working hours of the junk yard or automotive recycling yard or when the
applicant or his agent is within. All motor vehicles and parts stored or
deposited by the applicant shall be kept within the enclosure of the
junk yard or automotive recycling yard except as removal is necessary
for its transportation in the reasonable course of the business. All
wrecking or other work on such motor vehicles and parts and all burning
of vehicles shall be accomplished within the enclosure. Where the
topography, natural growth of timber, a natural barrier, or other
considerations accomplish the purposes of this subdivision in whole or
in part, the fencing requirements hereunder may be reduced by the local
governing body, upon granting the license. Any citizen of the
municipality may apply for writ of certiorari to the superior court for
the county in which the new junk yard or automotive recycling yard is
located to review the action of the local governing body.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:11. 1965, 372:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 103:14. 1992,
88:16, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 236:124

 **236:124 Effect of Local Ordinances. –** This subdivision is not in
derogation of zoning ordinances or ordinances for the control of junk
yards now or hereafter established within the proper exercise of the
police power granted to municipalities, but rather is in aid thereof.
Specific local ordinances shall control when in conflict with this
subdivision.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:12. 1965, 372:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:125

 **236:125 Established Junk Yards or Automotive Recycling Yards. –**
For the purposes of this subdivision the location of junk yards or
automotive recycling yards already established are considered approved
by the local governing body of the municipality where located and the
owner of the yard considered suitable for the issuance of a license.
Within 60 days from the passage of this subdivision, however, the owner
shall furnish the local governing body the information as to location
which is required in an application, together with the license fee, and
the local governing body shall issue him a license valid until April 1,
1966, at which time the owner may apply for a renewal. The owner shall
comply with all other provisions of this subdivision including the
fencing requirements set forth in RSA 236:123.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:13. 1965, 372:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 103:15. 1992,
88:17, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 236:126

 **236:126 Motor Vehicle Dealers. –** Both new and used car dealers
are hereby required to remove from their premises registered with the
director of motor vehicles as their principal place of business any
motor vehicle which is of the type referred to in RSA 236:112, I, under
the definition of junk yard, within at least 160 days from the date of
its original entrance thereon. Any other location within the same
community used by such dealer shall be subject to the terms of this
subdivision if in its operation it falls within the confines of the
definition of the term junk yard as defined in this subdivision.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:14. 1965, 372:1. 1969, 189:1. 1981, 87:1, eff.
April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:127

 **236:127 Penalty. –** Any person who is in violation of any
provisions of this subdivision shall be guilty of a violation and each
day or fraction thereof shall constitute a separate offense.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:15. 1965, 372:1. 1973, 531:89. 1981, 87:1, eff.
April 20, 1981.

### Section 236:128

 **236:128 Local Enforcement; Injunction; Civil Penalties. –** The
governing body, elected or appointed officers or other appointed agents
of a town, city, or unincorporated place, or a private person pursuant
to RSA 236:129 may initiate proceedings for the enforcement of the
provisions of this subdivision. In addition to the criminal penalty in
RSA 236:127, enforcement may be by the following:
                                             
 I. The local governing body may obtain a mandatory injunction to end
the violation.
                                             
 II. If the local governing body does not obtain such an injunction
the attorney general may obtain an injunction in the name of the state.
                                             
 III. The local governing body or other enforcement official of the
town, city, or unincorporated place, after providing notice, may impose
a civil penalty of up to 
                                             $50 for each day upon any person whose land is
deemed a nuisance pursuant to RSA 236:119 until such time as the
nuisance is removed or abated to the satisfaction of the governing body,
or until the owner of the land acquires a license and is in compliance
with the provisions of this subdivision. The building inspector or other
local official with the authority to enforce the provisions of this
section may commence an action to collect the civil penalty in the
district court. Imposition of a civil penalty under this paragraph shall
not relieve the owner of any requirement to comply with the provisions
of this subdivision, nor shall it preclude the imposition of further
actions or remedies under this chapter. The proceeds from the assessment
of civil penalties under this section shall be for the use of the town,
city, or unincorporated place. This paragraph shall not apply to
automotive recycling yards and junkyards properly licensed or pending
license renewal under this subdivision.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:16. 1965, 372:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 103:16. 2003,
118:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 236:129

 **236:129 Private Persons. –** Any person owning real property whose
property is directly affected by the site of a junk yard or automotive
recycling yard maintained in violation of the provisions of this
subdivision may in writing addressed to the local governing body request
the local governing body to take appropriate action under this
subdivision. A copy of the written communication to the local governing
body shall be mailed to the person complained of. If the local governing
body shall not, within 30 days thereafter, make a determination that a
junk yard or automotive recycling yard does exist and issue the
appropriate order, such person may, in his own name and in his own
right, seek appropriate injunctive relief for the enforcement of this
subdivision in the superior court.

**Source.** RSA 267-A:17. 1967, 372:1. 1969, 415:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985,
103:17. 1992, 88:18, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

Highway Video Surveillance
--------------------------

### Section 236:130

 **236:130 Highway Surveillance Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. In this subdivision, "surveillance'' means the act of determining
the ownership of a motor vehicle or the identity of a motor vehicle's
occupants on the public ways of the state or its political subdivisions
through the use of a camera or other imaging device or any other device,
including but not limited to a transponder, cellular telephone, global
positioning satellite, or radio frequency identification device, that by
itself or in conjunction with other devices or information can be used
to determine the ownership of a motor vehicle or the identity of a motor
vehicle' s occupants.
                                             
 II. Neither the state of New Hampshire nor its political
subdivisions shall engage in surveillance on any public ways of the
state or its political subdivisions.
                                             
 III. The prohibition set forth in paragraph II shall not apply where
surveillance:
                                             
 (a) Is specifically authorized by statute;
                                             
 (b) Is undertaken on a case-by-case basis in the investigation of
a particular violation, misdemeanor, or felony;
                                             
 (c) Is undertaken to produce images or data that:
                                             
 (1) Are viewed only at the transportation management center of
the department of transportation in connection with a particular
incident occurring on a public way; and
                                             
 (2) Are not recorded;
                                             
 (d) Is incidental to the monitoring of a building or other
structure under the control of the state or a political subdivision of
the state;
                                             
 (e) Is undertaken for purposes of operation of the toll
collection system; or
                                             
 (f) Is undertaken for the security of the following bridges and
approach structures: I-95 Piscataqua River Bridge, Sarah Mildred Long
Bridge, and the Memorial Bridge, all in Portsmouth.
                                             
 (g) Is undertaken for security and to facilitate law enforcement
in the investigation of criminal activity at the state-owned park and
ride facilities that provide regularly scheduled public transit service
listed below. A video recording may only be retrieved from the
department of transportation's transportation management center, subject
to its availability. The storage of any video recording shall be limited
by the storage capacity of the individual server at each facility. No
video recording shall be stored longer than 24 days. Any video
recordings requested and retrieved prior to expiration may only be used
by the requesting party for a lawful purpose, including as evidence in a
judicial or administrative proceeding, and shall be copied and retained
by the department of transportation's transportation management center
for no longer than 18 months from the date of the recording. The
state-owned park and ride facilities which conduct video surveillance
shall display signage indicating the presence of 24 hour video cameras.
                                             
 (1) I-93 Exit 2 in Salem.
                                             
 (2) I-93 Exit 4 in Londonderry.
                                             
 (3) I-93 Exit 5 in Londonderry.
                                             
 (4) I-93 Exit 14 in Concord.
                                             
 (5) I-95 Exit 3 in Portsmouth.
                                             
 (6) Spaulding Turnpike Exit 9 in Dover.
                                             
 (7) Everett Turnpike Exit 8 in Nashua.
                                             
 (8) I-89 Exit 12 in New London.
                                             
 (9) NH Route 101 Exit 7 in Epping.
                                             
 (10) Any future state-owned park and ride facilities that
provide regularly scheduled public transit service.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section shall prevent the creation,
transmission, or recording of any images or data which cannot, by
enhancement, manipulation, or otherwise, be used for surveillance.
                                             
 V. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a violation if a natural person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if
any other person.

**Source.** 2006, 107:1. 2007, 335:2, eff. July 16, 2007. 2013, 186:10,
eff. Aug. 31, 2013. 2014, 272:1, eff. Sept. 26, 2014.

### Section 236:131

 **236:131 Information From Other Sources. –** Neither the state of
New Hampshire nor its political subdivisions shall obtain from others,
including private businesses and federal and state governments, any
information that it is prohibited from obtaining under the provisions of
RSA 236:130.

**Source.** 2006, 107:1, eff. July 1, 2006.
