---
title: CHAPTER 237 TURNPIKE SYSTEM
---

TITLE XX
                                             
TRANSPORTATION
==============

CHAPTER 237
                                             
TURNPIKE SYSTEM
---------------

### Section 237:1

 **237:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
                                             
 I. "Central New Hampshire Turnpike'' shall mean the turnpike
constructed pursuant to the appropriate subdivision of this chapter
including the relocation and improvements constructed and such further
improvements, modifications and extensions as the general court may
hereafter authorize as part of the central New Hampshire turnpike.
                                             
 II. "Eastern New Hampshire Turnpike'' shall mean the toll road
constructed pursuant to the appropriate subdivision of this chapter, the
bridge constructed under RSA 237:29-33 and the improvements and
extension authorized by this chapter and such further improvements,
modifications and extensions as the general court may hereafter
authorize as part of the eastern New Hampshire turnpike.
                                             
 III. "New Hampshire Turnpike System'' shall mean the toll highway
authorized by this chapter and such further toll highways and
improvements, modifications and extensions of toll highways as the
general court may hereafter authorize as part of the New Hampshire
turnpike system. When the bonds issued prior to January 1, 1971, to
finance the central New Hampshire turnpike have been fully paid, or sums
deposited with the paying agent for such payment, the central New
Hampshire turnpike shall become a part of the New Hampshire turnpike
system, the toll account established under RSA 237:40 shall become part
of the toll account established under RSA 237:9. When the bonds issued
prior to January 1, 1971, to finance the eastern New Hampshire turnpike
have been fully paid, or sums deposited with the paying agent for such
payment, the eastern New Hampshire turnpike shall become part of the New
Hampshire turnpike system, the toll account established under RSA 237:24
shall become part of the toll account established under RSA 237:9.

**Source.** RSA 256-C:1. 1971, 520:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:2

 **237:2 Authority Granted. –** Subject to RSA 237:3, II, the
commissioner of the department of transportation, with the approval of
the governor and council, is authorized to:
                                             
 I. Make improvements to that portion of the eastern New Hampshire
turnpike known as the Blue Star memorial highway, including, but not
limited to, the addition of 2 traffic lanes in each direction from the
route N.H. 107 interchange in Seabrook to the route N.H. 101 interchange
in Portsmouth and the reconstruction of the toll facilities in the town
of Hampton;
                                             
 II. Acquire land and make improvements to that portion of the
eastern New Hampshire turnpike known as the Spaulding turnpike and
extend said turnpike with 2 lanes including the completion of existing
interchange number 9, the Dover-Somersworth interchange including the
access roads into and away from the Weeks traffic circle in the city of
Dover, and the extension of the turnpike to the 1965 Milton-Wakefield
project, the expansion of the Dover toll facility, safety and widening
improvements along the turnpike, purchases of access in critical
sections, and study the Spaulding turnpike for expansion from 2 to 4
lanes from the intersection of Route 125 and the Spaulding turnpike
north to the intersection of Route 11 and the Spaulding turnpike.
                                             
 II-a. Include, as part of the study for a 4-lane east-west highway
from I-393 in Concord to the Spaulding turnpike as defined in 1986,
203:8 as amended by 1988, 266:2 and 1990, 244:2, as one alternative, a
corridor that would intercept the Spaulding turnpike between existing
exit 9 and exit 11. This interchange would be known as exit 10. Such
study shall include an evaluation of the potential social, economic and
environmental impacts, and preliminary design for the siting of an
interchange and exit 10.
                                             
 II-b. Make improvements to the Spaulding turnpike by constructing
exit 10.
                                             
 II-c. Redesign and reconstruct a portion of exit 6 on the Spaulding
turnpike at its intersection with N.H. Route 4 and Boston Harbor Road.
This project shall not begin until the governor and council authorize a
transfer of a sum not to exceed 
                                             $1,000,000 from any funds remaining in
projects under RSA 237:7, I as authorized by RSA 237:7, II.
                                             
 II-d. Construct a second barrel on the Spaulding turnpike from exits
12 to 16 with related interchange improvements from exits 11 to 16, as
needed, and a maintenance facility at exit 16 in Rochester.
                                             
 II-e. Construct improvements to the Spaulding turnpike/US 4/N.H. 16
extending from just north of the Gosling Road intersection in Newington
to just south of the most southerly toll plaza in Dover, including
improvements to access on and off the highway.
                                             
 III. Make improvements to the central New Hampshire turnpike,
including, but not limited to, the addition of a traffic lane or lanes
in each direction from a point near the proposed junction of interstate
route 93 near the Manchester-Hooksett town line to a point northerly of
the junction of interstate route 89 in the city of Concord and the
reconstruction of the toll facilities in the town of Hooksett.
                                             
 IV. Make improvements to the central New Hampshire turnpike,
including, but not limited to:
                                             
 (a) The design, right-of-way acquisition and construction for the
improvement of the central New Hampshire turnpike in Nashua between the
Massachusetts line and exit 3 to include reconstruction of exit 1, also
including associated widening and the construction of a new northbound
on-ramp from Daniel E. Webster highway to the central turnpike, and the
design and land acquisition for a new interchange at exit 2 which
connects to a new interchange at the Daniel E. Webster highway and for
additional lanes on the turnpike between the state line and exit 3. The
commissioner of the department of transportation is hereby directed to
make this project a priority and to begin construction within the
biennium ending June 30, 1987.
                                             
 (b) Construction of a new exit 8, formerly exit 7W, in Nashua.
The commissioner of the department of transportation is hereby directed
to prioritize this project and to begin construction within the 1985
biennium.
                                             
 (c) Reconstruction of exit 11, formerly exit 8, in Merrimack to
remove the current toll plaza providing toll collection equipment on the
southbound on and northbound off ramps.
                                             
 (d) Construction of the main line toll plaza in Bedford.
                                             
 (e) For the construction of a northbound off ramp and a
southbound on ramp to the Everett turnpike at the Bedford road in the
town of Merrimack; the widening and lengthening of the overpass bridge
at Bedford road; and the installation of toll booths for both ramps.
                                             
 (f) Continue design and engineering of the modernization of the
central turnpike.
                                             
 (g) Construction of a bridge crossing the Merrimack River
connecting U.S. 3 in Merrimack and N.H. 102 in Litchfield with future
design consideration for a segment of highway connecting N.H. 102 in
Litchfield and N.H. 111 in Hudson.
                                             
 (h) Making improvements to the central New Hampshire turnpike,
including, but not limited to, the addition of a traffic lane in each
direction to the following 3 segments: the segment between exit 8 in the
city of Nashua to exit 10 in the town of Merrimack; the segment between
exit 11 in the town of Merrimack to the southern limits of the
Manchester Airport Access Road project in the town of Bedford; and the
segment between the northern limits of the Manchester Airport Access
Road project and the interstate 293 interchange in the town of Bedford.
                                             
 (i) Installation of intelligent transportation systems
infrastructure on the F.E. Everett Turnpike from Nashua to Bedford.
                                             
 V. Make improvements to the central New Hampshire turnpike,
including, but not limited to, the addition of a Merrimack industrial
interchange, including toll collection equipment, and a 1.5 mile access
highway between U.S. Route 3 and Camp Sargent road.
                                             
 VI. Make improvements to the eastern New Hampshire turnpike by the
construction of a full interchange on the Spaulding turnpike at Gosling
road, Pease Air Force Base.
                                             
 VII. (a) Acquire land as required and make improvements to the
central New Hampshire turnpike including, but not limited to, completing
the connection to the Merrimack industrial interchange, relocation of
Camp Sargent Road, improvements to interchanges 3 through 7 as required,
the extension of the system to include an easterly circumferential
beltway around Nashua extending from exit 2 and running easterly through
the city of Nashua and the towns of Hudson, Litchfield, and Merrimack to
an intersection with the existing turnpike, improvements and widening
between interchanges 2 and 7, widening between the Route 101
intersection and the Amoskeag interchange in Manchester, and
coordinating a study of widening between the I-89 and I-93
interchanges.
                                             
 (b) Plan, engineer, and construct improvements, and acquire land
as necessary for the central New Hampshire turnpike, including, but not
limited to the addition of a traffic lane or lanes in each direction
from the junction of interstate 89 in the city of Concord to the
northerly expansion joint of the Interstate 93 bridge over Loudon Road
and N.H. Route 9 (bridge no. 163/106).
                                             
 (c) Plan, engineer, and construct improvements, and acquire land
as necessary for the central New Hampshire turnpike, including, but not
limited to the addition of a traffic lane or lanes in each direction
from exit 6 to exit 7 in the city of Manchester, as well as the
reconstruction of the exit 6 and exit 7 interchanges.
                                             
 VII-a. Acquire land as required and relocate the high voltage
transmission lines to support the redevelopment of existing rest areas
located on Interstate 93 in the town of Hooksett to full service centers
with food, state liquor stores, and other retail goods and services for
the traveling public as may be required under 2009, 144:84 and SS 2010,
1:76.
                                             
 VIII. Acquire and install new toll collection equipment.
                                             
 IX. Make such other and further improvements to the New Hampshire
turnpike system as may be required by RSA 240.
                                             
 X. Acquire, expand, and make improvements to the eastern New
Hampshire turnpike from the northerly expansion joint of the Interstate
Route 95 bridge over the Spaulding turnpike, U.S. Route 4 and N.H. Route
16 (bridge No. 197/122) north to a point on the New Hampshire-Maine
border in the city of Portsmouth, said improvements to include the
installation of open road tolling for the toll currently on Interstate
Route 95 in the town of Hampton.

**Source.** RSA 256-C:2. 1971, 520:1. 1973, 559:1. 1975, 286:6. 1981,
87:1. 1982, 42:58. 1983, 76:1; 427:1; 451:1. 1985, 391:3; 402:6,
I(b)(8). 1986, 203:10-12. 1987, 266:2. 1989, 356:1. 1991, 255:1;
301:1-5. 1992, 217:1. 1994, 281:1. 1998, 306:2. 2000, 309:11. 2004,
262:4. 2006, 240:7, eff. July 31, 2006. 2009, 144:82, eff. July 1, 2009.
2012, 193:11, eff. June 11, 2012. 2014, 326:3-5, eff. Aug. 1, 2014.
2016, 324:3, eff. June 24, 2016.

### Section 237:3

 **237:3 Determination of Feasibility. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1991, 301:13,
I, eff. Aug. 23, 1991.
                                             ]

### Section 237:4

 **237:4 Exception from Written Estimate Requirements for Certain
Projects on Central Turnpike. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1991, 301:13, II, eff. Aug.
23, 1991.
                                             ]

### Section 237:5

 **237:5 Further Authority. –**
                                             
 I. Except as may be inconsistent herewith and except as hereinafter
provided, the projects authorized by RSA 237:2, I and II shall be laid
out, constructed and operated in accordance with, and shall be subject
to, the provisions of RSA 237:17-28 inclusive until the eastern New
Hampshire turnpike becomes part of the New Hampshire turnpike system,
except that RSA 237:20 through 23 shall not apply and except that the
bonds referred to in RSA 237:24 shall be deemed to include all bonds
issued to finance the eastern New Hampshire turnpike. Subject to the
same exceptions, the projects authorized by RSA 237:2, III shall be laid
out, constructed and operated in accordance with, and shall be subject
to, the provisions of RSA 237:29 through 39 until the central New
Hampshire turnpike becomes part of the New Hampshire turnpike system,
except that RSA 237:19 through 22 shall not apply and except that the
bonds referred to in RSA 237:23 shall be deemed to include all bonds
issued to finance the central New Hampshire turnpike. In addition to
other project costs, the cost of constructing any portion of the central
New Hampshire turnpike, the eastern New Hampshire turnpike or the New
Hampshire turnpike system may include any required payment to the United
States on account of the incorporation of a federally-aided highway in
such turnpike or system.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of transportation is further authorized to
operate and maintain the New Hampshire turnpike system. In doing so and
in constructing any portion thereof, he may, subject to the limitations
set forth in this chapter:
                                             
 (a) Determine the location of each portion of the system and fix
the width of its right-of-way.
                                             
 (b) Acquire in the name of the state by purchase or by exercise
of the right of condemnation as provided by statute such lands,
property, rights, easements and interests as may be deemed necessary for
carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 (c) Designate the locations and establish, limit and control such
points of ingress to and egress from the system as may be necessary or
desirable to ensure the proper operation of the system and to prohibit
ingress to or egress from the system at any points not so designated.
                                             
 (d) Permit toll free use of certain sections of the system if it
is for the public good.
                                             
 (e) Construct grade separations at intersections of the system
with public roads and private ways, and change and adjust the lines and
grades of such roads and ways so as to accommodate the same to the
design of such grade separations and to the design of the system.
                                             
 (f) Construct, operate and maintain portions of the system within
the compact areas of cities and towns.
                                             
 (g) Grant permits or licenses to any corporation or person to
place and maintain along, on, under or within the system ducts, pipes,
pipelines, poles, wires or other structures, to be so located as not to
be unsightly and not to interfere with the safe and convenient operation
and maintenance of the system, and contract with any such corporation or
person for such permit or licenses on such terms and conditions as may
be deemed necessary for carrying out the provisions of this chapter. The
appearance, construction, maintenance and repairs of any such ducts,
pipes, pipelines, poles, wires or other structures shall be subject to
such directions and regulations as may be imposed.
                                             
 (h) Establish a temporary turnpike engineering section for the
period of design and construction of any portion of the system, assign
permanent employees of the department of transportation to duties and
positions in said section and employ such engineers and assistants as
may be necessary on a temporary basis for said period of design and
construction. The costs of said turnpike engineering section shall be a
charge against the funds made available under this chapter or otherwise
for the system.
                                             
 (i) Enter into contractual relations on behalf of the state.
                                             
 (j) Do and perform all such acts as are necessary for the public
good.
                                             
 (k) Cause periodic traffic and economic studies to be made of the
operation of the system.
                                             
 (l) Make periodic studies of possible extensions or additions to
the system.
                                             
 (m) Employ such assistants, engineers or consulting services as
may be necessary to carry out the studies authorized by paragraphs (k)
and (l) herein and, upon approval by the legislature, extend or add to
the system when recommendations of independent recognized consultants
indicate that such extensions are economically feasible. The expense of
the said studies shall be a charge upon the fund established under RSA
237:9.
                                             
 (n) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (o) Install open road tolling for existing tolls on the main
lines of the turnpike system.

**Source.** RSA 256-C:4. 1971, 520:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 19:4; 402:6,
I(a)(8), (b)(8). 1987, 403:3. 1996, 95:1, I, eff. July 14, 1996. 2009,
146:6, eff. June 30, 2009.

### Section 237:6

 **237:6 Highway Patrol. –** Law enforcement and public safety
services on the turnpike system shall be provided by the department of
safety, division of state police. The cost of these services shall be a
charge on the fund established under RSA 237:9.

**Source.** RSA 256-C:5. 1971, 520:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 19:3, eff. April
1, 1985.

### Section 237:7

 **237:7 Funds Provided. –**
                                             
 I. The following sums are appropriated for the purpose of carrying
out the projects authorized by RSA 237:2:

    Projects Amounts

     (a) Improvements to the Blue Star memorial highway. RSA $68,800,000
     237:2, I, IX. 
     (b) Improvements and 2 lane extension of Spaulding 43,200,000
     turnpike. RSA 237:2, II. 
     (c) Improvements to central New Hampshire turnpike. RSA 28,500,000
     237:2, III. 
     (d) Construction of Dover-Somersworth interchange number 9 2,800,000
     of Spaulding turnpike, including the access roads 
     into and away from the Weeks traffic circle in the 
     city of Dover. RSA 237:2, II. 
     (e) Construction and improvements to the central New 126,600,000
     Hampshire turnpike. RSA 237:2, IV. 
     (f) Improvements to central New Hampshire turnpike. RSA 24,100,000
     237:2, V. 
     (g) [Repealed.] 
     (h) Improvements to central New Hampshire turnpike. RSA $697,000,000
     237:2, IV(h), VII, VII(b), VII(c), IX. 
     (i) Improvements to the Spaulding turnpike Gosling Road 17,800,000
     interchange; RSA 237:2, VI. 
     (j) Study of exit 10 on Spaulding turnpike. RSA 237:2 II-a. $3,500,000
     (k) Toll collection equipment. RSA 237:2, VIII, IX, RSA $131,000,000
     237:5, II. 
     (l) Construction of exit 10 on the Spaulding turnpike. RSA 37,000,000
     237:2, II-b, IX. 
     (m) Construction of a second barrel from exits 12 to 16 on 160,000,000
     the Spaulding Turnpike with related interchange 
     improvements from exits 11 to 16. RSA 237:2, II-d, 
     IX. 
     (n) Construction of improvements to the Spaulding 14,250,000
     Turnpike/US 4/N.H. 16 north of Gosling Road 
     intersection in Newington to just south of most 
     southerly plaza in Dover, including access roads on 
     and off the highway. RSA 237:2, II-e. 
      (o) Construction of a bridge crossing the Merrimack River 75,000,000
     connecting U.S. 3 in Merrimack and N.H. 102 in 
     Litchfield with future design consideration for a 
     segment of highway connecting N.H. 102 in Litchfield 
     and N.H. 111 in Hudson. RSA 237:2, IV(g). 
     (p) Acquisition of a 1.6 mile section of I-95. 120,000,000
     (q) Repairs and improvements to the bridge on N.H. 107 over 4,000,000
     I-95 in Seabrook. 
     (r) Construction of the Newington-Dover Little Bay Bridge 275,000,000
     project. 

    (s) Construction of noise barriers along I-95 in Portsmouth. 3,200,000


                                             
 I-a. The department shall not proceed with the installation of all
electronic tolling without prior legislative approval.
                                             
 II. After substantial completion of the project or projects
authorized by paragraph I of this section, the governor and council may
transfer appropriations for such project or projects to other projects
under this chapter. The appropriations made by this chapter shall be
continuing appropriations and shall not lapse.
                                             
 III. Paragraph I of this section shall not limit the authority of
the governor and council under RSA 237-A to provide, solely by
resolutions or by trust or security agreements, without further
appropriation, for application or expenditures of moneys deposited or
held in funds established in connection with the issuance of revenue
bonds under RSA 237-A, including without limitation the application of
moneys to operate, maintain, and make improvements to the turnpike
system, to pay costs of issuance of bonds including costs of traffic
studies and engineering reports prepared for issuance of bonds, and to
establish and maintain reserves.

**Source.** RSA 256-C:6. 1971, 520:1. 1973, 500:1, 2; 559:2. 1975,
286:3. 1977, 558:4. 1981, 87:1. 1983, 76:2; 427:2; 451:2. 1985, 246:1;
391:1. 1986, 203:13. 1987, 266:3. 1989, 356:2. 1991, 255:2; 301:6, 7,
13, III. 1992, 217:2. 1998, 306:3. 2004, 262:5. 2006, 240:8, eff. July
31, 2006. 2009, 144:78-81, eff. July 1, 2009. 2010, 194:1-3, eff. Aug.
20, 2010. 2013, 186:13-15, eff. Aug. 31, 2013. 2014, 326:6, 7, eff. Aug.
1, 2014. 2016, 324:4, 5, eff. June 24, 2016.

### Section 237:8

 **237:8 Borrowing Power. –** For the purpose of providing a portion
of the funds necessary for the appropriations made by RSA 237:7 the
state treasurer is authorized to borrow upon the credit of the state a
sum not exceeding 
                                             $91,500,000 and may issue general obligation bonds
and notes in the name and on behalf of the state in accordance with the
provisions of RSA 6-A; provided that the bonds may mature up to 30 years
from their dates of issue and may be made redeemable before maturity at
the option of the governor and council at such price or prices and under
such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the governor and council
prior to the issue of the bonds. In addition, the state treasurer is
authorized to issue revenue bonds under RSA 237-A to provide the
additional funds necessary for the appropriations made by RSA 237:7, as
well as to pay related project costs, including costs of issuance and
funding of reserves, all in accordance with and subject to the debt
limit prescribed in RSA 237-A.

**Source.** RSA 256-C:7. 1971, 520:1. 1973, 500:3. 1975, 286:4. 1977,
558:5. 1981, 87:1. 1983, 76:3; 427:3; 451:3. 1985, 246:2, 391:2, 8.
1987, 266:4. 1989, 356:5. 1991, 255:4, eff. July 1, 1991; 301:8, eff.
Aug. 23, 1991.

### Section 237:9

 **237:9 Tolls. –** The commissioner of transportation, with the
approval of the governor and council, shall establish toll rates and
other charges for use of the New Hampshire turnpike system or any part
of the right-of-way and other property acquired in connection therewith.
The governor and council shall approve or reject the commissioner's
proposed toll rates and other charges within 90 days of receiving them.
The tolls collected shall be deposited with the state treasurer who
shall keep the same in a separate account to be used exclusively for
purposes of the New Hampshire turnpike system including, without
limitation, the operating expenses, construction, reconstruction, and
maintenance of the New Hampshire turnpike system. All operating expenses
and maintenance costs shall be paid from said account. From the balance
remaining after the payment of operating expenses and maintenance costs,
there shall be paid the interest and principal on the bonds issued to
finance the system. No part of such revenues shall, by transfer of funds
or otherwise, be diverted to any other purpose whatsoever. Fourteen days
previous to the time any interest or principal is payable, on any
general obligation bonds issued to finance the system, the state
treasurer shall examine the existing balance and, except as otherwise
provided in RSA 237:10, if such balance is insufficient to make the
payment, then he shall notify the governor who shall immediately draw
his warrant on the highway fund to cover any deficit and if the funds in
both of the above accounts are insufficient, the governor shall draw his
warrant upon the state's general fund to the amount necessary to meet
the payments. Any funds paid out from the state's highway fund or
general fund for the above purposes shall be reimbursed from the
collection of tolls as soon as such funds are available. Any funds that
have been or may be expended for any portion of the system by the
department of transportation shall be repaid to said department when, in
the opinion of the governor and council, sufficient funds are available.
Any excess income may be used for further system extensions in
accordance with RSA 237:5, II(m). No provision of this chapter shall
constitute a covenant with bondholders with respect to the charging,
collection or disposition of tolls.

**Source.** RSA 256-C:8. 1971, 520:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 19:5; 402:6,
I(a)(8). 1987, 403:4. 1991, 301:9, eff. Aug. 23, 1991. 2010, 264:1, eff.
Sept. 4, 2010.

### Section 237:10

 **237:10 Interaccount Transfers. –** In the event the balance in the
account under RSA 237:24, RSA 237:40 or RSA 237:9 is insufficient at any
time to meet the operating expenses, maintenance costs and debt service
of the eastern New Hampshire turnpike, the central New Hampshire
turnpike or the New Hampshire turnpike system, as the case may be, the
treasurer shall transfer the amount necessary to meet the deficiency
from the excess income in either or both of the other accounts. In
determining which account or accounts to make the transfer from, the
treasurer shall be guided by the respective needs of the accounts.

**Source.** RSA 256-C:9. 1971, 520:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:11

 **237:11 Toll Criteria. –** Tolls shall be established on the New
Hampshire turnpike system, the central New Hampshire turnpike and the
eastern New Hampshire turnpike in accordance with the following
criteria:
                                             
 I. Until the eastern New Hampshire turnpike becomes part of the New
Hampshire turnpike system, tolls shall be established and revised from
time to time under RSA 237:24 which are at least sufficient to meet the
operating expenses and maintenance costs of the eastern New Hampshire
turnpike and to pay the principal and interest on bonds issued to
finance the eastern New Hampshire turnpike.
                                             
 II. Until the central New Hampshire turnpike becomes part of the New
Hampshire turnpike system, tolls shall be established and revised from
time to time under RSA 237:40 which are at least sufficient to meet the
operating expenses and maintenance costs of the central New Hampshire
turnpike and to pay the principal and interest on bonds issued to
finance the central New Hampshire turnpike.
                                             
 III. The tolls established or revised from time to time under RSA
237:24 and 237:40 and under 237:9 shall be at least sufficient in the
aggregate to meet the aggregate operating expenses and maintenance costs
of the central New Hampshire turnpike, the eastern New Hampshire
turnpike and the New Hampshire turnpike system and to pay the aggregate
principal and interest on bonds issued to finance the central New
Hampshire turnpike, the eastern New Hampshire turnpike and the New
Hampshire turnpike system.
                                             
 IV. Insofar as practicable, the tolls on the central New Hampshire
turnpike, the eastern New Hampshire turnpike and the New Hampshire
turnpike system shall be comparable.
                                             
 V. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
discount on the established tolls on any of the New Hampshire turnpikes
in the system for vehicles listed on a New Hampshire E-Z Pass account
and using the regional electronic toll collection system with a New
Hampshire E-Z Pass transponder shall be 30 percent for passenger
vehicles, including motorcycles, and 10 percent for commercial vehicles.

**Source.** RSA 256-C:10. 1971, 520:1. 1979, 218:1. 1981, 87:1. 1983,
427:4. 2001, 247:2. 2004, 241:5. 2005, 177:55, eff. July 1, 2005. 2013,
186:12, eff. Aug. 31, 2013.

### Section 237:12

 **237:12 Exemption From Tolls. –**
                                             
 I. The following motor vehicles shall be granted toll-free use of
any section of the New Hampshire turnpike system:
                                             
 (a) Motor vehicles bearing plates with the state seal as
authorized under RSA 261:90.
                                             
 (b) All vehicles with permanent plates as authorized under RSA
261:92.
                                             
 (c) Military vehicles of the state and federal governments.
                                             
 (d) Emergency vehicles going to and returning from their duties.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of the department of safety may request
electronic toll collection equipment from the department of
transportation for unmarked vehicles of the New Hampshire state police
and undercover vehicles of the department of justice not displaying
permanent plates. Accounting procedures for such electronic toll
collection equipment shall be established by the commissioner of the
department of transportation.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of the department of transportation shall
issue appropriate identification for turnpike employees and employees of
state liquor stores on the turnpike, when said employees have to use the
turnpike to get to their places of employment. Such identification shall
permit toll-free use of the New Hampshire turnpike system only to the
extent required by an employee covered in this paragraph to get to and
from his place of employment.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner of the department of transportation may grant,
at his discretion, toll-free use of the turnpike system to any person he
deems appropriate, by providing proper identification to such person;
provided, however, for those persons granted toll-free use pursuant to
this paragraph, the commissioner shall propose legislation for
consideration at the next session of the general court. If such
legislation is not enacted into law, such exemption shall expire at the
end of that particular session.

**Source.** RSA 256-C:11. 1971, 520:1. 1981, 87:1. 1988, 83:1. 2001,
247:3, eff. July 13, 2001.

### Section 237:13

 **237:13 Limited Access. –** The New Hampshire turnpike system shall
be limited access highways as defined in RSA 230:44, except that RSA
230:52 shall not apply to ducts, pipes, pipelines, poles, wires or other
structures permitted under RSA 237:5, II(g) or to pre-existing
facilities on highways, not previously restricted as to access, used as
toll-free sections of the system.

**Source.** RSA 256-C:12. 1971, 520:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:14

 **237:14 Contracts for Construction. –** All contracts for the
construction of the New Hampshire turnpike system shall be awarded to
the lowest responsible bidder submitting a sealed bid after an
advertisement calling for bids has been published at least once in each
of 2 successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in New
Hampshire. The first publication of such advertisement shall be not less
than 14 days prior to the date upon which bids are received. Contracts
shall be awarded in accordance with RSA 228:4.

**Source.** RSA 256-C:13. 1971, 520:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:15

 **237:15 Toll Reserve Accounts. –** Any excess of toll revenue which
may exist from time to time in any of the individual turnpike reserve
accounts or the New Hampshire turnpike system reserve account shall be
used only to finance extension studies, maintenance, construction,
reconstruction and extensions of the system wherever located, interest
on bonded indebtedness or retirement of bonded indebtedness or other
costs which may be properly charged against these accounts or to the New
Hampshire turnpike system.

**Source.** RSA 256-C:14. 1971, 520:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:15-a

 **237:15-a Transfers from the General Reserve Account. –** If the
expenditure of additional funds over budget estimates is necessary for
the proper functioning of the bureau of turnpikes, the department of
transportation may request that the governor and council authorize the
transfer of funds from the general reserve account for highway purposes.

**Source.** 1989, 58:1, eff. June 18, 1989.

### Section 237:16

 **237:16 Spaulding Extension--Opinion Required. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981,
149:1, eff. July 21, 1981.
                                             ]

Regional Electronic Toll Collection
-----------------------------------

### Section 237:16-a

 **237:16-a Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
transportation.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of transportation.
                                             
 III. "Electronic toll collection system'' means a system for
electronically transmitting information from a device on a vehicle to
receiving equipment in a toll collection facility, which information is
used to charge a valid account holder the appropriate toll or charge for
use of the turnpike system.
                                             
 IV. "E-Z Pass'' means a regional system of electronic toll
collection operated by the members of the E-Z Pass Interagency Group, or
when the context requires, means the registered service mark "E-Z
Pass.''
                                             
 V. "Interagency group'' means the agencies of this or any other
state that have mutually agreed to operate the E-Z Pass regional
electronic toll collection system by use of similar practices,
procedures, and toll collection equipment.
                                             
 VI. "Vehicle'' means every device in, upon or by which a person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

**Source.** 2001, 247:1, eff. July 13, 2001.

### Section 237:16-b

 **237:16-b Regional Electronic Toll Collection Authorized. –** The
commissioner is hereby authorized to execute all documents and perform
all other acts necessary to enter into and carry out the provisions of a
regional electronic toll collection system agreement with the
Interagency Group in order to increase the efficiency of turnpike
operation and to improve traffic management in the state and region.

**Source.** 2001, 247:1, eff. July 13, 2001.

### Section 237:16-c

 **237:16-c E-Z Pass Operations Interagency Agreement. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall represent the state as a member of the
Interagency Group and shall participate in the determination of
practices, policies, procedures, and in the selection of equipment and
contractors used to provide consistent toll collections throughout the
region in accordance with the terms of the Interagency Agreement for
Operations, as the same may be amended from time to time.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding the variations in physical and operating
characteristics of member agencies' toll collection equipment, it shall
be the power and duty of the Interagency Group to assure that similar
operating parameters and procedures are established to provide for
consistent, safe E-Z Pass operation throughout the region.
                                             
 III. This agreement shall be construed liberally to accomplish its
purposes, but in the event a dispute arises, it shall be resolved in
accordance with a provision establishing a procedure for the arbitration
and resolution of disputes contained in the agreement.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner may enter into discussions with other state
jurisdictions to create reciprocal agreements for the enforcement and
collection of tolls and administrative fees due under the E-Z Pass
system. The departments of transportation and safety may release
driver's and owner's information to other jurisdictions for the purpose
of enforcement or collection of tolls and may take such other action as
is necessary to effectuate the reciprocal enforcement agreements.

**Source.** 2001, 247:1, eff. July 13, 2001. 2009, 144:83, eff. July 1,
2009. 2015, 242:2, eff. Sept. 11, 2015.

### Section 237:16-d

 **237:16-d Rulemaking. –** The commissioner may adopt such rules as
are necessary to enforce the terms of this agreement, which shall be
exempt from the provisions of RSA 541-A and shall have the effect of
law, and which shall provide for each of the member states or agencies
to collect tolls and perform audits on behalf of the other member states
or agencies. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the
adoption of rules which alter any existing or establish any new tolls,
fees, penalties, or interest charges; provided, however, that the rules
may include tolls, fees, penalties, or interest charges which are
otherwise provided for by the laws of this state.

**Source.** 2001, 247:1, eff. July 13, 2001.

### Section 237:16-e

 **237:16-e Confidentiality of Records. –** Notwithstanding RSA 91-A
or any other provision of law, all information received by the
department that could serve to identify vehicles, vehicle owners,
vehicle occupants, or account holders in any electronic toll collection
system in use in this state shall be for the exclusive use of the
department for the sole purpose of administering the electronic toll
collection system, and shall not be open to any other organization or
person, nor be used in any court in any action or proceeding, unless the
action or proceeding relates to the imposition of or indemnification for
liability pursuant to this subdivision. The department may make such
information available to another organization or person in the course of
its administrative duties, only on the condition that the organization
or person receiving such information is subject to the limitations set
forth in this section. For the purposes of this section, administration
or administrative duties shall not include marketing, soliciting
existing account holders to participate in additional services, taking
polls, or engaging in other similar activities for any purpose. The use
and release of all information obtained from the department of safety
pursuant to RSA 260:14, III-a, shall be governed by RSA 260:14.

**Source.** 2001, 247:1. 2004, 19:2, eff. June 4, 2004. 2015, 242:3,
eff. Sept. 11, 2015.

### Section 237:16-f

 **237:16-f Immunity. –** Nothing in this subdivision shall be
construed to constitute a waiver of the sovereign immunity of the state,
or any other defense, right, immunity, or other protection under law,
including any statutory provision, as a result of participation in this
agreement.

**Source.** 2001, 247:1, eff. July 13, 2001.

### Section 237:16-g

 **237:16-g Additional Uses of E-Z Pass System. –** The commissioner
may approve the use of the E-Z Pass system for the payment of non-toll
based financial obligations voluntarily incurred by an account holder,
provided that:
                                             
 I. The financial obligation has been incurred for a purpose approved
by the department pursuant to RSA 237:16-d, or the Interagency Group
pursuant to procedures adopted in accordance with RSA 237:16-c.
                                             
 II. The business entity to be paid through the system has entered
into a written agreement with the department, or another member of the
Interagency Group, agreeing to be bound by:
                                             
 (a) All of the practices, procedures, and policies of the
department or the Interagency Group;
                                             
 (b) The requirements for confidentiality of information regarding
the vehicle, the vehicle owner, and vehicle occupants under RSA
237:16-e;
                                             
 (c) All applicable federal and state laws, regulations, and rules
regulating the consumer credit transaction between the business entity
and the account holder; and
                                             
 (d) A process for the resolution of disputed charges with account
holders, which includes an agreement to hold the department and its
agents harmless for the payment of any unpaid financial obligation to
the business entity incurred by the account holder through the E-Z Pass
system.
                                             
 III. The account holder has, as a result of signing a written
account holder agreement prior to incurring charges on the account:
                                             
 (a) Agreed to be liable for payment of such obligations in
accordance with the terms of the agreement;
                                             
 (b) Been provided with notice of all current policies regarding
the sharing of information regarding the account and transactions
incurred through the E-Z Pass system; and
                                             
 (c) Been provided with notice of procedures available to resolve
disputes arising from transactions incurred through the E-Z Pass
system.
                                             
 IV. The department may establish reasonable fees to be charged to
account holders and business entities participating in this program, and
to recover costs of administration, enforcement, and improvement of the
E-Z Pass system. Such fees shall be deposited in the turnpike fund.

**Source.** 2004, 19:1, eff. June 4, 2004.

Eastern New Hampshire Turnpike
------------------------------

### Section 237:17

 **237:17 Authority Granted. –** The commissioner of transportation,
with the approval of the governor and council, shall locate and
construct a continuous highway from a point on the Massachusetts-New
Hampshire boundary in the town of Seabrook to a point on the New
Hampshire-Maine boundary in the city of Portsmouth, and from the
Portsmouth traffic circle in the city of Portsmouth to a point in the
vicinity of the town of Milton, and shall operate and maintain said
highway as a toll road as hereinafter provided.
                                             
 I. Determine the location of the aforesaid toll road and fix the
width of its right-of-way.
                                             
 II. Acquire in the name of the state by purchase or by exercise of
the right of condemnation as provided by statute such lands, property,
rights, easements and interests as may be deemed necessary for carrying
out the provisions of this subdivision.
                                             
 III. Designate the locations and establish, limit and control such
points of ingress to and egress from the toll road as may be necessary
or desirable to ensure the proper operation of the toll road and to
prohibit ingress to or egress from the toll road at any points not so
designated.
                                             
 IV. Permit toll-free use of certain sections of the toll road if it
is for the public good.
                                             
 V. Construct grade separations at intersections of the toll road
with public roads and private ways, and change and adjust the lines and
grades of such roads and ways so as to accommodate the same to the
design of such grade separations and to the design of the toll road.
                                             
 VI. Construct, operate and maintain the toll road within the compact
areas of cities and towns.
                                             
 VII. Grant permits or licenses to any corporation or person to place
and maintain along, on, under or within the toll road ducts, pipes,
pipelines, poles, wires or other structures, to be so located as not to
be unsightly and not to interfere with the safe and convenient operation
and maintenance of the toll road, and may contract with any such
corporation or person for such permits or licenses on such terms and
conditions as may be deemed necessary for carrying out the provisions of
this subdivision. The appearance, construction, maintenance and repairs
of any such ducts, pipes, pipelines, poles, wires or other structures
shall be subject to such directions and regulations as may be imposed.
                                             
 VIII. Establish a temporary turnpike engineering section for the
period of design and construction of the toll road, assign permanent
employees of the department of transportation to duties and positions in
said section and employ such engineers and assistants as may be
necessary on a temporary basis for said period of design and
construction. The costs of said turnpike engineering section shall be a
charge against the funds made available under the subdivision.
                                             
 IX. Enter into contractual relations on behalf of the state.
                                             
 X. Do and perform all such acts as are necessary for the public
good.
                                             
 XI. Cause periodic traffic and economic studies to be made of the
operation of the aforesaid toll road.
                                             
 XII. Make periodic studies of possible extensions or additions to
said toll road.
                                             
 XIII. Employ such assistants, engineers or consulting services as
may be necessary to carry out the provisions of paragraphs XI and XII of
this section. The expense of the said studies shall be a charge upon the
fund established under RSA 237:24 and, upon approval by the legislature,
to extend said turnpike when recommendations of independent recognized
consultants indicate that such extensions are economically feasible.
                                             
 XIV. Construct a service road along the easterly side of the eastern
New Hampshire turnpike, at a point commencing at the southerly side of
Echo avenue in the city of Portsmouth, and running northerly to the
southerly side of Gosling road in said Portsmouth, with access to the
service road from land abutting the service road on the east; providing
that all land required for such roads shall be provided without cost to
the state, that all claims against the state as a result of construction
of the Spaulding turnpike and the service road shall also be waived by
said landowners and further provided that a sufficient balance from the
funds established for the construction of the Spaulding turnpike to
provide such access road shall be available on completion of the
project;
                                             
 XV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 Further provided that upon completion of said service road, it be
accepted by the city of Portsmouth and thereafter it will keep and
maintain said service road without expense to the state of New
Hampshire.

**Source.** 1947, 295:1, 2, 3. 1951, 21:1. 1953, 237:1, par. 1. RSA
256:1. 1955, 304:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 16:4; 402:6, I(b)(8). 1987, 403:5.
1996, 95:1, II. 2004, 257:34, eff. June 15, 2004. 2009, 144:74, eff.
July 1, 2009.

### Section 237:18

 **237:18 Highways Named. –** The portion of the toll road from the
Massachusetts-New Hampshire boundary in the town of Seabrook to a point
on the New Hampshire-Maine boundary in the city of Portsmouth shall be
designated as the Blue Star memorial highway as provided in chapter 115,
Laws of 1949, and shall be located on the road as now constructed. That
part of the said toll road from the Portsmouth traffic circle in the
city of Portsmouth to a point in the vicinity of the town of Milton,
shall be designated and named Spaulding turnpike.

**Source.** 1953, 237:1, par. 2. RSA 256:2. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20,
1981. 2009, 144:75, eff. July 1, 2009.

### Section 237:19

 **237:19 Highway Patrol. –** Law enforcement and public safety
services on the turnpike system shall be provided by the department of
safety, division of state police. The cost of these services shall be a
charge on the fund established under RSA 237:24.

**Source.** 1950, 8:1. 1953, 237:1, par. 3. RSA 256:3. 1961, 166:3.
1981, 87:1. 1985, 16:3, eff. April 1, 1985.

### Section 237:20

 **237:20 Funds Provided. –** A sum not exceeding 
                                             $7,000,000 for the
construction of the toll road from a point on the Massachusetts-New
Hampshire boundary in the town of Seabrook to a point in the city of
Portsmouth and a sum not exceeding 
                                             $14,300,000 for the construction
from said point in the city of Portsmouth to a point in the vicinity of
the city of Rochester is hereby appropriated as hereinafter provided for
the purposes of carrying into effect the provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1947, 295:4. 1949, 303:1. 1953, 237:1, par. 4. RSA 256:4.
1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:21

 **237:21 Borrowing Power. –**
                                             
 I. The state treasurer is hereby authorized under the direction of
the governor and council to borrow upon the credit of the state a sum
not exceeding 
                                             $21,300,000 for the purposes of carrying into effect the
provisions of this subdivision and for that purpose may issue bonds in
the name and on behalf of the state of New Hampshire at a rate of
interest to be determined by the governor and council.
                                             
 II. The maturity dates of such bonds shall be determined by the
governor and council but in no case shall they be later than 30 years
from the date of issue and may be redeemable before maturity at the
option of the governor and council at such price or prices and under
such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the governor and council
prior to the issuance of the bonds. Such bonds shall contain an express
guarantee which shall be deemed a contract on the part of the state that
tolls will be collected in accordance with the provisions of this
subdivision until the date of maturity of said bonds or until sufficient
money shall have accumulated to pay said bonds and the interest thereon
at or prior to dates of maturity. The bonds shall be in such form and
such denominations as the governor and council shall determine, may be
registerable as to both principal and interest, shall be countersigned
by the governor, and shall be deemed a pledge of the full faith and
credit of the state. The governor may authorize his countersignature on
said bonds to be by facsimile signature.
                                             
 III. The secretary of state shall keep an account of all such bonds
showing the number and amount of each, the time and date of
countersigning, the date of delivery to the treasurer, and the date of
maturity.
                                             
 IV. The state treasurer shall keep an account of each bond showing
the number thereof, the name of the person to whom sold, the amount
received from the same, the date of the sale and the date of maturity.

**Source.** 1947, 295:5. 1949, 303:2. 1953, 237:1, par. 5. RSA 256:5.
1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:22

 **237:22 Short Term Notes. –** Prior to the issuance of the bonds
hereunder, the state treasurer with the approval of the governor and
council may for the purposes hereof borrow money from time to time on
short term loans which may be refunded by the issuance of the bonds
hereunder. Provided, however, that at no one time shall the indebtedness
of the state on such short term loans exceed the sum of 
                                             $14,300,000.

**Source.** 1947, 295:7. 1949, 44:1. 1953, 237:1, par. 6. RSA 256:6.
1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:23

 **237:23 Sale of Bonds or Notes. –**
                                             
 I. All bonds or notes (except short-term loans) issued under the
provisions of this subdivision shall be sold (1) at public sealed
bidding (2) only after an advertisement calling for bids has been
published at least once in each of 2 successive calendar weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in New Hampshire and in a financial
publication of national circulation, the first publication being not
less than 15 days prior to the day the bids will be received, and (3) to
the highest bidder. The governor and council may reject any or all bids,
or negotiate with the highest responsible bidder.
                                             
 II. The proceeds from the sale of such bonds shall be held by the
treasurer and paid out by him upon warrants drawn by the governor for
the purposes of this subdivision alone, and the governor with the advice
and consent of the council shall draw his warrant for the payment from
the funds provided by this subdivision of all sums expended or due for
the purposes herein authorized, provided, however, that such
expenditures or commitments shall not exceed the sum of 
                                             $5,000,000
prior to July 1, 1955. All interest from such bonds shall be exempt from
taxation within the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1947, 295:6. 1953, 237:1, par. 7. RSA 256:7. 1981, 87:1,
eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:24

 **237:24 Tolls. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of transportation, with the approval of the
governor and council, shall establish toll rates and other charges for
use of the eastern New Hampshire turnpike or any part of the
right-of-way and other property acquired in connection therewith. The
governor and council shall approve or reject the commissioner's proposed
toll rates and other charges within 90 days of receiving them. The tolls
collected shall be deposited with the state treasurer who shall keep the
same in a separate account, and the operating expenses and maintenance
of the turnpike shall be paid from said account. From the balance
remaining after payment of operation and maintenance, the governor, with
the approval of the council, shall pay the interest and principal on the
bonds issued hereunder. Fourteen days previous to the time said interest
and principal are payable, the state treasurer shall examine the
existing balance and if such balance is insufficient to make the
payment, then he shall notify the governor who shall immediately draw
his warrant on the highway fund to cover any deficit, and, if the funds
in both of the above accounts are insufficient, the governor shall draw
his warrant upon the state's general fund to the amount necessary to
meet the payments. The full faith and credit of the state is pledged to
the payment of the principal of and the interest on the bonds as they
become due and payable. Any funds paid out from the state's general fund
for the above purposes shall be reimbursed from the collection of tolls
as soon as such funds are available. Any funds that have been or may be
expended for the completion of the turnpike by the department of
transportation shall be repaid to said department when, in the opinion
of the governor and council, sufficient funds are available. Any excess
income may be used for further toll road extensions in accordance with
RSA 237:17, XIII. During the construction of the turnpike the governor
may, if necessary, draw his warrant upon the highway fund to pay
interest due on any bonds that have been issued in accordance with the
provisions of this subdivision; such payment is to be repaid to the
highway fund from the collection of tolls.
                                             
 II. Tolls or charges collected for use of any section of the eastern
New Hampshire turnpike, including the so-called Blue Star memorial
highway and the so-called Spaulding highway, shall be kept in one
account by the state treasurer to be known as the eastern New Hampshire
turnpike fund. Payments therefrom shall be made as provided in paragraph
I.

**Source.** 1947, 295:8. 1953, 237:1, par. 8. RSA 256:8; 256:8-a. 1963,
97:3. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 16:5; 402:6, I(a)(8). 1987, 403:6, eff. Jan. 1,
1988.

### Section 237:25

 **237:25 Exemption from Tolls. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988, 83:2, I, eff.
June 14, 1988.
                                             ]

### Section 237:26

 **237:26 Encumbered Tolls Nonlapsing. –** Notwithstanding the
provisions of RSA 9:18 any general appropriation of funds collected
pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision which have been
encumbered shall not lapse until the object for which the encumbrance
was made has been accomplished. No later than 2 weeks after the
convening of any regular session of the legislature, the commissioner of
administrative services shall submit a list of all extensions of the
time of lapsing of any such appropriation pursuant to this section to
the chairperson of the finance committee of the house of representatives
and to the chairperson of the senate finance committee.

**Source.** RSA 256:8-c. 1971, 32:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 399:3, I. 1995,
9:33, eff. June 11, 1995.

### Section 237:27

 **237:27 Definition. –** Said toll road shall be a limited access
highway as defined in RSA 230:44, except that RSA 230:52 shall not apply
to ducts, pipes, pipelines, poles, wires or other structures permitted
under RSA 237:17, VII or to existing facilities on highways, not now
restricted as to access, used as toll-free sections of the turnpike.

**Source.** 1947, 295:10. 1949, 303:3. 1953, 237:1, par. 9. RSA 256:9.
1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:28

 **237:28 Contracts for Construction. –** All contracts for the
construction of the highway hereunder shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder submitting a sealed bid after an advertisement
calling for bids has been published at least once in each of 2
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in New Hampshire.
The first publication of such advertisement shall be not less than 14
days prior to the date upon which bids are received. Contracts shall be
awarded in accordance with RSA 228:4.

**Source.** 1947, 295:11. 1953, 237:1, par. 10. RSA 256:10. 1981, 87:1,
eff. April 20, 1981.

Eastern Turnpike Bridge
-----------------------

### Section 237:29

 **237:29 Authority Granted. –** The commissioner of transportation,
with the approval of the governor and council, is hereby authorized to
lay out and construct a bridge and the approaches thereto over Great Bay
parallel to, on the downstream side of, the General Sullivan bridge.
Except as may be inconsistent herewith and except as hereinafter
otherwise provided, said bridge shall be laid out, constructed and
operated in accordance with, and shall be subject to, the provisions of
RSA 237 including, but not limited to, RSA 237:24.

**Source.** RSA 256-A:1. 1963, 223:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(8).

### Section 237:30

 **237:30 Funds Provided. –** A sum not exceeding 
                                             $3,000,000 is
hereby appropriated as hereinafter provided for the purpose of carrying
into effect the provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** RSA 256-A:2. 1963, 223:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:31

 **237:31 Borrowing Power. –** The state treasurer is hereby
authorized with the approval of the governor and council to borrow upon
the credit of the state a sum not exceeding 
                                             $3,000,000 for the purpose
of carrying into effect the provisions of this subdivision and for that
purpose may issue bonds in the name and on behalf of the state of New
Hampshire at a rate of interest to be determined by the governor and
council. The maturity dates of such bonds shall be determined by the
governor and council but in no case shall they be later than 30 years
from the date of issue and may be redeemable before maturity at the
option of the governor and council at such price or prices and under
such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the governor and council
prior to the issuance of the bonds. Such bonds shall contain an express
guarantee which shall be deemed a contract on the part of the state that
tolls will be collected in accordance with the provisions of this
subdivision and RSA 237 until the date of maturity of said bonds or
until sufficient money shall have accumulated to pay said bonds and the
interest thereon at or prior to the dates of maturity. The bonds shall
be in such form and such denominations as the governor and council shall
determine, may be registerable as to both principal and interest, shall
be countersigned by the governor, and shall be deemed a pledge of the
full faith and credit of the state. The governor may authorize his
countersignature on said bonds to be by facsimile signature. The
secretary of state shall keep an account of all such bonds showing the
number and amount of each, the time and date of countersigning, the date
of delivery to the treasurer and the date of maturity. The state
treasurer shall keep an account of each bond showing the number thereof,
the name of the person to whom sold, the amount received from the same,
the date of the sale and the date of maturity.

**Source.** RSA 256-A:3. 1963, 223:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:32

 **237:32 Short Term Notes. –** Prior to the issuance of the bonds
hereunder the state treasurer, with the approval of the governor and
council, may for the purposes hereof borrow money from time to time on
short term loans which may be refunded by the issuance of bonds
hereunder. Provided, however, that at no time shall the indebtedness of
the state on such short term loans exceed the sum of 
                                             $3,000,000.

**Source.** RSA 256-A:4. 1963, 223:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:33

 **237:33 Sale of Bonds or Notes. –** All bonds or notes (except
short term loans) issued under the provisions of this subdivision shall
be sold (1) at public sealed bidding (2) only after an advertisement
calling for bids has been published at least once in each of 2
successive calendar weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in New
Hampshire and in a financial publication of national circulation, the
first publication being not less than 15 days prior to the day the bids
will be received, and (3) to the highest bidder. The governor and
council may reject any or all bids, and/or negotiate with the highest
responsible bidder. The proceeds from the sale of such bonds shall be
held by the treasurer and paid out by him upon warrants drawn by the
governor for the purposes of this subdivision alone, and the governor,
with the advice and consent of the council, shall draw his warrant for
the payment from the funds provided by this subdivision of all sums
expended or due for the purposes herein authorized. All interest from
such bonds shall be exempt from taxation within the state of New
Hampshire.

**Source.** RSA 256-A:5. 1963, 223:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

Central New Hampshire Turnpike
------------------------------

### Section 237:34

 **237:34 Authority Granted for Turnpike. –** The commissioner of
transportation, with the approval of the governor and council, shall
locate and construct a continuous highway from a point on the
Massachusetts-New Hampshire boundary in the city of Nashua to a point in
the city of Concord and shall operate and maintain said highway as a
turnpike as hereinafter provided:
                                             
 I. Determine the location of the authorized turnpike and fix the
width of its right-of-way; provided that the location of the turnpike
through the city of Manchester shall be located on the west bank of the
Merrimack river.
                                             
 II. Acquire in the name of the state by purchase or by exercise of
the right of condemnation as provided by statute such lands, property,
rights, easements and interests as may be deemed necessary for carrying
out the provisions of this subdivision.
                                             
 III. Designate the locations and establish, limit and control such
points of ingress to and egress from the turnpike as may be necessary or
desirable to ensure the proper operation of the turnpike and to prohibit
ingress to or egress from the turnpike at any points not so designated.
                                             
 IV. Permit toll-free use of certain sections of the turnpike if it
is for the public good.
                                             
 V. Construct grade separations at intersections of the turnpike with
public roads and private ways, and change and adjust the lines and
grades of such roads and ways so as to accommodate the same to the
design of such grade separations to the design of the turnpike.
                                             
 VI. Construct, operate and maintain the turnpike within the compact
areas of cities and towns.
                                             
 VII. Grant permits or licenses to any corporation or person to place
and maintain along, on, under or within the turnpike ducts, pipes,
pipelines, poles, wires or other structures, to be so located as not to
be unsightly and not to interfere with the safe and convenient operation
and maintenance of the turnpike and contract with any such corporation
or person for such permit or license on such terms and conditions as may
be deemed necessary for carrying out the provisions of this subdivision.
The appearance, construction, maintenance and repairs of any such ducts,
pipes, pipelines, poles, wires or other structures shall be subject to
such directions and regulations as may be imposed.
                                             
 VIII. Establish a temporary turnpike engineering section for the
period of design and construction of the turnpike, assign permanent
employees of the department of transportation to duties and positions in
said section and employ such engineers and assistants as may be
necessary on a temporary basis for said period of design and
construction. The costs of said turnpike engineering section shall be a
charge against the funds made available hereunder.
                                             
 IX. Enter into contractual relations on behalf of the state.
                                             
 X. Do and perform all such acts as are necessary for the public
good.
                                             
 XI. Cause periodic traffic and economic studies to be made of the
operation of the aforesaid turnpike.
                                             
 XII. Make periodic studies of possible extensions or additions to
said turnpike.
                                             
 XIII. Employ such assistants, engineers or consulting services as
may be necessary to carry out the provisions of paragraphs XI and XII
above. The expense of the said studies shall be a charge upon the funds
established under RSA 237:40 and, upon approval by the legislature,
extend said turnpike when recommendations of independent recognized
consultants indicate that such extensions are economically feasible.
                                             
 XIV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1953, 238:1. RSA 257:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 17:4; 402:6,
I(b)(8). 1987, 403:7. 1996, 95:1, III, eff. July 14, 1996.

### Section 237:35

 **237:35 Highway Patrol. –** Law enforcement and public safety
services on the turnpike system shall be provided by the department of
safety, division of state police. The cost of these services shall be a
charge on the fund established under RSA 237:40.

**Source.** 1953, 238:2. RSA 257:2. 1961, 166:3. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 17:3,
eff. April 1, 1985.

### Section 237:36

 **237:36 Funds Provided. –** A sum not exceeding 
                                             $19,350,000 is
hereby appropriated as hereinafter provided for the purposes of carrying
into effect the provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1953, 238:3. RSA 257:3. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:37

 **237:37 Borrowing Power. –**
                                             
 I. The state treasurer is hereby authorized with the approval of the
governor and council to borrow upon the credit of the state a sum not
exceeding 
                                             $19,350,000 for the purpose of carrying into effect the
provisions of this subdivision and for that purpose may issue bonds in
the name and on behalf of the state of New Hampshire at a rate of
interest to be determined by the governor and council.
                                             
 II. The maturity dates of such bonds shall be determined by the
governor and council but in no case shall they be later than 30 years
from the date of issue and may be redeemable before maturity at the
option of the governor and council at such price or prices and under
such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the governor and council
prior to the issuance of the bonds. Such bonds shall contain an express
guarantee which shall be deemed a contract on the part of the state that
tolls will be collected in accordance with the provisions of this
subdivision until the date of maturity of said bonds or until sufficient
money shall have accumulated to pay said bonds and the interest thereon
at or prior to the dates of maturity. The bonds shall be in such form
and such denominations as the governor and council shall determine, may
be registerable as to both principal and interest, shall be
countersigned by the governor, and shall be deemed a pledge of the full
faith and credit of the state. The governor may authorize his
countersignature on said bonds to be by facsimile signature.
                                             
 III. The secretary of state shall keep an account of all such bonds
showing the number and amount of each, the time and date of
countersigning, the date of delivery to the treasurer and the date of
maturity.
                                             
 IV. The state treasurer shall keep an account of each bond showing
the number thereof, the name of the person to whom sold, the amount
received from the same, the date of the sale and the date of maturity.

**Source.** 1953, 238:4. RSA 257:4. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:38

 **237:38 Short Term Notes. –** Prior to the issuance of the bonds
hereunder the state treasurer, with the approval of the governor and
council, may for the purposes hereof borrow money from time to time on
short term loans which may be refunded by the issuance of the bonds
hereunder. Provided, however, that at no one time shall the indebtedness
of the state on such short term loans exceed the sum of 
                                             $19,350,000.

**Source.** 1953, 238:5. RSA 257:5. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:39

 **237:39 Sale of Bonds or Notes. –**
                                             
 I. All bonds or notes (except short term loans) issued under the
provisions of this subdivision shall be sold (1) at public sealed
bidding (2) only after an advertisement calling for bids has been
published at least once in each of 2 successive calendar weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in New Hampshire and in a financial
publication of national circulation, the first publication being not
less than 15 days prior to the day the bids will be received, and (3) to
the highest bidder. The governor and council may reject any or all bids,
or negotiate with the highest responsible bidder.
                                             
 II. The proceeds from the sale of such bonds shall be held by the
treasurer and paid out by him upon warrants drawn by the governor for
the purposes of this subdivision alone, and the governor, with the
advice and consent of the council, shall draw his warrant for the
payment from the funds provided by this subdivision of all sums expended
or due for the purposes herein authorized, provided, however, that such
expenditure or commitments shall not exceed the sum of 
                                             $15,000,000
prior to July 1, 1955. All interest from such bonds shall be exempt from
taxation within the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1953, 238:6. RSA 257:6. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:40

 **237:40 Tolls. –** The commissioner of transportation, with the
approval of the governor and council, shall establish toll rates and
other charges for use of the central New Hampshire turnpike or any part
of the right-of-way and other property acquired in connection therewith.
The governor and council shall approve or reject the commissioner's
proposed toll rates and other charges within 90 days of receiving them.
The tolls collected shall be deposited with the state treasurer who
shall keep the same in a separate account, and the operating expenses
and maintenance of the turnpike shall be paid from said account. From
the balance remaining after payment of operation and maintenance, the
governor, with the approval of the council, shall pay the interest and
principal on the bonds hereunder. Fourteen days previous to the time
said interest and principal are payable, the state treasurer shall
examine the existing balance and if such balance is insufficient to make
the payment, then he shall notify the governor who shall immediately
draw his warrant on the highway fund to cover any deficit, and, if the
funds in both of the above accounts are insufficient, the governor shall
draw his warrant upon the state's general fund to the amount necessary
to meet the payments. The full faith and credit of the state is pledged
to the payment of the principal of and the interest on the bonds as they
become due and payable. Any funds paid out from the state's general fund
for the above purposes shall be reimbursed from the collection of tolls
as soon as such funds are available. Any funds that have been or may be
expended for the completion of the turnpike by the department of
transportation shall be repaid to said department when, in the opinion
of the governor and council, sufficient funds are available. Any excess
income may be used for further turnpike extensions in accordance with
RSA 237:34, XIII. During the construction of the turnpike the governor
may, if necessary, draw his warrant upon the highway fund to pay
interest due on any bonds that have been issued in accordance with the
provisions of this subdivision; such payment is to be repaid to the
highway fund from the collection of tolls.

**Source.** 1953, 238:7. RSA 257:7. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 17:5; 402:6,
I(a)(8). 1987, 403:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 237:41

 **237:41 Exemption from Tolls. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988, 83:2, II, eff.
June 14, 1988.
                                             ]

### Section 237:42

 **237:42 Encumbered Tolls Nonlapsing. –** Notwithstanding the
provisions of RSA 9:18 any general appropriation of funds collected
pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision which have been
encumbered shall not lapse until the object for which the encumbrance
was made has been accomplished. No later than 2 weeks after the
convening of any regular session of the legislature, the commissioner of
administrative services shall submit a list of all extensions of the
time of lapsing of any such appropriation pursuant to this section to
the chairperson of the finance committee of the house of representatives
and to the chairperson of the senate finance committee.

**Source.** RSA 257:7-b. 1971, 31:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985, 399:3, I. 1995,
9:34, eff. June 11, 1995.

### Section 237:43

 **237:43 Definition. –** Said turnpike shall be a limited access
highway as defined in RSA 230:44, except that RSA 230:52 shall not apply
to ducts, pipes, pipelines, poles, wires or other structures permitted
under RSA 237:34, VII or to existing facilities on highways, not now
restricted as to access, used as toll-free sections of the turnpike.

**Source.** 1953, 238:8. RSA 257:8. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:44

 **237:44 Contracts for Construction. –** All contracts for the
construction of the highway hereunder shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder submitting a sealed bid after an advertisement
calling for bids has been published at least once in each of 2
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in New Hampshire.
The first publication of such advertisement shall be not less than 14
days prior to the date upon which bids are received. Contracts shall be
awarded in accordance with RSA 228:4.

**Source.** 1953, 238:9. RSA 257:9. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

Central New Hampshire Turnpike Connection
-----------------------------------------

### Section 237:45

 **237:45 Authority Granted. –** For the purpose of connecting the
central New Hampshire turnpike with the proposed relocation of route
U.S. 3 in Massachusetts, at the New Hampshire-Massachusetts boundary,
the commissioner of transportation, with the approval of the governor
and council, is hereby authorized to lay out and construct a relocation
of the central New Hampshire turnpike at a point westerly of the present
location of said route in the city of Nashua, and to lay out and
construct additional ramps at the interchange of the central New
Hampshire turnpike and route 130, and for the acquisition of land
necessary for continuation and construction of the F. E. Everett
turnpike to the N.H.-Mass. boundary and to provide an access road or
ramps north and south at Spitbrook road, provided funds are available
for the construction of the additional ramps within the appropriations
made hereunder for the purposes of this subdivision. Except as may be
inconsistent herewith and except as hereinafter otherwise provided, said
relocation shall be laid out, constructed and operated in accordance
with, and shall be subject to the provisions of this subdivision
including, but not limited to, RSA 237:40. Provided further that said
relocation shall not be opened to traffic until relocated route 3 in
Massachusetts shall also be opened to traffic.

**Source.** RSA 257-A:1. 1963, 281:1. 1965, 342:1. 1981, 87:1. 1985,
402:6, I(b)(8).

### Section 237:46

 **237:46 Funds Provided. –** A sum not exceeding 
                                             $4,000,000 is
hereby appropriated for the purposes authorized in this subdivision. The
appropriation shall be a continuing appropriation and shall not lapse.

**Source.** RSA 257-A:2. 1963, 281:1. 1965, 342:2. 1981, 87:1, eff.
April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:47

 **237:47 Borrowing Power. –** The state treasurer is hereby
authorized with the approval of the governor and council to borrow upon
the credit of the state a sum not exceeding 
                                             $4,000,000 for the purpose
of carrying into effect the provisions of this subdivision and for that
purpose may issue bonds in the name and on behalf of the state of New
Hampshire at a rate of interest to be determined by the governor and
council. The maturity dates of such bonds shall be determined by the
governor and council but in no case shall they be later than 30 years
from the date of issue and may be redeemable before maturity at the
option of the governor and council at such price or prices and under
such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the governor and council
prior to the issuance of the bonds. Such bonds shall contain an express
guarantee which shall be deemed a contract on the part of the state that
tolls will be collected in accordance with the provisions of this
subdivision until the date of maturity of said bonds or until sufficient
money shall have accumulated to pay said bonds and the interest thereon
at or prior to the dates of maturity. The bonds shall be in such form
and such denominations as the governor and council shall determine, may
be registerable as to both principal and interest, shall be
countersigned by the governor, and shall be deemed a pledge of the full
faith and credit of the state. The governor may authorize his
countersignature on said bonds to be by facsimile signature. The
secretary of state shall keep an account of all such bonds showing the
number and amount of each, the time and date of countersigning, the date
of delivery to the treasurer and the date of maturity. The state
treasurer shall keep an account of each bond showing the number thereof,
the name of the person to whom sold, the amount received from the same,
the date of the sale and the date of maturity.

**Source.** RSA 257-A:3. 1963, 281:1. 1965, 342:3. 1981, 87:1, eff.
April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:48

 **237:48 Short Term Notes. –** Prior to the issuance of the bonds
hereunder the state treasurer, with the approval of the governor and
council, may for the purposes hereof borrow money from time to time on
short term loans which may be refunded by the issuance of bonds
hereunder. Provided, however, that at no time shall the indebtedness of
the state on such short term loans exceed the sum of 
                                             $4,000,000.

**Source.** RSA 257-A:4. 1963, 281:1. 1965, 342:4. 1981, 87:1, eff.
April 20, 1981.

### Section 237:49

 **237:49 Sale of Bonds or Notes. –** All bonds or notes (except
short term loans) issued under the provisions of this subdivision shall
be sold (1) at public sealed bidding (2) only after an advertisement
calling for bids has been published at least once in each of 2
successive calendar weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in New
Hampshire and in a financial publication of national circulation, the
first publication being not less than 15 days prior to the day the bids
will be received, and (3) to the highest bidder. The governor and
council may reject any or all bids, or negotiate with the highest
responsible bidder. The proceeds from the sale of such bonds shall be
held by the treasurer and paid out by him upon warrants drawn by the
governor for the purposes of this subdivision alone, and the governor,
with the advice and consent of the council, shall draw his warrant for
the payment from the funds provided by this subdivision of all sums
expended or due for the purposes herein authorized. All interest from
such bonds shall be exempt from taxation within the state of New
Hampshire.

**Source.** RSA 257-A:5. 1963, 281:1. 1981, 87:1, eff. April 20, 1981.

Turnpike Renewal and Replacement Accounts
-----------------------------------------

### Section 237:49-a

 **237:49-a Turnpike Renewal and Replacement Account Established. –**
There is established the turnpike renewal and replacement account within
the department of transportation. At the close of each fiscal year, all
surplus renewal and replacement funds shall be transferred to the
turnpike renewal and replacement fund.

**Source.** 1997, 351:3, eff. July 1, 1997.

### Section 237:50

 **237:50 Acquisition; Authority Granted. –**
                                             
 I. The department of transportation, acting by and on behalf of the
state, is hereby authorized to convey to the bureau of turnpikes, and
the bureau of turnpikes is authorized to acquire from the state, a
portion of Interstate Route 95 in the city of Portsmouth for the sum of

                                             $120,000,000 and on such other terms and provisions as the commissioner
of transportation and the bureau of turnpikes determine are reasonable
or necessary to complete the acquisition. The bureau of turnpikes is
authorized to acquire, expand, and make improvements to the eastern New
Hampshire turnpike from the northerly expansion joint of the Interstate
Route 95 bridge over the Spaulding turnpike, U.S. Route 4, and N.H.
Route 16 (bridge No. 197/122) north to a point on the New
Hampshire-Maine boundary in the city of Portsmouth, such improvements to
include the installation of open road tolling for the toll on Interstate
Route 95 in Hampton.
                                             
 II. The bureau of turnpikes shall operate and maintain this section
of highway, which shall become part of the eastern New Hampshire
turnpike under RSA 237:17 and the Blue Star memorial highway under RSA
237:18.
                                             
 III. Acquisition and expansion of the eastern New Hampshire turnpike
system for 
                                             $120,000,000 plus interest shall be at the state borrowing
rate to be paid over a maximum 20-year term to the highway fund from the
New Hampshire turnpike system reserve account as follows: 
                                             $30,000,000
in fiscal year 2010, 
                                             $20,000,000 in fiscal year 2011, and the balance
to be paid under terms and conditions to be determined by the
commissioner of transportation and the state treasurer.
                                             
 IV. The high level bridge on Interstate Route 95 over the Piscataqua
River is eligible for federal funds and state highway funds. In the
event of emergency repairs or repair to damage from a catastrophic
event, the department of transportation, rather than the bureau of
turnpikes, shall remain liable for such repairs to the high level
bridge.

**Source.** 2009, 144:76, eff. July 1, 2009.
