---
title: 'CHAPTER 238-A NEW HAMPSHIRE RAIL TRANSIT AUTHORITY'
---

TITLE XX
                                             
TRANSPORTATION
==============

CHAPTER 238-A
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE RAIL TRANSIT AUTHORITY
------------------------------------

### Section 238-A:1

 **238-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Authority'' means the New Hampshire rail transit authority.
                                             
 II. "Government agency'' includes any department, agency,
commission, public corporation, bureau, authority, instrumentality, or
political subdivision of:
                                             
 (a) The United States of America.
                                             
 (b) The state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (c) Any state adjacent to New Hampshire.
                                             
 III. "Municipality'' means town as defined in RSA 21:5.
                                             
 IV. "Regional planning commission'' means any commission formed
pursuant to RSA 36:46.
                                             
 V. "Railroad lines'' means railroad rights-of-way and any tracks,
track appurtenances, ties, ballast, bridges, stations, yards,
facilities, and other appurtenant structures located thereon or adjacent
thereto.
                                             
 VI. "Passenger rail service'' means all services performed by a
railroad pursuant to a contract with the authority in connection with
the transportation of rail passengers including, but not limited to:
                                             
 (a) The operation of trains, trackage, and equipment.
                                             
 (b) The construction, reconstruction, or maintenance of railroad
equipment, tracks, and appurtenant facilities.
                                             
 (c) The provision of trackage rights over lines owned by any such
railroad.
                                             
 VII. "Railroad'' means any person, railroad corporation, or other
legal entity in the business of providing rail transportation which
contracts with the authority for the provision of passenger rail
services.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1. 2008, 180:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2008.

### Section 238-A:2

 **238-A:2 Authority Established. –** There is hereby established the
New Hampshire rail transit authority for the general purpose of
developing and providing commuter rail or other similar forms of
passenger rail service. The authority shall be an administratively
attached agency, pursuant to RSA 21-G:10, to the department of
transportation.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007. 2009, 150:2, eff. July 8,
2009.

### Section 238-A:3

 **238-A:3 Duties. –** The authority and the department of
transportation shall allocate their respective responsibilities for
passenger rail service in a memorandum of understanding. The authority
shall take all actions that are reasonably necessary to establish
regularly scheduled commuter rail or other similar forms of passenger
rail service between points within the state of New Hampshire and points
within and adjacent to the state of New Hampshire. These actions may
include, but are not limited to:
                                             
 I. The acquisition, lease, possession, use, operation, repair,
renewal, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, modernization,
rebuilding, relocation, maintenance, and disposition of:
                                             
 (a) Railroad lines and related facilities.
                                             
 (b) Railroad rolling stock, machinery, and equipment.
                                             
 (c) Real and personal property of any kind.
                                             
 II. The acquisition, lease, license, possession, use, and
disposition of any rights in or related to such property, including
trackage, operating, maintenance, dispatching, and other contractual
rights and services from railroad companies, other transportation
service providers, public utilities, private persons, and government
agencies including the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007. 2009, 150:4, eff. July 8,
2009.

### Section 238-A:4

 **238-A:4 Membership. –**
                                             
 I. The governing body of the authority shall be a board of
directors. The board of directors shall receive input from the public
and from the authority advisory board established under paragraph IV.
The board of directors shall have the following 9 members:
                                             
 (a) The commissioner of the department of transportation, or
designee.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development, or designee.
                                             
 (c) An individual knowledgeable in the operations and
construction of railroads, appointed by the governor and approved by the
council.
                                             
 (d) An individual knowledgeable in labor and human relations,
appointed by the governor and approved by the council.
                                             
 (e) A member of the authority advisory board elected by the
board.
                                             
 (f) A business owner, appointed by the governor and approved by
the council.
                                             
 (g) A public member, appointed by the governor and approved by
the council.
                                             
 (h) The chairperson of the house transportation committee, or
designee.
                                             
 (i) The ranking minority member of the house transportation
committee, or designee.
                                             
 II. The members of the board of directors appointed by the governor
shall serve 2-year terms or until a successor has been named.
                                             
 III. The commissioners, or their designees, of the department of
transportation and the department of resources and economic development
shall serve until a successor has been named.
                                             
 IV. There is established the authority advisory board to:
                                             
 (a) Provide a state-wide perspective of passenger rail needs to
the authority.
                                             
 (b) Elect a member to serve as a voting member of the board of
directors.
                                             
 V. The authority advisory board shall have the following members:
                                             
 (a) The mayor of the city of Berlin, or designee.
                                             
 (b) The mayor of the city of Claremont, or designee.
                                             
 (c) The mayor of the city of Concord, or designee.
                                             
 (d) The mayor of the city of Dover, or designee.
                                             
 (e) The mayor of the city of Franklin or designee.
                                             
 (f) The mayor of the city of Manchester or designee.
                                             
 (g) The mayor of the city of Nashua, or designee.
                                             
 (h) The mayor of the city of Somersworth, or designee.
                                             
 (i) A designee of the town of Bedford town council.
                                             
 (j) A designee of the town of Durham town council, or the
university of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (k) A designee of the town of Exeter board of selectmen.
                                             
 (l) A designee of the town of Merrimack town council.
                                             
 (m) A designee of the town of Plaistow board of selectmen.
                                             
 (n) A designee from each of the 9 regional planning commissions.
                                             
 (o) The chairperson of the Manchester-Boston regional airport
board, or designee.
                                             
 (p) A member of the New Hampshire College and University Council,
appointed by the president of that organization.
                                             
 (q) Three public members appointed by the governor and approved
by the council, each for a term of 2 years.
                                             
 (r) The mayor of the city of Rochester, or designee.
                                             
 VI. The members of the authority advisory board shall serve at the
pleasure of their respective appointing agencies.
                                             
 VII. As additional municipalities propose future passenger rail
services they may petition the authority board of directors to designate
a member of the authority advisory board.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007. 2009, 55:1, eff. May 22,
2009. 2015, 178:1, eff. Aug. 25, 2015.

### Section 238-A:5

 **238-A:5 Service Area of the Authority. –**
                                             
 I. The service area of the authority shall include any town or city
in the state of New Hampshire through which commuter rail or other
similar forms of passenger rail service operates or may operate.
                                             
 II. The board of directors shall determine when to expand the
service area of the authority. Upon approval of a resolution to expand
the service area of the authority, after a properly noticed public
hearing, the board of directors shall notify eligible cities, towns, or
regional planning commissions of the determination to expand the service
area of the authority. A city, town, or regional planning commission may
petition the authority to support the development and establishment of
commuter rail and related public transportation services within its
jurisdiction. The board of directors shall have sole discretion to
accept or reject any such petition. When considering an expansion of the
service area of the authority the board of directors shall consider
support for the proposed passenger or commuter rail project by affected
towns, cities, and regional planning commissions, and the completion of
an alternatives analysis or major investment study.
                                             
 III. When the service area of the authority is expanded as
identified in RSA 238-A:5, II new members will be added to the board of
directors as follows:
                                             
 (a) One designee for each town or city added to the service area
that is not represented on the board of directors.
                                             
 (b) One designee for each regional planning commission added to
the service area that is not represented on the board of directors.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 238-A:6

 **238-A:6 Meetings. –**
                                             
 I. The board of directors shall, at the initial meeting of the
authority, elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson of the board. The
board of directors shall also designate a secretary, treasurer, or other
officer as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the board.
                                             
 II. The authority shall conduct an annual meeting. At such meeting
the board of directors shall approve an annual report of the authority
and elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson of the board.
                                             
 III. The board of directors may exercise all the powers of the
authority in a lawful meeting. A majority of directors then in office
shall constitute a quorum. Regular meetings of the board of directors
may be established by bylaws.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 238-A:7

 **238-A:7 Conflict of Interest. –**
                                             
 I. A director, officer, or employee of the authority shall not
acquire any interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or proposed
contract of the authority. A director, officer, or employee of the
authority shall not participate in any decision on any contract entered
into or to be entered into by the authority if that individual has any
interest, direct or indirect, in any firm, partnership, corporation, or
association that will be party to such a contract or financially
involved in any transaction with the authority.
                                             
 II. The prohibition in paragraph I shall not apply to:
                                             
 (a) The execution of agreements by banking institutions for the
deposit or handling of authority funds in connection with any contract.
                                             
 (b) Utility services, for which rates are fixed or controlled by
a government agency.
                                             
 (c) Contracts with the department of transportation, a regional
planning commission, or any other government agency.
                                             
 III. The authority shall not:
                                             
 (a) Employ a person or firm to promote or oppose, directly or
indirectly, any legislation pending or proposed before the general
court, or to promote or oppose, directly or indirectly, any action by
the governor, governor and council, or any agency, as defined in RSA
15-A:2, where such action concerns legislation or contracts pending or
proposed before the general court, any pending or proposed
administrative rule, or the procurement of goods or services that are
being or may be purchased by the state.
                                             
 (b) Employ or remunerate in any fashion any member of the
legislature.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 238-A:8

 **238-A:8 Powers. –** The authority may:
                                             
 I. Sue and be sued, subject to all privileges and immunities of the
state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. Have a seal and alter the seal.
                                             
 III. Adopt and amend bylaws covering procedure and rules for the
purposes of this chapter, develop and adopt rules in accordance with the
laws of the state of New Hampshire, publish bylaws and rules as
necessary or advisable, and cause records of its proceedings to be
kept.
                                             
 IV. Employ such assistants, attorneys, experts, inspectors, and such
other employees and consultants as the board of directors considers
necessary for its purposes. The authority shall not be required to hire
such personnel in accordance with state personnel rules, so long as
state general funds have not been appropriated to fund positions for any
such personnel.
                                             
 V. Utilize the services and resources of the department of
transportation that are available and expedient. All charges for
services provided by the department may be paid to it by the authority
as mutually agreed upon.
                                             
 VI. Utilize the services of the Nashua regional planning commission
or other regional planning commissions that are available and expedient.
All charges for services provided by such commission may be paid to it
by the authority as mutually agreed upon.
                                             
 VII. Acquire any property or property rights through purchase,
lease, lease-purchase, gift, contract, devise, or otherwise. In making
these acquisitions the authority may exercise the power of eminent
domain following the same procedure set forth for similar government
agencies under the laws of the state of New Hampshire, provided it is
consistent with the purposes established under the New Hampshire
constitution and approved by a joint resolution of the general court.
                                             
 VIII. Accept gifts, grants, or loans of money or other property, and
enter into contracts or other transactions with any federal or state
agency, or any other public entity.
                                             
 IX. Enter into and fulfill any contracts or agreements with public
or private transportation operators, government agencies, or other
entities for management, operation, or support of public transit
services or as the board of directors otherwise deems necessary.
                                             
 X. Lease the passenger rail system or part thereof, or contract for
the use of the passenger rail system or any part thereof with any
operator as may be required for operation of the passenger rail
service.
                                             
 XI. Receive and disburse funds for authority purposes. The authority
shall have the power to deposit any monies of the authority, in
accordance with the provisions of the general laws of the state of New
Hampshire governing the deposit of public monies in such bank or banks
or investment deposit pools as may be authorized to receive deposits of
public funds.
                                             
 XII. Issue bonds for the implementation of any project of the
authority, including the acquisition of property, or paying off of any
debt or obligation of the authority. The authority may issue such types
of bonds as may be determined by the board of directors, including
certificates on which principal and interest are payable:
                                             
 (a) Exclusively from income or revenue from the operation of the
authority financed with the proceeds of such bonds or together with such
proceeds and grants from any instrumentality or other person or
corporation in aid of such projects.
                                             
 (b) Exclusively from income and revenues of certain designated
projects.
                                             
 (c) From general revenues of the authority. Any such bond may be
additionally secured by mortgage of the passenger rail system or any
part thereof constituting real or personal property of the authority.
                                             
 XIII. Conduct or cause to be conducted any studies that the
authority determines necessary.
                                             
 XIV. Enter into agreements, contracts, and compacts with any
government agency, Pan Am Railways, Massachusetts Bay Transportation
Authority, and any other person or entity, public or private, as may be
required to develop, establish, and provide passenger rail
transportation services, including but not limited to property owners
and developers of property adjacent to or incidental to the railroad
lines and related facilities.
                                             
 XV. In conjunction with the Massachusetts Bay Transportation
Authority or any other government agency with a vested interest in such
matters, fix equitable fares or charges and other rules and regulations
for passenger rail services developed or established in whole or in part
by the authority.
                                             
 XVI. Take all lawful action necessary and incidental to effectuate
the purposes set forth in this chapter.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007. 2009, 150:5, 6, eff. July
8, 2009.

### Section 238-A:9

 **238-A:9 Funding. –** The authority shall seek, apply for, accept
for its use, and use funds necessary for the implementation of this
chapter.
                                             
 I. Such funds shall be spent first to develop and initiate, at the
earliest practicable time, regularly scheduled commuter rail service
between Lowell, Massachusetts and Manchester, New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. The authority shall seek and use funds to extend regularly
scheduled commuter rail or other similar forms of passenger rail
service, to the extent practicable, to other points within the state of
New Hampshire.
                                             
 III. The authority shall seek and expend funds as necessary to
coordinate with other government agencies providing public
transportation services that support or complement regularly scheduled
commuter or other form of passenger rail service identified in
paragraphs I and II.
                                             
 IV. The authority shall use any revenues it receives from the
operation of the passenger rail service and any ancillary support
facilities and services established under this chapter, including fares,
fees, rents, royalties, and other revenues, to pay the operational
expenses of that service. The authority shall seek and use funds
necessary to pay all operational expenses of its passenger rail service
that are not met by fares and other authority funds or revenues. For the
purposes of this section, "operational expenses'' include, but are not
limited to, all ongoing capital expenses necessary to maintain the
passenger rail service.
                                             
 V. The authority may take all actions, consistent with this chapter,
that are necessary to apply for, qualify for, accept, and disburse any
money that the federal government may grant or loan to the authority to
fund any actions the board of directors deems necessary under this
chapter.
                                             
 VI. Any government agency may allocate money and take other actions
that may aid in the implementation of this chapter. The authority may
provide funds, including loans and matching grants, to government
agencies in order to encourage their participation in implementing this
chapter.
                                             
 VII. The authority shall use its best efforts to ensure that fares
for passenger rail service established under this chapter be set at
reasonable levels to encourage use of this service.
                                             
 VIII. The authority shall obtain all additional funds, through
borrowing, revenues, or other means, necessary to satisfy operating
deficits arising from expenses, including capital expenditures,
necessary to ensure the continuation of passenger rail service
established pursuant to this chapter.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 238-A:10

 **238-A:10 Bonds. –**
                                             
 I. The authority shall have the power and is hereby authorized to
issue its bonds and notes in such principal amount as the authority
shall determine to be necessary, not to exceed 
                                             $125,000,000 in the
aggregate, to provide sufficient funds for achieving any of its
corporate purposes. Neither the directors of the authority nor any
person executing bonds on behalf of the authority shall be personally
liable thereon by reason of the issuance thereof.
                                             
 II. Bonds of the authority shall be authorized by its resolution and
may be issued in one or more series and shall bear such date or dates,
mature at such time or times, bear interest at such rate or rates, be in
such denomination or denominations, be in such form, either coupon or
registered, carry such conversion or registration privileges, have such
rank or priority, be executed in such manner, be payable in such medium
of payment, at such place or places and be subject to such terms of
redemption, with or without premium, as such resolutions, its trust
indenture, or mortgage may provide. In case any of the directors or
officers of the authority whose signatures appear on any bond or coupon
shall cease to be such directors or officers before the delivery of such
bonds, such signatures shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for
all purposes. All bonds may be signed on behalf of the authority by, or
with the facsimile signatures of, such persons as at the actual date of
such execution shall be the proper officers authorized by resolution of
the authority to execute said bonds, notwithstanding the fact that on
the day said bonds are dated, or on the date of the delivery thereof,
any such person shall not have been such officer.
                                             
 III. Obligations of the authority other than certificates shall be
payable from general funds of the authority and shall at no time be a
charge against any special fund allocated to the payment of bonds except
upon payment of current annual maturities and reserves thereof.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding any restrictions on investments contained in any
laws of this state, the state and all public officers, municipal
corporations, political subdivisions, public bodies, all banks, bankers,
trust companies, savings banks and institutions, building and loan
associations, savings and loan associations, investment companies, and
other persons carrying on a banking business, all insurance companies,
insurance associations and other persons carrying on an insurance
business, and all executors, administrators, guardians, trustees, and
other fiduciaries may legally invest any sinking funds, moneys, or other
funds belonging to them or within their control in any bonds or other
obligations issued by the authority under this chapter, when such bonds
or other obligations are secured by rentals or other monies to be paid
by the United States of America or any department or agency thereof, and
such bonds and other obligations shall be authorized security for all
public deposits, it being the purpose of this section to authorize any
persons, firms, corporations, associations, political subdivisions,
bodies, and officers, public or private, to use any funds owned or
controlled by them, including, but not limited to, sinking, insurance,
investment, retirement, compensation, pension and trust funds, and funds
held on deposit, for the purchase of any such bonds or other
obligations; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section
shall be construed as relieving any person, firm, or corporation from
any applicable duty of exercising reasonable care in selecting
securities.
                                             
 V. The authority may obligate itself for the payment of bonds and
other debts incurred in the furtherance of its public purposes by the
state of New Hampshire, or by any county, municipality, political
subdivision, or public corporation.
                                             
 VI. The authority shall determine the time, form, and manner of the
issuance of its bonds and the specific provisions for, and references to
such time, form, and manner set forth in this chapter are illustrative
of its powers and are not in limitation thereof. The authority may
designate a bank or trust company, qualified to do business in this
state, as a trustee for the authority and the holders of bonds issued
hereunder, and may authorize the trustee to act on behalf of the holders
of the bonds, or any stated percentage thereof, and to exercise and
prosecute on behalf of the holders of the bonds such rights and remedies
as may be available to the holders.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007. 2010, 201:1, eff. Aug. 21,
2010.

### Section 238-A:11

 **238-A:11 Expenses and Obligations. –** All expenses incurred in
carrying out this chapter shall be paid solely from funds provided to or
obtained by the authority under this chapter. Any notes, obligations, or
liabilities under this chapter shall not be deemed to be a debt of the
state or a pledge of the faith and credit of the state; but those notes,
obligations, and liabilities are payable exclusively from funds provided
to or obtained by the authority under this chapter. The records and
correspondence relating to negotiations, trade secrets received by the
authority, and estimates of costs on projects to be put out to bid are
confidential.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 238-A:12

 **238-A:12 Annual Report and Audit. –**
                                             
 I. Beginning one year after the establishment of the authority and
on an annual basis thereafter, the authority shall present an annual
report to the governor, the commissioner of transportation, the members
of the executive council, and the standing committees of the senate and
house of representatives having jurisdiction over transportation
matters. The report shall include a description of the authority's
activities for the preceding fiscal year, including a report of its
receipts and expenditures from all sources. All administrative costs
shall be identified. A copy of the report shall be made available to any
interested person.
                                             
 II. The authority shall cause an audit by an independent certified
public accountant of its books and accounts to be made each fiscal year.
After certification of the audit by the board of directors copies shall
be provided to the governor, the commissioner of transportation, the
members of the executive council, and the standing committees of the
senate and house of representatives having jurisdiction over
transportation matters.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 238-A:12-a

 **238-A:12-a Semiannual Reports. –** The authority shall provide
informational reports on its activities to the capital budget overview
committee on March 30 and September 30 of each year.

**Source.** 2010, 201:2, eff. Aug. 21, 2010.

### Section 238-A:13

 **238-A:13 Property of the Authority. –**
                                             
 I. All property owned or leased by the authority under this chapter
is exempt from levy and sale by virtue of any execution. An execution or
other judicial process is not a valid lien upon its property held under
this chapter. The authority may use its property only for the purposes
set forth in this chapter.
                                             
 II. The authority and its authorized officers, agents, and employees
may enter upon any lands, waters, and premises in the state for the
purpose of making surveys, soundings, drillings, and examinations it
determines necessary under this chapter. Such entry shall not be deemed
a trespass. The authority shall not be liable for the discovery during
any such entry of any form of waste or environmental contamination.
                                             
 III. Any county, municipality, or other political subdivision, any
public agency or commission of the state, and any public service
corporation or district, notwithstanding any contrary provisions of law,
may lease, lend, grant, or convey to the authority, upon its request and
upon such terms and conditions as the proper authorities of the
political subdivision, agency, commission, public corporation, or
district determine reasonable and fair, any real or personal property or
rights in the property that are necessary or convenient to the
effectuation of the authorized purposes of the authority, including real
and personal property or rights in the property already devoted to
public use.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 238-A:14

 **238-A:14 Exemption From Taxes. –** Because the accomplishment by
the authority of the authorized purpose of this chapter is for the
benefit of the people of the state and for the improvement of their
commerce and prosperity and is the performance of essential governmental
functions, the authority shall not be required to pay any taxes or
assessment on any property acquired or used by it for the purposes of
this chapter, except that service facilities leased or rented by the
authority to business entities are subject to taxation and assessments
shall be made against the tenant in possession based upon the value of
the leasehold interest, both real and personal. The authority shall not
be required to pay any tax upon its income except as may be required by
the laws of the United States.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 238-A:15

 **238-A:15 Public Utilities Commission. –** The authority shall not
be subject to regulation by the public utilities commission.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 238-A:16

 **238-A:16 Review of Rail Transit Authority. –** The general court
shall review the scope of the rail transit authority during the 2012
legislative session, giving particular attention to expanding the
jurisdiction and membership of the governing body of the authority.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 238-A:17

 **238-A:17 Open Meetings and Records. –** The authority shall be
subject to all requirements of RSA 91-A.

**Source.** 2007, 360:1, eff. July 17, 2007. 2009, 150:7, eff. July 8,
2009.

### Section 238-A:18

 **238-A:18 Liability Policy for Passenger Service. –**
                                             
 I. Agreements for the provision of passenger rail service shall
provide for securing and maintaining a liability insurance policy
covering the liability of the railroad for property damage, personal
injury, bodily injury, and death arising out of such rail service. Such
policy shall:
                                             
 (a) Have policy limits of not less than 
                                             $75,000,000 per
occurrence annually and 
                                             $75,000,000 in the aggregate annually.
                                             
 (b) Be subject to self-insured retention in an amount not less
than 
                                             $7,500,000, to be allocated in accordance with the agreement
between the railroad and the state.
                                             
 II. In no event shall the railroad be liable in excess of the
coverage limits of such insurance policy for any claim for damage,
whether compensatory or punitive, for property damage, personal injury,
and death arising out of such passenger rail service.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this section shall constitute a waiver of the
sovereign immunity of the state.

**Source.** 2008, 180:2, eff. Aug. 10, 2008. 2009, 150:8, 9, eff. July
8, 2009.

### Section 238-A:19

 **238-A:19 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared
to be severable.

**Source.** 2009, 150:10, eff. July 8, 2009.
