---
title: CHAPTER 238 HIGHWAY PROGRAMS
---

TITLE XX
                                             
TRANSPORTATION
==============

CHAPTER 238
                                             
HIGHWAY PROGRAMS
----------------

Safety Program
--------------

### Section 238:1-9

 **238:1 to 238:9 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2015, 276:161, eff. July
1, 2015.
                                             ]

Traffic Safety Commission
-------------------------

### Section 238:10,-11

 **238:10, 238:11 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2015, 276:161, eff. July
1, 2015.
                                             ]

### Section 238:12

 **238:12 Advisory Committee. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 15:3, eff. April
3, 1987.
                                             ]

New Hampshire Scenic Byways Planning Program
--------------------------------------------

### Section 238:13-18

 **238:13 to 238:18 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1992, 160:4, eff. July
5, 1992.
                                             ]

Scenic and Cultural Byways System
---------------------------------

### Section 238:19

 **238:19 Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. The scenic and cultural byways system is established to provide
the opportunity for residents and visitors to travel a system of byways
which feature the scenic and cultural qualities of the state within the
existing highway system, promote retention of rural and urban scenic
byways, support the cultural, recreational and historic attributes along
these byways and expose the unique elements of the state's beauty,
culture and history.
                                             
 II. It is the intent of the general court that the scenic and
cultural assets of the byways will be respected, that the rights of
individual property owners shall be preserved, and that nothing in this
subdivision shall be interpreted to preempt any land and zoning
authority granted to municipalities under title LXIV.
                                             
 III. It shall be a process of state and local identification of
scenic and cultural byways that shall build a statewide system. However,
nothing in this subdivision shall restrict a municipality from
designating scenic byways within its jurisdiction, require that such
designated scenic byways be nominated for inclusion in the New Hampshire
scenic and cultural byways system, or require that the scenic and
cultural byways council accept such locally designated scenic byway into
the system.

**Source.** 1992, 160:1. 1995, 105:1, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 238:20

 **238:20 Establishment of Scenic and Cultural Byways Council. –**
                                             
 I. The scenic and cultural byways council shall consist of the
following 15 members:
                                             
 (a) Nine members appointed by the governor including one person
representing regional planning, 3 persons representing municipalities,
one person representing tourist and recreation interests, one person
representing forests and lands, one person representing the utilities,
one person representing the Outdoor Advertising Association of New
Hampshire and one person representing the highway construction
industry.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner of the department of transportation, or
designee.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development, or designee.
                                             
 (d) The director of the office of energy and planning, or
designee.
                                             
 (e) The director of the division of historic resources, or
designee.
                                             
 (f) One member of the house, appointed by the speaker of the
house.
                                             
 (g) One member of the senate, appointed by the senate president.
                                             
 II. The terms of the members appointed by the governor shall be for
3 years, except that he shall appoint the initial members for terms of
one, 2 and 3 years.
                                             
 III. The council shall choose its chairman annually from among its
members. The chair shall serve for no more than 2 consecutive one-year
terms.
                                             
 IV. Except as provided in this section, no state employee or member
of any state commission, federal employee, or member of any federal
commission shall be eligible for membership on the council.

**Source.** 1992, 160:1. 1995, 106:1, 2. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44, eff.
July 1, 2004.

### Section 238:21

 **238:21 Duties. –** The council shall:
                                             
 I. Encourage towns and municipalities to designate scenic and
cultural byways within their jurisdictions and to petition the council
for the inclusion of these byways into the New Hampshire scenic and
cultural byways system. Such inclusion shall enable the municipality to
participate in federal funding that may be available under section 1047,
Scenic Byways Program, of the Intermodal Surface Transportation
Efficiency Act of 1991. The council may also propose a statewide network
of connecting highways. Proposed connecting highways shall not be
designated as scenic and cultural byways as defined and controlled under
section 1047, Scenic Byways Program, of the Intermodal Surface
Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991.
                                             
 II. Develop the process for byways nomination and nomination
criteria. Advise and consult with municipalities regarding the process
of recommending municipal roads for inclusion in the scenic and cultural
byways system.
                                             
 III. Encourage and assist in fostering public awareness,
understanding, and participation in the objectives and functions of the
scenic and cultural byways system.
                                             
 IV. Provide municipalities with tools and ideas for enhancement and
protection of the scenic and cultural byways.
                                             
 V. Review the byway system and report biennially to the governor and
the general court upon the effectiveness of this subdivision and make
recommendations. The reports shall indicate the status of all state and
town designations and include a fiscal accounting of all moneys received
and expended.
                                             
 VI. De-designate a scenic and cultural byway at the request of the
municipality or if its character changes in such a way that it no longer
meets the criteria under which it was designated.

**Source.** 1992, 160:1. 1995, 105:2, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 238:22

 **238:22 Designation. –**
                                             
 I. The council shall designate and de-designate scenic and cultural
byways of the New Hampshire scenic and cultural byways system based on
criteria which include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
                                             
 (a) Possesses significant visible natural or cultural features
along its border such as agricultural lands, farms, significant
architectural attributes, historic sites, town and city centers,
museums, cottage industries, panoramic views, vistas of marshes,
shorelines or forests, or notable geological or other natural features.
                                             
 (b) Accessible to natural and cultural features such as cultural
facilities, historic sites, town and city centers, trails, lakes,
rivers, streams, mountains, the seacoast, bike paths, agricultural land,
parks, or protected lands that are open to the public, etc.
                                             
 (c) Conforms to and does not detract from the landscape.
                                             
 (d) Meets safety standards for the particular traffic
encouraged.
                                             
 (e) Is free from intensive commercial development and obstructive
signage that would detract from the principal reason for its
designation.
                                             
 II. Designation of a state or local road or highway as a scenic and
cultural byway under the provisions of this subdivision, and any general
or special management criteria applicable thereto, shall not affect the
operation, maintenance and expansion of existing public utility lines
and facilities, or be construed to require any public utility to install
any of its lines or facilities underground.
                                             
 III. Under no circumstances shall a local scenic and cultural byway
be designated without a public hearing conducted by the municipalities
in the area.
                                             
 IV. Nominations shall demonstrate local, private, and public
support, and be reviewed to assess any traffic or other problems that
may accrue to the designation as a scenic and cultural byway and propose
a method to ensure the preservation and maintenance of the qualities of
the scenic and cultural byway on which the nomination is based.

**Source.** 1992, 160:1. 1995, 105:3, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 238:23

 **238:23 Funds. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department of transportation, with the
advice of the commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development and the commissioner of the department of cultural
resources, is authorized to apply for and accept gifts, grants,
donations and contributions from any source, public or private, in the
name of the state and to provide for technical and administrative
support consistent with the resources provided to the program under this
section. Any moneys accepted shall be continually and solely
appropriated for the purpose of this subdivision.
                                             
 II. Any funds obtained under former RSA 238:18 and not expended
shall be transferred for use under this section.

**Source.** 1992, 160:1. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44. 2007, 263:76, eff.
July 1, 2007.

### Section 238:24

 **238:24 Advertising Devices on Scenic and Cultural Byways. –**
Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, advertising
devices as defined in RSA 236:70, I, shall not be erected on any primary
system highway that has been designated as a scenic and cultural byway,
provided that:
                                             
 I. The council shall remove any scenic and cultural byway
designation, highway sections that:
                                             
 (a) Have no scenic or cultural value; and
                                             
 (b) Have been designated or would be designated solely to
preserve system continuity.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this section shall preclude the council from removing
from any scenic and cultural byway designation, highway sections that
are adjacent to property that is used for intensive commercial or
industrial purposes. In this section, "intensive'' means an area
containing more than 5 zoned commercial or industrial activities located
within one continuous mile.
                                             
 III. Advertising devices erected before the effective date of this
section may be maintained.
                                             
 IV. On-premise signs, as defined in RSA 236:73, III, and
directional, informational, or official signs, as defined under RSA
236:73, IV, may be erected and/or maintained.

**Source.** 1995, 106:3, eff. June 15, 1995.

### Section 238:25

 **238:25 Traffic and Directional Signs on Scenic and Cultural
Byways. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department of transportation shall file
with the planning board of a town a plan for any new traffic or
directional sign to be placed on a scenic or cultural byway within such
town with no additional cost to the department.
                                             
 II. The planning board may hold a public hearing and suggest changes
to the plan for the purpose of maintaining the scenic nature of the
byway; however, the department shall not be required to comply with any
such suggestion.

**Source.** 2016, 120:1, eff. July 19, 2016.
