---
title: |
    CHAPTER 239-B STATE COORDINATING COUNCIL (SCC) FOR COMMUNITY
    TRANSPORTATION IN NEW HAMPSHIRE
---

TITLE XX
                                             
TRANSPORTATION
==============

CHAPTER 239-B
                                             
STATE COORDINATING COUNCIL (SCC) FOR COMMUNITY TRANSPORTATION IN NEW HAMPSHIRE
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 239-B:1

 **239-B:1 State Coordinating Council (SCC) for Community
Transportation Established. –** There is hereby established a state
coordinating council (SCC) for community transportation in New
Hampshire.

**Source.** 2007, 351:2, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 239-B:1-a

 **239-B:1-a Definition. –** In this chapter "community
transportation'' means services that address all transit needs of a
community, including general and special populations, such as persons
with disabilities and seniors.

**Source.** 2010, 38:1, eff. July 17, 2010.

### Section 239-B:2

 **239-B:2 Membership and Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. The SCC shall consist of the following members:
                                             
 (a) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner of transportation, or designee.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of the department of education, or
designee.
                                             
 (d) The executive director of the governor's commission on
disability, or designee.
                                             
 (e) The chair of the New Hampshire Transit Association, or
designee.
                                             
 (f) A representative of a regional planning commission, appointed
by the commissioner of transportation for a term of 3 years.
                                             
 (g) A representative of a philanthropic organization, such as the
Endowment For Health or the United Way, appointed by the commissioner of
the department of health and human services for a term of 3 years.
                                             
 (h) Eight representatives from transportation providers, the
business community, and statewide organizations, such as Granite State
Independent Living, AARP, Easter Seals, and the university of New
Hampshire Institute on Disability, appointed by the governor and council
for a term of 3 years.
                                             
 II. Members of the SCC shall receive no compensation through the SCC
when attending to the duties of the SCC.
                                             
 III. The first meeting of the SCC shall be held within 45 days of
the effective date of this section. The members of the SCC shall
annually elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among the
members. The SCC shall meet on a quarterly basis, or as needed. Eight
members of the SCC shall constitute a quorum.

**Source.** 2007, 351:2, eff. July 1, 2007. 2010, 38:2, eff. July 17,
2010.

### Section 239-B:3

 **239-B:3 Duties. –** The SCC shall:
                                             
 I. Develop, implement, and provide guidance for the coordination of
community transportation options within New Hampshire so that the
general public, in particular citizens in need of access to essential
services and activities, can access local and regional transportation
services and municipalities, human service agencies, and other
organizations can purchase shared ride coordinated transportation
services for their citizens, clients, and customers.
                                             
 II. Set statewide coordination policies for community
transportation, establish community transportation regions, encourage
the development of regional coordination councils, assist other regional
efforts as needed, and monitor the results of statewide coordination.
                                             
 III. Approve the formation of regional coordination councils and the
selection of regional transportation coordinators, according to such
criteria and guidelines as the SCC may establish.
                                             
 IV. Solicit and accept donations for funding to implement and
sustain community transportation.

**Source.** 2007, 351:2, eff. July 1, 2007. 2010, 38:3, eff. July 17,
2010.

### Section 239-B:3-a

 **239-B:3-a Regional Coordination Councils (RCC). –** There are
hereby established regional coordination councils (RCC), representing
regions to be defined by the SCC. The designation as an RCC must be
approved by the SCC. Members of an RCC shall be immune from liability in
executing the duties of the council. The duties of an RCC shall be to:
                                             
 I. Facilitate the implementation of coordinated community
transportation in their region.
                                             
 II. Encourage the development of improved and expanded regional
community transportation services.
                                             
 III. Advise the SCC on the status of community transportation in
their region.

**Source.** 2010, 38:4, eff. July 17, 2010.

### Section 239-B:4

 **239-B:4 Reports. –** The SCC shall annually report its findings,
progress, and any recommendations for proposed legislation to the
governor, the speaker of the house of representatives, and the president
of the senate by November 1 of each year. The report shall cover the
state fiscal year ending June 30 of the same year.

**Source.** 2007, 351:2, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 239-B:5

 **239-B:5 Fund Established. –** There is established in the office
of the state treasurer a nonlapsing fund to be known as the regional
transportation coordination fund which shall be kept distinct and
separate from all other funds. All moneys in the regional transportation
coordination fund shall be continually appropriated to the SCC and may
be expended for the purpose of making grants to improve community
transportation. The treasurer shall deposit all donations received
pursuant to RSA 239-B:3, IV in the regional transportation coordination
fund.

**Source.** 2007, 351:2, eff. July 1, 2007. 2010, 38:5, eff. July 17,
2010.
