---
title: 'CHAPTER 240 STATE 10-YEAR TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM'
---

TITLE XX
                                             
TRANSPORTATION
==============

CHAPTER 240
                                             
STATE 10-YEAR TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
------------------------------------------------

### Section 240:1

 **240:1 Legislative Intent. –** The plan is intended to serve as the
guideline for transportation projects in the state for the next 10
years.

**Source.** 2010, 2:1, eff. April 2, 2010.

### Section 240:2

 **240:2 Project Priority. –** To the extent practicable the projects
shall be implemented in the order shown in the plan.

**Source.** 2010, 2:1, eff. April 2, 2010; 231:8, eff. June 28, 2010.

### Section 240:2-a

 **240:2-a Plan. –** In this chapter, a plan means the "State of New
Hampshire Ten Year Transportation Improvement Plan 2011-2020'' and any
succeeding plan adopted by the general court pursuant to RSA 228:99 and
RSA 240 of the laws of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 2010, 231:9, eff. June 28, 2010.

### Section 240:3

 **240:3 Implementation of Plan. –**
                                             
 I. The department of transportation shall be responsive to requests
for information relative to the plan.
                                             
 II. The plan shall include a list of projects intended to be under
construction in the next 10 years with dates and costs of construction.
                                             
 III. Preliminary studies, design, and right of way funding for long
term projects that have been approved by the Governor's Advisory
Commission on Intermodal Transportation (GACIT) and the department of
transportation shall be included in the plan.
                                             
 IV. The governor shall transmit the plan to the general court by
January 15 of each even-numbered year. Projects listed in the plan shall
be listed by the year the funds are to be expended and the 10 years of
the plan shall be financially constrained.
                                             
 V. Projects listed in the plan, except projects which are solely for
infrastructure preservation or which stem from statewide transportation
programs included in the plan, shall be prioritized based on a
department of transportation methodology that examines the certainty of
a project relative to its scope, cost, constructability, permitability,
and public support, provided that the project has the following:
                                             
 (a) Preliminary design.
                                             
 (b) Environmental evaluation.
                                             
 (c) A public participation process.
                                             
 (d) Available and adequate funding.
                                             
 VI. The following shall be considered for any project proposed for
the plan:
                                             
 (a) Safety.
                                             
 (b) Multimodalism.
                                             
 (c) Land use.
                                             
 (d) Infrastructure preservation.
                                             
 (e) Overall corridor improvement.
                                             
 VII. Every 2 years, the department of transportation shall propose
to the general court a list of projects to be removed from the 10-year
plan if the department determines that any project:
                                             
 (a) Has significantly changed in scope; or
                                             
 (b) Is no longer financially or environmentally feasible; or
                                             
 (c) Lacks the necessary permits; or
                                             
 (d) For other reasons is unnecessary or unlikely to proceed.
                                             
 VIII. Inflation shall be included in the costs calculated in the
10-year plan and shall also be included in calculating the necessary
revenues.
                                             
 IX. The department of transportation shall meet at least
semi-annually with the GACIT.
                                             
 X. The GACIT shall review:
                                             
 (a) Department of transportation financial status and issues.
                                             
 (b) The status and issues of transportation projects.
                                             
 (c) Other ongoing initiatives and issues.
                                             
 XI. The GACIT shall provide the first statewide review of the plan
as drafted by the department of transportation with input from the
regional planning commissions.

**Source.** 2010, 2:1, eff. April 2, 2010; 231:10, 11, eff. June 28,
2010.
