---
title: CHAPTER 626 GENERAL PRINCIPLES
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 626
                                             
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
------------------

### Section 626:1

 **626:1 Requirement of a Voluntary Act. –**
                                             
 I. A person is not guilty of an offense unless his criminal
liability is based on conduct that includes a voluntary act or the
voluntary omission to perform an act of which he is physically capable.
                                             
 II. Possession is a voluntary act if the possessor knowingly
procured or received the thing possessed or was aware of his control
thereof for a sufficient period to have been able to terminate his
possession.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 626:2

 **626:2 General Requirements of Culpability. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of murder, a felony, or a misdemeanor only if
he acts purposely, knowingly, recklessly or negligently, as the law may
require, with respect to each material element of the offense. He may be
guilty of a violation without regard to such culpability. When the law
defining an offense prescribes the kind of culpability that is
sufficient for its commission, without distinguishing among the material
elements thereof, such culpability shall apply to all the material
elements, unless a contrary purpose plainly appears.
                                             
 II. The following are culpable mental states:
                                             
 (a) "Purposely.'' A person acts purposely with respect to a
material element of an offense when his conscious object is to cause the
result or engage in the conduct that comprises the element.
                                             
 (b) "Knowingly.'' A person acts knowingly with respect to conduct
or to a circumstance that is a material element of an offense when he is
aware that his conduct is of such nature or that such circumstances
exist.
                                             
 (c) "Recklessly.'' A person acts recklessly with respect to a
material element of an offense when he is aware of and consciously
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the material
element exists or will result from his conduct. The risk must be of such
a nature and degree that, considering the circumstances known to him,
its disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the conduct that a
law-abiding person would observe in the situation. A person who creates
such a risk but is unaware thereof solely by reason of having
voluntarily engaged in intoxication or hypnosis also acts recklessly
with respect thereto.
                                             
 (d) "Negligently.'' A person acts negligently with respect to a
material element of an offense when he fails to become aware of a
substantial and unjustifiable risk that the material element exists or
will result from his conduct. The risk must be of such a nature and
degree that his failure to become aware of it constitutes a gross
deviation from the conduct that a reasonable person would observe in the
situation.
                                             
 III. When the law provides that negligence suffices to establish an
element of an offense, such element is also established if the person
acts purposely, knowingly or recklessly. When recklessness suffices, the
element is also established if the person acts purposely or knowingly.
When acting knowingly suffices, the element is also established if a
person acts purposely.
                                             
 IV. A requirement that an offense be committed wilfully is satisfied
if the person acts knowingly with respect to the material elements of
the offense, unless a purpose to impose further requirements appears.
                                             
 V. Neither knowledge nor recklessness nor negligence as to whether
conduct constitutes an offense or as to the existence or meaning of the
law defining the offense is an element of such offense, unless the law
so provides.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1973, 370:29, 30, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 626:3

 **626:3 Effect of Ignorance or Mistake. –**
                                             
 I. A person is not relieved of criminal liability because he acts
under a mistaken belief of fact unless:
                                             
 (a) The mistake negatives the culpable mental state required for
commission of the offense; or
                                             
 (b) The statute defining the offense expressly provides that such
mistake is a defense; or
                                             
 (c) Such mistake supports a defense of justification as defined
in RSA 627.
                                             
 II. A person is not relieved of criminal liability because he acts
under a mistaken belief that his conduct does not, as a matter of law,
constitute an offense unless his belief is founded upon a statement of
the law contained in a statute or other enactment, or an administrative
order or grant of permission, or a judicial decision of a state or
federal court, or a written interpretation of the law relating to the
offense officially made by a public servant, agency or body legally
empowered with authority to administer, enforce or interpret such law.
The defendant must prove a defense arising under this subsection by a
preponderance of evidence.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 626:4

 **626:4 Intoxication. –** Intoxication is not, as such, a defense.
The defendant may, however, introduce evidence of intoxication whenever
it is relevant to negate an element of the offense charged, and it shall
be taken into consideration in determining whether such element has been
proved beyond a reasonable doubt.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 626:5

 **626:5 Entrapment. –** It is an affirmative defense that the actor
committed the offense because he was induced or encouraged to do so by a
law enforcement official or by a person acting in cooperation with a law
enforcement official, for the purpose of obtaining evidence against him
and when the methods used to obtain such evidence were such as to create
a substantial risk that the offense would be committed by a person not
otherwise disposed to commit it. However, conduct merely affording a
person an opportunity to commit an offense does not constitute
entrapment.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 626:6

 **626:6 Consent. –**
                                             
 I. The consent of the victim to conduct constituting an offense is a
defense if such consent negatives an element of the offense or precludes
the harm sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense.
                                             
 II. When conduct constitutes an offense because it causes or
threatens bodily harm, consent to the conduct is a defense if the bodily
harm is not serious; or the harm is a reasonably foreseeable hazard of
lawful activity.
                                             
 III. Consent is no defense if it is given by a person legally
incompetent to authorize the conduct or by one who, by reason of
immaturity, insanity, intoxication or use of drugs is unable and known
by the actor to be unable to exercise a reasonable judgment as to the
harm involved.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 626:7

 **626:7 Defenses; Affirmative Defenses and Presumptions. –**
                                             
 I. When evidence is admitted on a matter declared by this code to
be:
                                             
 (a) A defense, the state must disprove such defense beyond a
reasonable doubt; or
                                             
 (b) An affirmative defense, the defendant has the burden of
establishing such defense by a preponderance of the evidence.
                                             
 II. When this code establishes a presumption with respect to any
fact which is an element of an offense, it has the following
consequences:
                                             
 (a) When there is evidence of the facts which give rise to the
presumption, the issue of the existence of the presumed fact must be
submitted to the jury, unless the court is satisfied that the evidence
as a whole clearly negatives the presumed fact; and
                                             
 (b) When the issue of the existence of the presumed fact is
submitted to the jury, the court shall charge that while the presumed
fact must, on all the evidence, be proved beyond a reasonable doubt, the
law declares that the jury may regard the facts giving rise to the
presumption as sufficient evidence of the presumed fact.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 626:8

 **626:8 Criminal Liability for Conduct of Another. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of an offense if it is committed by his own
conduct or by the conduct of another person for which he is legally
accountable, or both.
                                             
 II. A person is legally accountable for the conduct of another
person when:
                                             
 (a) Acting with the kind of culpability that is sufficient for
the commission of the offense, he causes an innocent or irresponsible
person to engage in such conduct; or
                                             
 (b) He is made accountable for the conduct of such other person
by the law defining the offense; or
                                             
 (c) He is an accomplice of such other person in the commission of
the offense.
                                             
 III. A person is an accomplice of another person in the commission
of an offense if:
                                             
 (a) With the purpose of promoting or facilitating the commission
of the offense, he solicits such other person in committing it, or aids
or agrees or attempts to aid such other person in planning or committing
it; or
                                             
 (b) His conduct is expressly declared by law to establish his
complicity.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding the requirement of a purpose as set forth in
paragraph III(a), when causing a particular result is an element of an
offense, an accomplice in the conduct causing such result is an
accomplice in the commission of that offense, if he acts with the kind
of culpability, if any, with respect to that result that is sufficient
for the commission of the offense. In other words, to establish
accomplice liability under this section, it shall not be necessary that
the accomplice act with a purpose to promote or facilitate the offense.
An accomplice in conduct can be found criminally liable for causing a
prohibited result, provided the result was a reasonably foreseeable
consequence of the conduct and the accomplice acted purposely,
knowingly, recklessly, or negligently with respect to that result, as
required for the commission of the offense.
                                             
 V. A person who is legally incapable of committing a particular
offense himself may be guilty thereof if it is committed by the conduct
of another person for which he is legally accountable, unless such
liability is inconsistent with the purpose of the provision establishing
his incapacity.
                                             
 VI. Unless otherwise provided, a person is not an accomplice in an
offense committed by another person if:
                                             
 (a) He is the victim of that offense; or
                                             
 (b) The offense is so defined that his conduct is inevitably
incident to its commission; or
                                             
 (c) He terminates his complicity prior to the commission of the
offense and wholly deprives it of effectiveness in the commission of the
offense or gives timely warning to the law enforcement authorities or
otherwise makes proper effort to prevent the commission of the offense.
                                             
 VII. An accomplice may be convicted on proof of the commission of
the offense and of his complicity therein, though the person claimed to
have committed the offense has not been prosecuted or convicted or has
been convicted of a different offense or degree of offense or has an
immunity to prosecution or conviction or has been acquitted.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 2001, 216:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.
