---
title: CHAPTER 628 RESPONSIBILITY
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 628
                                             
RESPONSIBILITY
--------------

### Section 628:1

 **628:1 Immaturity. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph II, a person less than 15 years
old is not criminally responsible for his conduct, but may be adjudged
to be a juvenile delinquent.
                                             
 II. Except as provided in paragraph III, a person 13 years of age or
older may be held criminally responsible for the following offenses if
the person's case is transferred to the superior court under the
provisions of RSA 169-B:24:
                                             
 (a)(1) First degree murder as defined in RSA 630:1-a.
                                             
 (2) Second degree murder as defined in RSA 630:1-b.
                                             
 (3) Manslaughter as defined in RSA 630:2.
                                             
 (b) First degree assault as defined in RSA 631:1.
                                             
 (c) Second degree assault as defined in RSA 631:2.
                                             
 (d) Kidnapping as defined in RSA 633:1.
                                             
 (e) Aggravated felonious sexual assault as defined in RSA
632-A:2.
                                             
 (f) Criminal restraint as defined in RSA 633:2.
                                             
 (g) Class A felony robbery as defined in RSA 636:1.
                                             
 (h) Attempted murder.
                                             
 (i) Negligent homicide as defined in RSA 630:3, II.
                                             
 III. If a person is charged after his or her 17th birthday for an
offense set forth in paragraph II which is alleged to have been
committed when such person was 13 years of age but less than 15 years of
age, and the statute of limitations has not expired, and no juvenile
petition based on the acts constituting the offense has been filed, the
provisions of RSA 169-B:24 shall not apply. In such cases, the superior
court shall hold a hearing prior to trial to determine, based on a
preponderance of the evidence, whether the defendant may be held
criminally responsible. In making such determination, the court shall
consider, but shall not be limited to, the following criteria:
                                             
 (a) The seriousness of the alleged offense to the community;
                                             
 (b) The aggressive, violent, premeditated, or willful nature of
the alleged offense;
                                             
 (c) Whether the alleged offense was committed against persons or
property;
                                             
 (d) The prosecutorial merit of the charge;
                                             
 (e) The sophistication and maturity of the defendant at the time
of the alleged offense; and
                                             
 (f) The defendant's prior record and prior contacts with law
enforcement as of the date of the hearing.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1988, 204:6. 1995, 308:113. 1998, 381:3. 2003,
265:2. 2004, 158:1, 2, eff. May 24, 2004.

### Section 628:2

 **628:2 Insanity. –**
                                             
 I. A person who is insane at the time he acts is not criminally
responsible for his conduct. Any distinction between a statutory and
common law defense of insanity is hereby abolished and invocation of
such defense waives no right an accused person would otherwise have.
                                             
 II. The defendant shall have the burden of proving the defense of
insanity by clear and convincing evidence.
                                             
 III. Evidence of insanity is not admissible unless:
                                             
 (a) The defendant, within 10 days after entering his plea of not
guilty or at such later time as the court may for good cause permit,
notifies the court and the state of his purpose to rely on such defense;
and
                                             
 (b) Such notice is given at least 30 days before the scheduled
commencement of trial.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1982, 34:1. 1987, 13:1, eff. June 2, 1987.
