---
title: CHAPTER 629 INCHOATE CRIMES
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 629
                                             
INCHOATE CRIMES
---------------

### Section 629:1

 **629:1 Attempt. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of an attempt to commit a crime if, with a
purpose that a crime be committed, he does or omits to do anything
which, under the circumstances as he believes them to be, is an act or
omission constituting a substantial step toward the commission of the
crime.
                                             
 II. As used in this section, "substantial step'' means conduct that
is strongly corroborative of the actor's criminal purpose.
                                             
 III. (a) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this
section that the actor voluntarily renounces his criminal purpose by
abandoning his effort to commit the crime or otherwise preventing its
commission under circumstances manifesting a complete withdrawal of his
criminal purpose.
                                             
 (b) A renunciation is not "voluntary'' if it is substantially
motivated by circumstances the defendant was not aware of at the
inception of his conduct which increase the probability of his detection
or which make more difficult the commission of the crime. Renunciation
is not complete if the purpose is to postpone the criminal conduct until
a more advantageous time or to transfer the criminal effort to another
but similar objective or victim.
                                             
 IV. The penalty for attempt is the same as that authorized for the
crime that was attempted, except that in the case of attempt to commit
murder the punishment shall be imprisonment for life or such other term
as the court shall order.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1979, 126:5. 1999, 158:3, eff. June 28, 1999.

### Section 629:2

 **629:2 Criminal Solicitation. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of criminal solicitation if, with a purpose
that another engage in conduct constituting a crime, he commands,
solicits or requests such other person to engage in such conduct.
                                             
 II. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section
that the actor renounced his criminal purpose by persuading the other
not to engage in the criminal conduct or by otherwise preventing
commission of the crime under circumstances manifesting a purpose that
it not occur.
                                             
 III. It is no defense to prosecution under this section that the
person solicited would be immune from liability for engaging in the
criminal conduct by virtue of irresponsibility, incapacity or
exemption.
                                             
 IV. The penalty for criminal solicitation is the same as that
authorized for the crime that was solicited, except that in the case of
solicitation of murder the punishment shall be imprisonment for a term
of not more than 30 years.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1999, 158:2, eff. June 28, 1999.

### Section 629:3

 **629:3 Conspiracy. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of conspiracy if, with a purpose that a crime
defined by statute be committed, he agrees with one or more persons to
commit or cause the commission of such crime, and an overt act is
committed by one of the conspirators in furtherance of the conspiracy.
                                             
 II. For purposes of paragraph I, "one or more persons'' includes,
but is not limited to, persons who are immune from criminal liability by
virtue of irresponsibility, incapacity or exemption.
                                             
 III. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this statute
that the actor renounces his criminal purpose by giving timely notice to
a law enforcement official of the conspiracy and of the actor's part in
it, or by conduct designed to prevent commission of the crime agreed
upon.
                                             
 IV. The penalty for conspiracy is the same as that authorized for
the crime that was the object of the conspiracy, except that in the case
of a conspiracy to commit murder the punishment shall be imprisonment
for a term of not more than 30 years.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1999, 158:1, eff. June 28, 1999.
