---
title: CHAPTER 630 HOMICIDE
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 630
                                             
HOMICIDE
------------

### Section 630:1

 **630:1 Capital Murder. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of capital murder if he knowingly causes the
death of:
                                             
 (a) A law enforcement officer or a judicial officer acting in the
line of duty or when the death is caused as a consequence of or in
retaliation for such person's actions in the line of duty;
                                             
 (b) Another before, after, while engaged in the commission of, or
while attempting to commit kidnapping as that offense is defined in RSA
633:1;
                                             
 (c) Another by criminally soliciting a person to cause said death
or after having been criminally solicited by another for his personal
pecuniary gain;
                                             
 (d) Another after being sentenced to life imprisonment without
parole pursuant to RSA 630:1-a, III;
                                             
 (e) Another before, after, while engaged in the commission of, or
while attempting to commit aggravated felonious sexual assault as
defined in RSA 632-A:2;
                                             
 (f) Another before, after, while engaged in the commission of, or
while attempting to commit an offense punishable under RSA 318-B:26,
I(a) or (b); or
                                             
 (g) Another, who is licensed or privileged to be within an
occupied structure, or separately secured or occupied section thereof,
before, after, or while in the commission of, or while attempting to
commit, burglary as defined in RSA 635:1.
                                             
 II. As used in this section, a "law enforcement officer'' is a
sheriff or deputy sheriff of any county, a state police officer, a
constable or police officer of any city or town, an official or employee
of any prison, jail or corrections institution, a probation-parole
officer, or a conservation officer.
                                             
 II-a. As used in this section, a "judicial officer'' is a judge of a
district, probate, superior or supreme court; an attorney employed by
the department of justice or a municipal prosecutor's office; or a
county attorney; or attorney employed by the county attorney.
                                             
 III. A person convicted of a capital murder may be punished by
death.
                                             
 IV. As used in this section and RSA 630:1-a, 1-b, 2, 3 and 4, the
meaning of "another'' does not include a foetus.
                                             
 V. In no event shall any person under the age of 18 years at the
time the offense was committed be culpable of a capital murder.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1974, 34:1. 1977, 440:1; 588:41. 1988, 69:1, 2.
1990, 199:1. 1994, 128:1, 2. 2005, 35:1. 2011, 222:2, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 630:1-a

 **630:1-a First Degree Murder. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of murder in the first degree if he:
                                             
 (a) Purposely causes the death of another; or
                                             
 (b) Knowingly causes the death of:
                                             
 (1) Another before, after, while engaged in the commission of,
or while attempting to commit felonious sexual assault as defined in RSA
632-A:3;
                                             
 (2) Another before, after, while engaged in the commission of,
or while attempting to commit robbery or burglary while armed with a
deadly weapon, the death being caused by the use of such weapon;
                                             
 (3) Another in perpetrating or attempting to perpetrate arson
as defined in RSA 634:1, I, II, or III;
                                             
 (4) The president or president-elect or vice-president or
vice-president-elect of the United States, the governor or
governor-elect of New Hampshire or any state or any member or
member-elect of the congress of the United States, or any candidate for
such office after such candidate has been nominated at his party's
primary, when such killing is motivated by knowledge of the foregoing
capacity of the victim.
                                             
 II. For the purpose of RSA 630:1-a, I(a), "purposely'' shall mean
that the actor's conscious object is the death of another, and that his
act or acts in furtherance of that object were deliberate and
premeditated.
                                             
 III. A person convicted of a murder in the first degree shall be
sentenced to life imprisonment and shall not be eligible for parole at
any time.

**Source.** 1974, 34:2. 1986, 132:3. 1990, 199:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 630:1-b

 **630:1-b Second Degree Murder. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of murder in the second degree if:
                                             
 (a) He knowingly causes the death of another; or
                                             
 (b) He causes such death recklessly under circumstances
manifesting an extreme indifference to the value of human life. Such
recklessness and indifference are presumed if the actor causes the death
by the use of a deadly weapon in the commission of, or in an attempt to
commit, or in immediate flight after committing or attempting to commit
any class A felony.
                                             
 II. Murder in the second degree shall be punishable by imprisonment
for life or for such term as the court may order.

**Source.** 1974, 34:2, eff. April 15, 1974.

### Section 630:2

 **630:2 Manslaughter. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of manslaughter when he causes the death of
another:
                                             
 (a) Under the influence of extreme mental or emotional
disturbance caused by extreme provocation but which would otherwise
constitute murder; or
                                             
 (b) Recklessly.
                                             
 II. Manslaughter shall be punishable by imprisonment for a term of
not more than 30 years.
                                             
 III. In addition to any other penalty imposed, if the death of
another person resulted from the driving of a motor vehicle, the court
may revoke the license or driving privilege of the convicted person
indefinitely.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1974, 34:3. 1979, 126:4. 2000, 318:1, eff. June
21, 2000.

### Section 630:3

 **630:3 Negligent Homicide. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of a class B felony when he causes the death
of another negligently.
                                             
 II. A person is guilty of a class A felony when in consequence of
being under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled drug or
any combination of intoxicating liquor and controlled drug while
operating a propelled vehicle, as defined in RSA 637:9, III or a boat as
defined in RSA 265-A:1, II, he or she causes the death of another.
                                             
 III. In addition to any other penalty imposed, if the death of
another person resulted from the negligent driving of a motor vehicle,
the court may revoke the license or driving privilege of the convicted
person for up to 7 years. In cases where the person is convicted under
paragraph II, the court shall revoke the license or driving privilege of
the convicted person indefinitely and the person shall not petition for
eligibility to reapply for a driver's license for at least 7 years. In a
case in which alcohol was involved, the court may also require that the
convicted person shall not have a license to drive reinstated until
after the division of motor vehicles receives certification of
installation of an ignition interlock device as described in RSA
265-A:36, which shall remain in place for a period not to exceed 5
years.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1977, 588:40. 1985, 290:2. 1989, 415:2. 1992,
257:10. 1993, 272:2. 2000, 287:4; 318:2. 2006, 260:32, eff. Jan. 1,
2007.

### Section 630:4

 **630:4 Causing or Aiding Suicide. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of causing or aiding suicide if he purposely
aids or solicits another to commit suicide.
                                             
 II. Causing or aiding suicide is a class B felony if the actor's
conduct causes such suicide or an attempted suicide. Otherwise it is a
misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 630:5

 **630:5 Procedure in Capital Murder. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever the state intends to seek the sentence of death for the
offense of capital murder, the attorney for the state, before trial or
acceptance by the court of a plea of guilty, shall file with the court
and serve upon the defendant, a notice:
                                             
 (a) That the state in the event of conviction will seek the
sentence of death; and
                                             
 (b) Setting forth the aggravating factors enumerated in paragraph
VII of this section and any other aggravating factors which the state
will seek to prove as the basis for the death penalty.
                                             
The court may permit the attorney for the state to amend this notice for
good cause shown. Any such amended notice shall be served upon the
defendant as provided in this section.
                                             
 II. When the attorney for the state has filed a notice as required
under paragraph I and the defendant is found guilty of or pleads guilty
to the offense of capital murder, the judge who presided at the trial or
before whom the guilty plea was entered, or any other judge if the judge
who presided at the trial or before whom the guilty plea was entered is
unavailable, shall conduct a separate sentencing hearing to determine
the punishment to be imposed. The hearing shall be conducted:
                                             
 (a) Before the jury which determined the defendant's guilt;
                                             
 (b) Before a jury impaneled for the purpose of the hearing if:
                                             
 (1) the defendant was convicted upon a plea of guilty; or
                                             
 (2) the jury which determined the defendant's guilt has been
discharged for good cause; or
                                             
 (3) after initial imposition of a sentence under this section,
redetermination of the sentence under this section is necessary.
                                             
A jury impaneled under subparagraph (b) shall consist of 12 members,
unless at any time before the conclusion of the hearing, the parties
stipulate with the approval of the court that it shall consist of any
number less than 12.
                                             
 III. When a defendant is found guilty of or pleads guilty to the
offense of capital murder, no presentence report shall be prepared. In
the sentencing hearing, information may be presented as to matters
relating to any of the aggravating or mitigating factors set forth in
paragraphs VI and VII, or any other mitigating factor or any other
aggravating factor for which notice has been provided under subparagraph
I(b). Where information is presented relating to any of the aggravating
factors set forth in paragraph VII, information may be presented
relating to any other aggravating factor for which notice has been
provided under subparagraph I(b). Information presented may include the
trial transcript and exhibits if the hearing is held before a jury or
judge not present during the trial, or at the trial judge's discretion.
Any other information relevant to such mitigating or aggravating factors
may be presented by either the state or the defendant, regardless of its
admissibility under the rules governing admission of evidence at
criminal trials, except that information may be excluded if its
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury. The state
and the defendant shall be permitted to rebut any information received
at the hearing and shall be given fair opportunity to present argument
as to the adequacy of the information to establish the existence of any
of the aggravating or mitigating factors and as to appropriateness in
that case of imposing a sentence of death. The state shall open and the
defendant shall conclude the argument to the jury. The burden of
establishing the existence of any aggravating factor is on the state,
and is not satisfied unless established beyond a reasonable doubt. The
burden of establishing the existence of any mitigating factor is on the
defendant, and is not satisfied unless established by a preponderance of
the evidence.
                                             
 IV. The jury shall consider all the information received during the
hearing. It shall return special findings identifying any aggravating
factors set forth in paragraph VII, which are found to exist. If one of
the aggravating factors set forth in subparagraph VII(a) and another of
the aggravating factors set forth in subparagraphs VII(b)-(j) is found
to exist, a special finding identifying any other aggravating factor for
which notice has been provided under subparagraph I(b) may be returned.
A finding with respect to a mitigating factor may be made by one or more
of the members of the jury, and any member of the jury who finds the
existence of a mitigating factor may consider such a factor established
for purposes of this section, regardless of the number of jurors who
concur that the factor has been established. A finding with respect to
any aggravating factor must be unanimous. If an aggravating factor set
forth in subparagraph VII(a) is not found to exist or an aggravating
factor set forth in subparagraph VII(a) is found to exist but no other
aggravating factor set forth in paragraph VII is found to exist, the
court shall impose a sentence of life imprisonment without possibility
of parole. If an aggravating factor set forth in subparagraph VII(a) and
one or more of the aggravating factors set forth in subparagraph VII
(b)-(j) are found to exist, the jury shall then consider whether the
aggravating factors found to exist sufficiently outweigh any mitigating
factor or factors found to exist, or in the absence of mitigating
factors, whether the aggravating factors are themselves sufficient to
justify a sentence of death. Based upon this consideration, if the jury
concludes that the aggravating factors outweigh the mitigating factors
or that the aggravating factors, in the absence of any mitigating
factors, are themselves sufficient to justify a death sentence, the
jury, by unanimous vote only, may recommend that a sentence of death be
imposed rather than a sentence of life imprisonment without possibility
of parole. The jury, regardless of its findings with respect to
aggravating and mitigating factors, is never required to impose a death
sentence and the jury shall be so instructed.
                                             
 V. Upon the recommendation that the sentence of death be imposed,
the court shall sentence the defendant to death. Otherwise the court
shall impose a sentence of life imprisonment without possibility of
parole.
                                             
 VI. In determining whether a sentence of death is to be imposed upon
a defendant, the jury shall consider mitigating factors, including the
following:
                                             
 (a) The defendant's capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of
his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of law was
significantly impaired, regardless of whether the capacity was so
impaired as to constitute a defense to the charge.
                                             
 (b) The defendant was under unusual and substantial duress,
regardless of whether the duress was of such a degree as to constitute a
defense to the charge.
                                             
 (c) The defendant is punishable as an accomplice (as defined in
RSA 626:8) in the offense, which was committed by another, but the
defendant's participation was relatively minor, regardless of whether
the participation was so minor as to constitute a defense to the
charge.
                                             
 (d) The defendant was youthful, although not under the age of
18.
                                             
 (e) The defendant did not have a significant prior criminal
record.
                                             
 (f) The defendant committed the offense under severe mental or
emotional disturbance.
                                             
 (g) Another defendant or defendants, equally culpable in the
crime, will not be punished by death.
                                             
 (h) The victim consented to the criminal conduct that resulted in
the victim's death.
                                             
 (i) Other factors in the defendant's background or character
mitigate against imposition of the death sentence.
                                             
 VII. If the defendant is found guilty of or pleads guilty to the
offense of capital murder, the following aggravating factors are the
only aggravating factors that shall be considered, unless notice of
additional aggravating factors is provided under subparagraph I(b):
                                             
 (a) The defendant:
                                             
 (1) purposely killed the victim;
                                             
 (2) purposely inflicted serious bodily injury which resulted
in the death of the victim;
                                             
 (3) purposely engaged in conduct which:
                                             
 (A) the defendant knew would create a grave risk of death
to a person, other than one of the participants in the offense; and
                                             
 (B) resulted in the death of the victim.
                                             
 (b) The defendant has been convicted of another state or federal
offense resulting in the death of a person, for which a sentence of life
imprisonment or a sentence of death was authorized by law.
                                             
 (c) The defendant has previously been convicted of 2 or more
state or federal offenses punishable by a term of imprisonment of more
than one year, committed on different occasions, involving the
infliction of, or attempted infliction of, serious bodily injury upon
another person.
                                             
 (d) The defendant has previously been convicted of 2 or more
state or federal offenses punishable by a term of imprisonment of more
than one year, committed on different occasions, involving the
distribution of a controlled substance.
                                             
 (e) In the commission of the offense of capital murder, the
defendant knowingly created a grave risk of death to one or more persons
in addition to the victims of the offense.
                                             
 (f) The defendant committed the offense after substantial
planning and premeditation.
                                             
 (g) The victim was particularly vulnerable due to old age, youth,
or infirmity.
                                             
 (h) The defendant committed the offense in an especially heinous,
cruel or depraved manner in that it involved torture or serious physical
abuse to the victim.
                                             
 (i) The murder was committed for pecuniary gain.
                                             
 (j) The murder was committed for the purpose of avoiding or
preventing a lawful arrest or effecting an escape from lawful custody.
                                             
 VIII. If a person is convicted of the offense of capital murder and
the court does not impose the penalty of death, the court shall impose a
sentence of life imprisonment without possibility of parole.
                                             
 IX. If the jury cannot agree on the punishment within a reasonable
time, the judge shall impose the sentence of life imprisonment without
possibility of parole. If the case is reversed on appeal because of
error only in the presentence hearing, the new trial which may be
ordered shall apply only to the issue of punishment.
                                             
 X. In all cases of capital murder where the death penalty is
imposed, the judgment of conviction and the sentence of death shall be
subject to automatic review by the supreme court within 60 days after
certification by the sentencing court of the entire record unless time
is extended for an additional period not to exceed 30 days by the
supreme court for good cause shown. Such review by the supreme court
shall have priority over all other cases and shall be heard in
accordance with rules adopted by said court.
                                             
 XI. With regard to the sentence the supreme court shall determine:
                                             
 (a) Whether the sentence of death was imposed under the influence
of passion, prejudice or any other arbitrary factor; and
                                             
 (b) Whether the evidence supports the jury's finding of an
aggravating circumstance, as authorized by law; and
                                             
 (c) Whether the sentence of death is excessive or
disproportionate to the penalty imposed in similar cases, considering
both the crime and the defendant.
                                             
 XII. In addition to its authority regarding correction of errors,
the court, with regard to review of death sentences, shall be authorized
to:
                                             
 (a) Affirm the sentence of death; or
                                             
 (b) Set the sentence aside and remand the case for resentencing.
                                             
 XIII. When the penalty of death is imposed, the sentence shall be
that the defendant be imprisoned in the state prison at Concord until
the day appointed for his execution, which shall not be within one year
from the day sentence is passed. The punishment of death shall be
inflicted by continuous, intravenous administration of a lethal quantity
of an ultrashort-acting barbiturate in combination with a chemical
paralytic agent until death is pronounced by a licensed physician
according to accepted standards of medical practice.
                                             
 XIV. The commissioner of corrections or his designee shall determine
the substance or substances to be used and the procedures to be used in
any execution, provided, however, that if for any reason the
commissioner finds it to be impractical to carry out the punishment of
death by administration of the required lethal substance or substances,
the sentence of death may be carried out by hanging under the provisions
of law for the death penalty by hanging in effect on December 31, 1986.
                                             
 XV. An execution carried out by lethal injection shall be performed
by a person selected by the commissioner of the department of
corrections and trained to administer the injection. The person
administering the injection need not be a physician, registered nurse,
or licensed practical nurse, licensed or registered under the laws of
this or any other state.
                                             
 XVI. The infliction of the punishment of death by administration of
the required lethal substance or substances in the manner required by
this section shall not be construed to be the practice of medicine, and
any pharmacist or pharmaceutical supplier is authorized to dispense
drugs to the commissioner of corrections or his designee, without
prescription, for carrying out the provisions of this section,
notwithstanding any other provision of law.
                                             
 XVII. The governor and council or their designee shall determine the
time of performing such execution and shall be responsible for providing
facilities for the implementation thereof. In no event shall a sentence
of death be carried out upon a pregnant woman or a person for an offense
committed while a minor.

**Source.** 1974, 34:10. 1977, 440:2. 1986, 82:1. 1990, 199:3, eff. Jan.
1, 1991.

### Section 630:6

 **630:6 Place; Witnesses. –** The punishment of death shall be
inflicted within the walls or yard of the state prison. The sheriff of
the county in which the person was convicted, and 2 of his deputies,
shall be present, unless prevented by unavoidable casualty. He shall
request the presence of the attorney general or county attorney, clerk
of the court and a surgeon, and may admit other reputable citizens not
exceeding 12, the relations of the convict, his counsel and such priest
or clergyman as he may desire, and no others.

**Source.** 1974, 34:10, eff. April 15, 1974.
