---
title: CHAPTER 631 ASSAULT AND RELATED OFFENSES
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 631
                                             
ASSAULT AND RELATED OFFENSES
----------------------------

### Section 631:1

 **631:1 First Degree Assault. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of a class A felony if he:
                                             
 (a) Purposely causes serious bodily injury to another; or
                                             
 (b) Purposely or knowingly causes bodily injury to another by
means of a deadly weapon, except that if the deadly weapon is a firearm,
he shall be sentenced in accordance with RSA 651:2, II-g; or
                                             
 (c) Purposely or knowingly causes injury to another resulting in
miscarriage or stillbirth; or
                                             
 (d) Knowingly or recklessly causes serious bodily injury to a
person under 13 years of age.
                                             
 II. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Miscarriage'' means the interruption of the normal
development of the fetus other than by a live birth and not an induced
abortion, resulting in the complete expulsion or extraction of a fetus;
and
                                             
 (b) "Stillbirth'' means the death of a fetus prior to complete
expulsion or extraction and not an induced abortion.
                                             
 III. Upon proof that the victim and defendant were intimate partners
or family or household members, as those terms are defined in RSA
631:2-b, III, a conviction under this section shall be recorded as
"First Degree Assault--Domestic Violence.''

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1979, 126:1. 1990, 95:2. 1991, 75:1. 1992,
71:1. 2014, 152:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 631:2

 **631:2 Second Degree Assault. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of a class B felony if he or she:
                                             
 (a) Knowingly or recklessly causes serious bodily injury to
another; or
                                             
 (b) Recklessly causes bodily injury to another by means of a
deadly weapon, except that if the deadly weapon is a firearm, he or she
shall be sentenced in accordance with RSA 651:2, II-g; or
                                             
 (c) Recklessly causes bodily injury to another under
circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to the value of human
life; or
                                             
 (d) Purposely or knowingly causes bodily injury to a child under
13 years of age; or
                                             
 (e) Recklessly or negligently causes injury to another resulting
in miscarriage or stillbirth; or
                                             
 (f) Purposely or knowingly engages in the strangulation of
another.
                                             
 II. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Miscarriage'' means the interruption of the normal
development of the fetus other than by a live birth and not an induced
abortion, resulting in the complete expulsion or extraction of a fetus.
                                             
 (b) "Stillbirth'' means the death of a fetus prior to complete
expulsion or extraction and not an induced abortion.
                                             
 (c) "Strangulation'' means the application of pressure to another
person's throat or neck, or the blocking of the person's nose or mouth,
that causes the person to experience impeded breathing or blood
circulation or a change in voice.
                                             
 III. Upon proof that the victim and defendant were intimate partners
or family or household members, as those terms are defined in RSA
631:2-b, III, a conviction under this section shall be recorded as
"Second Degree Assault--Domestic Violence.''

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1979, 126:2. 1985, 181:1. 1990, 95:3. 1991,
75:2. 2010, 8:1. 2014, 152:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 631:2-a

 **631:2-a Simple Assault. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of simple assault if he:
                                             
 (a) Purposely or knowingly causes bodily injury or unprivileged
physical contact to another; or
                                             
 (b) Recklessly causes bodily injury to another; or
                                             
 (c) Negligently causes bodily injury to another by means of a
deadly weapon.
                                             
 II. Simple assault is a misdemeanor unless committed in a fight
entered into by mutual consent, in which case it is a violation.

**Source.** 1979, 126:3, eff. Aug. 4, 1979.

### Section 631:2-b

 **631:2-b Domestic Violence. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of domestic violence if the person commits any
of the following against a family or household member or intimate
partner:
                                             
 (a) Purposely or knowingly causes bodily injury or unprivileged
physical contact against another by use of physical force;
                                             
 (b) Recklessly causes bodily injury to another by use of physical
force;
                                             
 (c) Negligently causes bodily injury to another by means of a
deadly weapon;
                                             
 (d) Uses or attempts to use physical force, or by physical
conduct threatens to use a deadly weapon for the purpose of placing
another in fear of imminent bodily injury;
                                             
 (e) Threatens to use a deadly weapon against another person for
the purpose to terrorize that person;
                                             
 (f) Coerces or forces another to submit to sexual contact by
using physical force or physical violence;
                                             
 (g) Threatens to use physical force or physical violence to cause
another to submit to sexual contact and the victim believes the actor
has the present ability to execute the threat;
                                             
 (h) Threatens to use a deadly weapon to cause another to submit
to sexual contact and the victim believes the actor has the present
ability to carry out the threat;
                                             
 (i) Confines another unlawfully, as defined in RSA 633:2, by
means of physical force or the threatened use of a deadly weapon, so as
to interfere substantially with his or her physical movement;
                                             
 (j) Knowingly violates a term of a protective order issued
pursuant to RSA 173-B:4, I by means of the use or attempted use of
physical force or the threatened use of a deadly weapon;
                                             
 (k) Uses physical force or the threatened use of a deadly weapon
against another to block that person's access to any cell phone,
telephone, or electronic communication device with the purpose of
preventing, obstructing, or interfering with:
                                             
 (1) The report of any criminal offense, bodily injury, or
property damage to a law enforcement agency; or
                                             
 (2) A request for an ambulance or emergency medical assistance
to any law enforcement agency or emergency medical provider.
                                             
 II. Domestic violence is a class A misdemeanor unless the person
uses or threatens to use a deadly weapon as defined in RSA 625:11, V, in
the commission of an offense, in which case it is a class B felony.
                                             
 III. For purposes of this section:
                                             
 (a) "Family or household member'' means:
                                             
 (1) The actor's spouse or former spouse;
                                             
 (2) A person with whom the actor is cohabiting as a spouse,
parent, or guardian;
                                             
 (3) A person with whom the actor cohabited as a spouse,
parent, or guardian but no longer shares the same residence;
                                             
 (4) An adult with whom the actor is related by blood or
marriage; or
                                             
 (5) A person with whom the actor shares a child in common.
                                             
 (b) "Intimate partner'' means a person with whom the actor is
currently or was formerly involved in a romantic relationship,
regardless of whether or not the relationship was sexually consummated.
                                             
 IV. Upon conviction and sentencing, the court shall document on the
sentencing form the specific nature of the relationship between the
defendant and the victim, by reference to subparagraphs III(a)(1)-(5)
and III(b).
                                             
 V. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, the court
shall levy a fine of 
                                             $50 for each conviction under this section. If the
court determines that the defendant is unable to pay the fine on the
date imposed, the court may defer payment or order periodic payments
thereof. Fines imposed under this section shall not be subject to an
additional penalty assessment. The clerk shall forward all fines
collected under this paragraph to the department of health and human
services for the purposes of RSA 173-B:15.

**Source.** 2014, 152:2. 2015, 244:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 631:3

 **631:3 Reckless Conduct. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of reckless conduct if he recklessly engages
in conduct which places or may place another in danger of serious bodily
injury.
                                             
 II. Reckless conduct is a class B felony if the person uses a deadly
weapon as defined in RSA 625:11, V. All other reckless conduct is a
misdemeanor.
                                             
 III. A person convicted of a class B felony offense under this
section shall not be subject to the provisions of RSA 651:2, II-g.
                                             
 IV. Upon proof that the victim and defendant were intimate partners
or family or household members, as those terms are defined in RSA
631:2-b, III, a conviction under this section shall be recorded as
"Reckless Conduct--Domestic Violence.''

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1994, 187:1. 2006, 163:2. 2014, 152:5, eff.
Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 631:3-a


                                             


                                             [RSA 631:3-a effective until January 1, 2017; see also RSA 631:3-a set
out below.
                                             ]

 **631:3-a Conduct Involving Laser Pointing Devices. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who knowingly shines the beam of a laser pointing
device at an occupied motor vehicle, window, or person shall be guilty
of a violation and the laser pointing device shall be forfeited upon
conviction.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph I, any person who
knowingly shines the beam of a laser pointing device at a law
enforcement officer or law enforcement vehicle shall be guilty of a
class A misdemeanor and the laser pointing device shall be forfeited
upon conviction.
                                             
 III. It shall be an affirmative defense under this section if the
laser pointing device was used in an organized meeting or training class
by the instructor or speaker. Nothing in this section shall be construed
so as to limit the use of medical lasers by qualified medical personnel,
or construction lasers used by construction personnel, or laser devices
utilized by law enforcement personnel in the performance of their
official duties.


                                             [RSA 631:3-a effective January 1, 2017; see also RSA 631:3-a set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**631:3-a Conduct Involving Laser Pointing Devices.** --
                                             
 I. (a) Any person who knowingly shines the beam of a laser pointing
device at an occupied motor vehicle, vessel, or window, or at a person
shall be guilty of a violation and the laser pointing device shall be
seized and forfeited upon conviction.
                                             
 (b) Any person who knowingly shines the beam of a laser pointing
device at an occupied aircraft shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and the
laser pointing device shall be seized and forfeited upon conviction.
                                             
 II. Any person who knowingly shines the beam of a laser pointing
device at a law enforcement officer or law enforcement vehicle shall be
guilty of a class A misdemeanor and the laser pointing device shall be
seized and forfeited upon conviction.
                                             
 III. It shall be an affirmative defense under this section if the
laser pointing device was used in an organized meeting or training class
by the instructor or speaker. Nothing in this section shall be construed
so as to limit the use of medical lasers by qualified medical personnel,
or construction lasers used by construction personnel in the course of
their work, or laser devices utilized by law enforcement personnel in
the performance of their official duties.

**Source.** 1999, 230:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2000. 2016, 92:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2017.

### Section 631:4

 **631:4 Criminal Threatening. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of criminal threatening when:
                                             
 (a) By physical conduct, the person purposely places or attempts
to place another in fear of imminent bodily injury or physical contact;
or
                                             
 (b) The person places any object or graffiti on the property of
another with a purpose to coerce or terrorize any person; or
                                             
 (c) The person threatens to commit any crime against the property
of another with a purpose to coerce or terrorize any person; or
                                             
 (d) The person threatens to commit any crime against the person
of another with a purpose to terrorize any person; or
                                             
 (e) The person threatens to commit any crime of violence, or
threatens the delivery or use of a biological or chemical substance,
with a purpose to cause evacuation of a building, place of assembly,
facility of public transportation or otherwise to cause serious public
inconvenience, or in reckless disregard of causing such fear, terror or
inconvenience; or
                                             
 (f) The person delivers, threatens to deliver, or causes the
delivery of any substance the actor knows could be perceived as a
biological or chemical substance, to another person with the purpose of
causing fear or terror, or in reckless disregard of causing such fear or
terror.
                                             
 II. (a) Criminal threatening is a class B felony if the person:
                                             
 (1) Violates the provisions of subparagraph I(e); or
                                             
 (2) Uses a deadly weapon as defined in RSA 625:11, V in the
violation of the provisions of subparagraph I(a), I(b), I(c), or I(d).
                                             
 (b) All other criminal threatening is a misdemeanor.
                                             
 III. (a) As used in this section, "property'' has the same meaning
as in RSA 637:2, I; "property of another'' has the same meaning as in
RSA 637:2, IV.
                                             
 (b) As used in this section, "terrorize'' means to cause alarm,
fright, or dread; the state of mind induced by the apprehension of hurt
from some hostile or threatening event or manifestation.
                                             
 IV. A person who responds to a threat which would be considered by a
reasonable person as likely to cause serious bodily injury or death to
the person or to another by displaying a firearm or other means of
self-defense with the intent to warn away the person making the threat
shall not have committed a criminal act under this section.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1983, 338:1. 1994, 187:2. 1996, 92:1. 2002,
222:7. 2003, 69:1. 2010, 361:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 631:4-a

 **631:4-a Harm or Threats to Certain Government Officials. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of a class A felony if he or she causes bodily
injury to, or commits any other crime against, a sitting member of the
general court, an executive councilor, a past or present governor,
member of the judiciary, marital master, or member of their immediate
family, for the purpose of influencing such official's action or in
retaliation for action taken as a part of an official's government
duties.
                                             
 II. A person is guilty of a class B felony if he or she threatens
bodily injury or threatens to commit any other crime against a sitting
member of the general court, an executive councilor, a past or present
governor, member of the judiciary, marital master, or member of their
immediate family, for the purpose of influencing such official's action
or in retaliation for action taken as a part of an official's government
duties.
                                             
 III. Violations of this statute shall be prosecuted by the office of
the attorney general.

**Source.** 2006, 47:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 631:5

 **631:5 Operating Boats Under Influence of Liquor or Drugs. –**

                                             [Repealed 1992, 257:22, II, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.
                                             ]

### Section 631:6

 **631:6 Failure to Report Injuries. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph II, a person is guilty of a
misdemeanor if, having knowingly treated or assisted another for a
gunshot wound or for any other injury he believes to have been caused by
a criminal act, he fails immediately to notify a law enforcement
official of all the information he possesses concerning the injury.
                                             
 II. A person who has rendered treatment or assistance is excepted
from the reporting provisions of paragraph I if the person seeking or
receiving treatment or other assistance: (a) is 18 years of age or
older, (b) has been a victim of a sexual assault offense or abuse as
defined in RSA 173-B:1, and (c) objects to the release of any
information to law enforcement officials. This exception shall not apply
if the sexual assault or abuse victim is also being treated for a
gunshot wound or other serious bodily injury.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1991, 59:1. 1993, 95:1, 3, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 631:7

 **631:7 Student Hazing. –**
                                             
 I. For the purposes of this section:
                                             
 (a) "Educational institution'' means any public or private high
school, college, university, or other secondary or postsecondary
educational establishment.
                                             
 (b) "Organization'' means a fraternity, sorority, association,
corporation, order, society, corps, athletic group, cooperative, club,
or service, social or similar group, whose members are or include
students, operating at or in conjunction with an educational
institution.
                                             
 (c) "Student'' means any person regularly enrolled on a full-time
or part-time basis as a student in an educational institution.
                                             
 (d) "Student hazing'' means any act directed toward a student, or
any coercion or intimidation of a student to act or to participate in or
submit to any act, when:
                                             
 (1) Such act is likely or would be perceived by a reasonable
person as likely to cause physical or psychological injury to any
person; and
                                             
 (2) Such act is a condition of initiation into, admission
into, continued membership in or association with any organization.
                                             
 II. (a) A natural person is guilty of a class B misdemeanor if such
person:
                                             
 (1) Knowingly participates as actor in any student hazing; or
                                             
 (2) Being a student, knowingly submits to hazing and fails to
report such hazing to law enforcement or educational institution
authorities; or
                                             
 (3) Is present at or otherwise has direct knowledge of any
student hazing and fails to report such hazing to law enforcement or
educational institution authorities.
                                             
 (b) An educational institution or an organization operating at or
in conjunction with an educational institution is guilty of a
misdemeanor if it:
                                             
 (1) Knowingly permits or condones student hazing; or
                                             
 (2) Knowingly or negligently fails to take reasonable measures
within the scope of its authority to prevent student hazing; or
                                             
 (3) Fails to report to law enforcement authorities any hazing
reported to it by others or of which it otherwise has knowledge.
                                             
 III. The implied or express consent of any person toward whom an act
of hazing is directed shall not be a defense in any action brought under
this section.

**Source.** 1993, 155:1, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 631:8

 **631:8 Criminal Neglect of Elderly, Disabled, or Impaired Adults.
–**
                                             
 I. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Adult'' means any person who is 18 years of age or older.
                                             
 (b) "Caregiver'' means any person who has been entrusted with, or
has assumed the responsibility voluntarily, by contract, or by order of
the court, for frequent and regular care of or services to an elderly,
disabled, or impaired adult, including subsistence, medical, custodial,
personal or other care, on a temporary or permanent basis. A caregiver
shall not include an uncompensated volunteer, unless such person has
agreed to provide care and is aware that the person receiving the care
is dependent upon the care provided.
                                             
 (c) "Disabled adult'' means an adult who has a diagnosed physical
or mental impairment.
                                             
 (d) "Elderly adult'' means an individual who is 60 years of age
or older.
                                             
 (e) "Impaired adult'' means any adult who suffers from an
impairment by reason of mental illness, developmental disability,
organic brain disorder, physical illness or disability, chronic use of
drugs, chronic intoxication, memory loss, or other cause, that causes an
adult to lack sufficient understanding or capacity to make or
communicate reasonable decisions concerning the adult's person or
property or exhibits the functional limitations as defined in RSA
464-A:2, VII. Impaired adult includes a person determined to be
vulnerable under RSA 161-F or incapacitated under RSA 464-A.
                                             
 (f) "Neglect'' means the failure or omission on the part of the
caregiver to provide the care, supervision, and services which he or she
has voluntarily, or by contract, or by order of the court agreed to
provide and which are necessary to maintain the health of an elderly,
disabled, or impaired adult, including, but not limited to, food,
clothing, medicine, shelter, supervision, and medical services, that a
prudent person would consider necessary for the well-being of an
elderly, disabled, or impaired adult. "Neglect'' may be repeated conduct
or a single incident.
                                             
 (g) "Person'' means any natural person, corporation, trust,
partnership, unincorporated association, or any other legal entity.
                                             
 (h) "Serious bodily injury'' means serious bodily injury as
defined in RSA 625:11, VI.
                                             
 (i) "Undue influence'' means the intentional use, by a person in
a position of trust and confidence with an elderly, disabled, or
impaired adult, of that position to obtain an unfair advantage over the
elderly, disabled, or impaired adult, through actions or tactics,
including, but not limited to, emotional, psychological, and legal
manipulation.
                                             
 II. Any caregiver who purposely causes serious bodily injury to an
elderly, disabled, or impaired adult by neglect shall be guilty of a
class A felony.
                                             
 III. Any caregiver who knowingly or recklessly causes serious bodily
injury to an elderly, disabled, or impaired adult by neglect shall be
guilty of a class B felony.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section shall be construed to alter or impair a
person's right to self-determination or right to refuse medical
treatment as described in RSA 151:21 and RSA 151:21-b.
                                             
 V. Nothing in this section shall be construed to mean a person is
abused, neglected, exploited, or in need of protective services for the
sole reason that such person relies on or is being furnished treatment
by spiritual means alone through prayer, in accordance with the tenets
and practices of a church or religious denomination of which such person
is a member or an adherent.
                                             
 VI. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose criminal
liability on a person who has made a good faith effort to provide for
the care of an elderly, disabled, or impaired adult, but through no
fault of his or her own, has been unable to provide such care, or on a
person who is carrying out the lawful request of an elderly or disabled
adult who is competent to make his or her own decisions.

**Source.** 2002, 226:1. 2014, 151:2, 3, eff. Jan. 1, 2015. 2016, 59:8,
eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 631:9

 **631:9 Financial Exploitation of an Elderly, Disabled, or Impaired
Adult. –**
                                             
 I. Whoever commits any of the following acts against an elderly,
disabled, or impaired adult, as defined in RSA 631:8, shall be guilty of
financial exploitation and penalized pursuant to RSA 631:10 if:
                                             
 (a) In breach of a fiduciary obligation recognized in law,
including pertinent regulations, contractual obligations, documented
consent by a competent person, including, but not limited to, an agent
under a durable power of attorney, guardian, conservator, or trustee, a
person, knowingly or recklessly, for his or her own profit or
advantage:
                                             
 (1) Fails to use the real or personal property or other
financial resources of the elderly, disabled, or impaired adult to
provide food, clothing, shelter, health care, therapeutic conduct, or
supervision for the elderly, disabled, or impaired adult when under a
duty to do so; or
                                             
 (2) Unless authorized by the instrument establishing fiduciary
obligation, deprives, uses, manages, or takes either temporarily or
permanently the real or personal property or other financial resources
of the elderly, disabled, or impaired adult for the benefit of someone
other than the elderly, disabled, or impaired adult; or
                                             
 (b) In the absence of legal authority a person knowingly or
recklessly through the use of undue influence, harassment, duress,
force, compulsion, or coercion:
                                             
 (1) Acquires possession or control of an interest in real or
personal property or other financial resources of an elderly, disabled,
or impaired adult;
                                             
 (2) Induces an elderly, disabled, or impaired adult against
the elderly, disabled, or impaired adult's will to perform services for
the profit or advantage of another; or
                                             
 (3) Establishes a relationship with a fiduciary obligation to
an elderly, disabled, or impaired adult that gives the person control of
an interest in real or personal property or other financial resources of
an elderly, disabled, or impaired adult.
                                             
 II. State and local law enforcement agencies shall have concurrent
jurisdiction to investigate reports of abuse, neglect, or exploitation
of vulnerable adults as defined in RSA 161-F or incapacitated adults
under RSA 464-A and all other crimes against elderly, disabled, or
impaired adult victims including, but not limited to, the crimes set
forth in RSA 631:8 and this section. Nothing in this paragraph shall be
construed to alter the duties and responsibilities of the commissioner
of the department of health and human services, or his or her designees,
relative to investigating reports of abuse, neglect, self-neglect, or
exploitation of vulnerable adults pursuant to RSA 161-F.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this section requires a health or residential care
facility, licensed under RSA 151, or any person to provide financial
management or supervise financial management for an elderly, disabled,
or impaired adult except as otherwise required by law.
                                             
 IV. If the person knew or had reason to know that the elderly,
disabled, or impaired adult lacked capacity to consent, consent is not a
defense to a violation of this section.
                                             
 V. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose criminal
liability on a person who makes a good faith effort to assist an
elderly, disabled, or impaired adult in the management of funds, assets,
or property which effort fails through no fault of the person.

**Source.** 2014, 151:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2015. 2016, 59:9, eff. July 4,
2016.

### Section 631:10

 **631:10 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who violates RSA 631:9 and who knows or reasonably
should know that the victim is an elderly, disabled, or impaired adult
shall be guilty of:
                                             
 (a) A class A felony if the funds, assets, or property involved
in the exploitation of the elderly, disabled, or impaired adult is
valued at 
                                             $1,500 or more; or
                                             
 (b) A class B felony if the funds, assets, or property involved
in the exploitation of the elderly, disabled, or impaired adult is
valued at 
                                             $1,000 or more, but less than 
                                             $1,500; or
                                             
 (c) A misdemeanor if the funds, assets, or property involved in
the exploitation of the elderly, disabled, or impaired adult is valued
at less than 
                                             $1,000.
                                             
 II. A person convicted of financial exploitation shall be sentenced
to make restitution of the full value of the fund, assets, or property
involved in the exploitation to the elderly, disabled, or impaired adult
or the adult's estate in accordance with RSA 651:63.

**Source.** 2014, 151:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.
