---
title: CHAPTER 635 UNAUTHORIZED ENTRIES
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 635
                                             
UNAUTHORIZED ENTRIES
--------------------

### Section 635:1

 **635:1 Burglary. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of burglary if he or she enters or remains
unlawfully in a building or occupied structure, or separately secured or
occupied section thereof, with purpose to commit a crime therein, unless
the premises are at the time open to the public or the actor is licensed
or privileged to enter. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for
burglary that the building or structure was abandoned.
                                             
 II. Burglary is a class B felony unless it is perpetrated in the
dwelling of another at night, or if, in the commission of the offense,
attempt at commission or in flight immediately after attempt or
commission, the actor is armed with a deadly weapon or explosives or he
purposely, knowingly or recklessly inflicts bodily injury on anyone; in
which case it is a class A felony; except that if the person is armed
with a deadly weapon and the deadly weapon is a firearm, he shall be
sentenced in accordance with RSA 651:2, II-g.
                                             
 III. "Occupied structure'' shall mean any structure, vehicle, boat
or place adapted for overnight accommodation of persons, or for carrying
on business therein, whether or not a person is actually present.
"Night'' shall mean the period between 30 minutes past sunset and 30
minutes before sunrise.
                                             
 IV. A person may not be convicted both for burglary and for the
offense which it was his purpose to commit after the burglarious entry
or for an attempt to commit that offense, unless the additional offense
constitutes a class A felony.
                                             
 V. A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if he makes or mends, or
begins to make or mend, or knowingly has in his possession, an engine,
machine, tool, or implement adapted and designed for cutting through,
forcing or breaking open a building, room, vault, safe, or other
depository, in order to steal therefrom money or other property, or to
commit any other crime, knowing the same to be adapted and designed for
the purpose aforesaid, with intent to use or employ or allow the same to
be used or employed for such purpose.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1990, 95:4. 2014, 161:9, eff. July 10, 2014.

### Section 635:2

 **635:2 Criminal Trespass. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of criminal trespass if, knowing that he is
not licensed or privileged to do so, he enters or remains in any place.
                                             
 II. Criminal trespass is a misdemeanor for the first offense and a
class B felony for any subsequent offense if the person knowingly or
recklessly causes damage in excess of 
                                             $1,500 to the value of the
property of another.
                                             
 III. Criminal trespass is a misdemeanor if:
                                             
 (a) The trespass takes place in an occupied structure as defined
in RSA 635:1, III; or
                                             
 (b) The person knowingly enters or remains:
                                             
 (1) In any secured premises;
                                             
 (2) In any place in defiance of an order to leave or not to
enter which was personally communicated to him by the owner or other
authorized person; or
                                             
 (3) In any place in defiance of any court order restraining
him from entering such place so long as he has been properly notified of
such order.
                                             
 IV. All other criminal trespass is a violation.
                                             
 V. In this section, "secured premises'' means any place which is
posted in a manner prescribed by law or in a manner reasonably likely to
come to the attention of intruders, or which is fenced or otherwise
enclosed in a manner designed to exclude intruders.
                                             
 VI. In this section, "property,'' "property of another,'' and
"value'' shall be as defined in RSA 637:2, I, IV, and V, respectively.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1979, 377:7. 2005, 125:1. 2010, 239:2, eff.
July 1, 2010.

### Section 635:3

 **635:3 Trespassing Stock. –** If any person having the charge or
custody of any sheep, goats, cattle, horses, or swine shall knowingly,
recklessly, or negligently suffer or permit the same to enter upon, pass
over, or remain upon any improved or enclosed land of another without
written permission of the owner, occupant, or his agent, and thereby
injures his crops, or property, he shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 635:4

 **635:4 Prescribed Manner of Posting. –** A person may post his land
to prohibit criminal trespass and physical activities by posting signs
of durable material with any words describing the physical activity
prohibited, such as "No Hunting or Trespassing'', printed with block
letters no less than 2 inches in height, and with the name and address
of the owner or lessee of such land. Such signs shall be posted not more
than 100 yards apart on all sides and shall also be posted at gates,
bars and commonly used entrances. This section shall not prevent any
owner from adding to the language required by this section.

**Source.** 1977, 284:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1977.

### Section 635:5

 **635:5 Penalty. –** Any person who is found removing, defacing or
destroying any sign, poster or property of another shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1977, 284:1. 1992, 269:13, eff. July 1, 1992.

Cemeteries, Burial Grounds, Gravestones
---------------------------------------

### Section 635:6

 **635:6 Interference With Cemetery or Burial Ground. –**
                                             
 I. No person, without the written authorization of the owner of a
burial plot, or the lineal descendant or ascendant of the deceased, if
such owner or lineal descendant or ascendant is known, or the written
authorization of the governing board of the municipality in which the
burial plot lies, if the owner or lineal descendant or ascendant is
unknown, shall:
                                             
 (a) Purposely or knowingly destroy, mutilate, injure or remove
any tomb, monument, gravestone, marker, or other structure, or any
portion or fragment thereof, placed or designed for a memorial of the
dead, or any fence, railing, gate, curb, or plot delineator or other
enclosure for the burial of the dead.
                                             
 (b) Purposely or knowingly disturb the contents of any tomb or
grave in any cemetery or burial ground.
                                             
 II. The governing board of the municipality in which the burial plot
lies shall not grant approval for the removal or disturbance of a tomb,
monument, gravestone, marker, or plot delineator without first giving 30
days' notice, along with a report of the full circumstances, to the
division of historical resources, that such approval has been requested.
The governing board of the municipality shall maintain a record of the
date, circumstances, and disposition of the request for removal or
disturbance.

**Source.** 1987, 107:1. 2015, 95:1, eff. Aug. 4, 2015.

### Section 635:7

 **635:7 Unlawful Possession or Sale of Gravestones and Gravesite
Items. –** No person shall possess or sell, offer for sale or attempt to
sell, or transfer or dispose of any monument, gravestone, marker, or
other structure, or any portion or fragment thereof, placed or designed
for a memorial of the dead, or any fence, railing, gate, plot
delineator, or curb, knowing or having reasonable cause to know that it
has been unlawfully removed from a cemetery or burial ground.

**Source.** 1987, 107:1, eff. May 6, 1987.

### Section 635:8

 **635:8 Penalties. –** Any person who is convicted of an offense
under RSA 635:6 or 635:7 shall be guilty of a class B felony, and shall
be ordered by the court to make restitution for damages resulting from
the offense and for replacement of removed items.

**Source.** 1987, 107:1, eff. May 6, 1987.
