---
title: CHAPTER 637 THEFT
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 637
                                             
THEFT
------------

### Section 637:1

 **637:1 Consolidation. –** Conduct denominated theft in this chapter
constitutes a single offense embracing the separate offenses such as
those heretofore known as larceny, larceny by trick, larceny by bailees,
embezzlement, false pretense, extortion, blackmail, receiving stolen
property. An accusation of theft may be supported by evidence that it
was committed in any manner that would be theft under this chapter,
notwithstanding the specification of a different manner in the
indictment or information.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 637:2

 **637:2 Definitions. –** The following definitions are applicable to
this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Property'' means anything of value, including real estate,
tangible and intangible personal property, captured or domestic animals
and birds, written instruments or other writings representing or
embodying rights concerning real or personal property, labor, services,
or otherwise containing any thing of value to the owner, commodities of
a public utility nature such as telecommunications, gas, electricity,
steam, or water, and trade secrets, meaning the whole or any portion of
any scientific or technical information, design, process, procedure,
formula or invention which the owner thereof intends to be available
only to persons selected by him.
                                             
 II. "Obtain'' means, in relation to property, to bring about a
transfer of possession or of some other legally recognized interest in
property, whether to the obtainer or another; in relation to labor or
services, to secure performance thereof; and in relation to a trade
secret, to make any facsimile, replica, photograph or other
reproduction.
                                             
 III. "Purpose to deprive'' means to have the conscious object:
                                             
 (a) To withhold property permanently or for so extended a period
or to use under such circumstances that a substantial portion of its
economic value, or of the use and benefit thereof, would be lost; or
                                             
 (b) To restore the property only upon payment of a reward or
other compensation; or
                                             
 (c) To dispose of the property under circumstances that make it
unlikely that the owner will recover it; or
                                             
 (d) To appropriate the goods or merchandise of a merchant without
paying the merchant's stated or advertised price.
                                             
 IV. "Property of another'' includes property in which any person
other than the actor has an interest which the actor is not privileged
to infringe, regardless of the fact that the actor also has an interest
in the property and regardless of the fact that the other person might
be precluded from civil recovery because the property was used in an
unlawful transaction or was subject to forfeiture as contraband.
Property in possession of the actor shall not be deemed property of
another who has only a security interest therein, even if legal title is
in the creditor pursuant to a conditional sales contract or other
security agreement.
                                             
 V. "Value'' means the highest amount determined by any reasonable
standard of property or services.
                                             
 (a) Amounts involved in thefts committed pursuant to one scheme
or course of conduct, whether from the same person or several persons,
may be aggregated in determining the grade of the offense.
                                             
 (b) The value of property or services obtained by the actor shall
determine the grade of the offense, and such value shall not be offset
against or reduced by the value of any property or services given by the
actor in exchange.
                                             
 (c) Each personal check or credit card shall have a value of

                                             $250.
                                             
 VI. "Merchant'' means the owner or operator of any place of business
where merchandise is displayed, held, or stored, for sale to the public,
or any agent or employee of such owner or operator.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1986, 222:1. 2005, 36:1. 2009, 209:2, 3, eff.
Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 637:3

 **637:3 Theft by Unauthorized Taking or Transfer. –**
                                             
 I. A person commits theft if he obtains or exercises unauthorized
control over the property of another with a purpose to deprive him
thereof.
                                             
 II. As used in this section and RSA 637:4 and 5, "obtain or exercise
unauthorized control'' includes but is not necessarily limited to
conduct heretofore defined or known as common law larceny by trespassory
taking, larceny by conversion, larceny by bailee, and embezzlement.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 637:3-a

 **637:3-a Willful Concealment. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of willful concealment if, without authority,
he or she willfully conceals the goods or merchandise of any store while
still upon the premises of such store. Goods or merchandise found
concealed upon the person shall be prima facie evidence of willful
concealment. Notwithstanding RSA 637:11, willful concealment shall be a
misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. A person commits theft if, with the purpose to deprive a
merchant of goods or merchandise, he or she knowingly:
                                             
 (a) Removes goods or merchandise from the premises of a merchant;
or
                                             
 (b) Alters, transfers, or removes any price marking affixed to
goods or merchandise; or
                                             
 (c) Causes the cash register or other sales recording device to
reflect less than the merchant's stated or advertised price for the
goods or merchandise; or
                                             
 (d) Transfers goods or merchandise from the container in which
such goods or merchandise were intended to be sold to another container.

**Source.** 2009, 209:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 637:4

 **637:4 Theft by Deception. –**
                                             
 I. A person commits theft if he obtains or exercises control over
property of another by deception and with a purpose to deprive him
thereof.
                                             
 II. For the purposes of this section, deception occurs when a person
purposely:
                                             
 (a) Creates or reinforces an impression which is false and which
that person does not believe to be true, including false impressions as
to law, value, knowledge, opinion, intention or other state of mind.
Provided, however, that an intention not to perform a promise, or
knowledge that it will not be performed, shall not be inferred from the
fact alone that the promise was not performed; or
                                             
 (b) Fails to correct a false impression which he previously had
created or reinforced and which he did not believe to be true, or which
he knows to be influencing another to whom he stands in a fiduciary or
confidential relationship; or
                                             
 (c) Prevents another from acquiring information which is
pertinent to the disposition of the property involved; or
                                             
 (d) Fails to disclose a known lien, adverse claim or other legal
impediment to the enjoyment of property which he transfers or encumbers
in consideration for the property obtained, whether such impediment is
or is not valid, or is or is not a matter of official record; or
                                             
 (e) Misrepresents to or misleads any person, in any manner, so as
to make that person believe that the person on whose behalf a
solicitation or sales promotion is being conducted is a charitable trust
or that the proceeds of such solicitation or sales promotion shall be
used for charitable purposes, if such is not the fact.
                                             
 III. Theft by deception does not occur, however, when there is only
falsity as to matters having no pecuniary significance, or puffing by
statements unlikely to deceive ordinary persons in the group addressed.
"Puffing'' means an exaggerated commendation of wares in communications
addressed to the public or to a class or group.
                                             
 IV. A person commits theft under this section notwithstanding that
the victim has suffered no actual or net pecuniary loss.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1986, 222:2. 1992, 239:4, eff. July 1, 1992.

### Section 637:5

 **637:5 Theft by Extortion. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of theft as he obtains or exercises control
over the property of another by extortion and with a purpose to deprive
him thereof.
                                             
 II. As used in this section, extortion occurs when a person
threatens to:
                                             
 (a) Cause physical harm in the future to the person threatened or
to any other person or to property at any time; or
                                             
 (b) Subject the person threatened or any other person to physical
confinement or restraint; or
                                             
 (c) Engage in other conduct constituting a crime; or
                                             
 (d) Accuse any person of a crime or expose him to hatred,
contempt or ridicule; or
                                             
 (e) Reveal any information sought to be concealed by the person
threatened; or
                                             
 (f) Testify or provide information or withhold testimony or
information with respect to another's legal claim or defense; or
                                             
 (g) Take action as an official against anyone or anything, or
withhold official action, or cause such action or withholding; or
                                             
 (h) Bring about or continue a strike, boycott or other similar
collective action to obtain property which is not demanded or received
for the benefit of the group which the actor purports to represent; or
                                             
 (i) Do any other act which would not in itself substantially
benefit him but which would harm substantially any other person with
respect to that person's health, safety, business, calling, career,
financial condition, reputation, or personal relationships.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 637:6

 **637:6 Theft of Lost or Mislaid Property. –** A person commits
theft when:
                                             
 I. He obtains property of another which he knows to have been lost
or mislaid, or to have been delivered under a mistake as to the identity
of the recipient or as to the nature or amount of the property, without
taking reasonable measures to return the same to the owner, and
                                             
 II. He has the purpose to deprive the owner of such property when he
obtains the property or at any time prior to taking the measures
designated in paragraph I.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 637:7

 **637:7 Receiving Stolen Property. –**
                                             
 I. A person commits theft if he receives, retains, or disposes of
the property of another knowing that it has been stolen, or believing
that it has probably been stolen, with a purpose to deprive the owner
thereof.
                                             
 II. The knowledge or belief required for paragraph I is presumed in
the case of a dealer who:
                                             
 (a) Is found in possession or control of property stolen from 2
or more persons on separate occasions; or
                                             
 (b) Has received other stolen property within the year preceding
the receiving charged; or
                                             
 (c) Being a dealer in property of the sort received, retained or
disposed, acquires it for a consideration which he knows is far below
its reasonable value, or
                                             
 (d) Purchases property from a law enforcement officer working in
an undercover capacity, or an agent of such law enforcement officer,
where such property has been explicitly represented as stolen.
                                             
 III. As used in this section, "receives'' means acquiring
possession, control or title or lending on the security of the property;
and "dealer'' means a person in the business of buying or selling goods.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 2001, 174:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

### Section 637:7-a

 **637:7-a Possession of Property Without Serial Number. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall knowingly remove, deface, alter, change, destroy,
obliterate or mutilate, or cause to be removed, defaced, altered,
changed, destroyed, obliterated or mutilated the identifying number or
numbers or any other identifying mark on any machine, mechanical or
electrical device or any other property. Anyone doing so with the intent
thereby to conceal the identity of the item or to defraud a
manufacturer, seller or purchaser, or to hinder competition in the areas
of sales and servicing, or to prevent the detection of a crime shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. Any person who buys, receives, possesses, sells or disposes of
any machine, mechanical or electrical device or any other property
knowing that the identification number or numbers or any other
identifying mark on the item have been removed, defaced, altered,
changed, destroyed, obliterated or mutilated shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. However, if a person discovering that the identification
number or numbers or any other identifying mark have been removed,
defaced, altered, changed, destroyed, obliterated or mutilated shall
report the same to the nearest police station, he shall not be charged
with violating this section. Further, said provisions do not apply to
those persons who, on August 13, 1977, are lawfully in possession of
that type of property described in paragraph I which does not have
identifying numbers or marks or from which the identifying marks or
numbers have been lost inadvertently.
                                             
 III. The provisions of this section do not apply to those cases or
instances where any of the changes or alterations enumerated in
paragraph I have been customarily made or done in an established
practice in the ordinary and regular conduct of business by the original
manufacturer, or by his duly appointed direct representative, or under
specific authorization from the original manufacturer.
                                             
 IV. When property described in paragraph I comes into the custody of
a law enforcement officer, it shall be considered stolen or embezzled
property, and prior to being disposed of, shall have an identifying
number engraved on it or embedded in it.

**Source.** 1977, 187:1, eff. Aug. 13, 1977.

### Section 637:8

 **637:8 Theft of Services. –**
                                             
 I. A person commits theft if he obtains services which he knows are
available only for compensation by deception, threat, force, or any
other means designed to avoid the due payment therefor. "Deception'' has
the same meaning as in RSA 637:4, II, and "threat'' the same meaning as
in RSA 637:5, II.
                                             
 II. A person commits theft if, having control over the disposition
of services of another, to which he knows he is not entitled, he diverts
such services to his own benefit or to the benefit of another who he
knows is not entitled thereto.
                                             
 III. As used in this section, "services'' includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, labor, professional service, public utility and
transportation services, restaurant, hotel, motel, tourist cabin,
rooming house and like accommodations, the supplying of equipment,
tools, vehicles, or trailers for temporary use, telephone or telegraph
service, gas, electricity, water or steam, admission to entertainment,
exhibitions, sporting events or other events for which a charge is
made.
                                             
 IV. This section shall not apply to the attachment of private
equipment to residential telephone lines unless the telephone company
can prove that the attached equipment will cause direct harm to the
telephone system. Attached equipment which is registered with the public
utilities commission shall not require a protective interconnecting
device. If the telephone company cites this section in its directories
or other customer informational material, said company shall duplicate
the entire section verbatim therein.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1977, 175:1, eff. Aug. 7, 1977.

### Section 637:9

 **637:9 Unauthorized Use of Propelled Vehicle or Rented Property.
–**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of theft if:
                                             
 (a) Having custody of a propelled vehicle pursuant to an
agreement between himself or another and the owner thereof whereby the
actor or another is to perform for compensation a specific service for
the owner involving the maintenance, repair or use of such vehicle, he
intentionally uses or operates the same, without the consent of the
owner, for his own purposes in a manner constituting a gross deviation
from the agreed purpose; or
                                             
 (b) Having custody of a propelled vehicle pursuant to a rental or
lease agreement with the owner thereof whereby such vehicle is to be
returned to the owner at a specified time and place, he abandons the
vehicle or willfully refuses or neglects to redeliver it to the owner in
such manner as he may have agreed; or
                                             
 (c) Having custody of any property pursuant to a rental or lease
agreement whereby such property is to be returned in a specified manner,
intentionally fails to comply with the terms of the agreement concerning
return so as to render such failure a gross deviation from the
agreement.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. As used in this section, "propelled vehicle'' means any
automobile, airplane, motorcycle, motorboat or any other motor-propelled
vehicle or vessel, or any boat or vessel propelled by sail, oar or
paddle.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1985, 176:1. 1992, 269:22, I, eff. July 1,
1992.

### Section 637:10

 **637:10 Theft by Misapplication of Property. –**
                                             
 I. A person commits theft if he obtains property from anyone or
personal services from an employee upon agreement, or subject to a known
legal obligation, to make a specified payment or other disposition to a
third person, whether from that property or its proceeds or from his own
property to be reserved in an equivalent or agreed amount, if he
purposely or recklessly fails to make the required payment or
disposition and deals with the property obtained or withheld as his
own.
                                             
 II. Liability under paragraph I is not affected by the fact that it
may be impossible to identify particular property as belonging to the
victim at the time of the failure to make the required payment or
disposition.
                                             
 III. An officer or employee of the government or of a financial
institution is presumed:
                                             
 (a) To know of any legal obligation relevant to his liability
under this section, and
                                             
 (b) To have dealt with the property as his own if he fails to pay
or account upon lawful demand, or if an audit reveals a shortage or
falsification of his accounts.
                                             
 IV. As used in this section:
                                             
 (a) "Financial institution'' means a bank, insurance company,
credit union, safety deposit company, savings and loan association,
investment trust, or other organization held out to the public as a
place of deposit of funds or medium of savings or collective
investment.
                                             
 (b) "Government'' means the United States, any state or any
county, municipality or other political unit within territory belonging
to the United States, or any department, agency, or subdivision of any
of the foregoing, or any corporation or other association carrying out
the functions of government or formed pursuant to interstate compact or
international treaty.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 637:10-a

 **637:10-a Use or Possession of Theft Detection Shielding Devices
and Theft Detection Device Removers. –**
                                             
 I. A person commits unlawful use of a theft detection shielding
device when he or she engages in the following acts:
                                             
 (a) Knowingly manufactures, sells, offers for sale, or
distributes a laminated or coated bag or device specially designed,
marketed, and intended to be used to shield merchandise from detection
by an electronic or magnetic theft alarm sensor.
                                             
 (b) Knowingly possesses any laminated or coated bag or device
specially designed, marketed, and intended to be used to shield
merchandise from detection by an electronic or magnetic theft alarm
sensor, with the intent to commit a theft.
                                             
 II. A person commits unlawful possession of a theft detection device
remover when he or she knowingly possesses any tool or device designed
to allow the removal of any theft detection device from any merchandise,
with the intent to use such tool to remove the detection device from the
merchandise without the permission of the merchant or person owning or
holding said merchandise.
                                             
 III. Persons convicted of either the use or possession of theft
detection shielding devices or theft detection device removers shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2000, 89:1, eff. April 27, 2000.

### Section 637:10-b

 **637:10-b Fraudulent Retail Transactions. –**
                                             
 I. A person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if such person
possesses, uses, transfers, manufactures, alters, counterfeits, or
reproduces a retail sales receipt or universal product code label with
the purpose to deprive a merchant of goods or merchandise.
                                             
 II. A person shall be guilty of a class B felony if such person
possesses, uses, transfers, manufactures, alters, counterfeits, or
reproduces 5 or more retail sales receipts or universal product code
labels, or any combination of 5 or more sales receipts or universal
product code labels, or possesses a device designed or adapted to
manufacture counterfeit retail sales receipts or universal product code
labels with the purpose to deprive a merchant of goods or merchandise.

**Source.** 2009, 209:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 637:10-c

 **637:10-c Organized Retail Crime Enterprise. –** A person is guilty
of a class B felony, and a class A felony for a second or subsequent
offense, if he or she conspires with one or more persons to engage for
profit in a scheme or course of conduct of theft as defined in RSA
637:3-a, II or RSA 637:10-b. A conviction under this section shall not
merge with the conviction for any offense that is the object of the
conspiracy.

**Source.** 2010, 239:13, eff. July 1, 2010.

### Section 637:11

 **637:11 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Theft constitutes a class A felony if:
                                             
 (a) The value of the property or services exceeds 
                                             $1,500, or
                                             
 (b) The property stolen is a firearm, or
                                             
 (c) The actor is armed with a deadly weapon at the time of the
theft, except that if the deadly weapon is a firearm, he shall be
sentenced in accordance with RSA 651:2, II-g.
                                             
 II. Theft constitutes a class B felony if:
                                             
 (a) The value of the property or services is more than 
                                             $1,000
but not more than 
                                             $1,500, or
                                             
 (b) The actor has been twice before convicted of theft of
property or services, as a felony or class A misdemeanor, or
                                             
 (c) The theft constitutes a violation of RSA 637:5, II(a) or (b),
or
                                             
 (d) The property or services stolen are from 3 separate business
establishments within a 72-hour period, or
                                             
 (e) The property is stolen with intent to resell or distribute.
It would be prima facie evidence that the offense constitutes theft with
intent to resell or distribute when the theft consists of goods or
merchandise in quantities that would not normally be purchased for
personal use or consumption, or
                                             
 (f) The property received in violation of RSA 637:7 consists of
goods or merchandise in quantities that would not normally be purchased
for personal use or consumption, or
                                             
 (g) The actor has twice before been convicted of offenses under
RSA 637:3-a, II and the present and prior convictions were based on
offenses committed within a 36-month period.
                                             
 III. Theft constitutes a misdemeanor if the value of the property or
services does not exceed 
                                             $1,000.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1977, 187:2. 1979, 266:1. 1990, 95:6. 1992,
269:14, 22, II. 2001, 174:2. 2010, 239:3, eff. July 1, 2010.
