---
title: CHAPTER 639 OFFENSES AGAINST THE FAMILY
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 639
                                             
OFFENSES AGAINST THE FAMILY
---------------------------

### Section 639:1

 **639:1 Bigamy. –** A person is guilty of a class B felony if,
having a spouse and knowing that he is not legally eligible to marry, he
marries another.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 639:2

 **639:2 Incest. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of a class B felony if he or she marries or
engages in sexual penetration as defined in RSA 632-A:1, V, or lives
together with, under the representation of being married, a person 18
years or older whom he or she knows to be his or her ancestor,
descendant, brother, or sister, of the whole or half blood, or an uncle,
aunt, nephew, or niece; provided, however, that no person under the age
of 18 shall be liable under this section if the other party is at least
3 years older at the time of the act. The relationships referred to
herein include blood relationships without regard to legitimacy,
stepchildren, and relationships of parent and child by adoption.
                                             
 II. In cases of alleged incest where the victim is under the age of
18 when the alleged offense occurred, the statute of limitations shall
run pursuant to RSA 625:8, III(d).
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph I, a person
convicted of incest where the victim is under the age of 18 shall be
sentenced to a maximum sentence which is not to exceed 20 years and a
minimum which is not to exceed 1/2 the maximum. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this paragraph, no person under 18 years of age shall be
subject to any minimum sentence of imprisonment for a conviction of
incest under this section.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1986, 168:2. 2000, 173:2, 3. 2008, 334:10, eff.
Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 639:3

 **639:3 Endangering Welfare of Child or Incompetent. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of endangering the welfare of a child or
incompetent if he knowingly endangers the welfare of a child under 18
years of age or of an incompetent person by purposely violating a duty
of care, protection or support he owes to such child or incompetent, or
by inducing such child or incompetent to engage in conduct that
endangers his health or safety.
                                             
 II. In the prosecution of any person under this section, the
tattooing or branding by any person of a child under the age of 18
constitutes endangering the welfare of such child.
                                             
 II-a. In the prosecution of any person under this section, the
placement of a child for adoption or the attempt to place a child for
adoption in violation of RSA 170-B:33 constitutes endangering the
welfare of such child.
                                             
 III. In the prosecution of any person under this section, the
solicitation by any person of a child under the age of 16 to engage in
sexual activity as defined by RSA 649-A:2, III for the purpose of
creating a visual representation as defined in RSA 649-A:2, IV, or to
engage in sexual penetration as defined by RSA 632-A:1, V, constitutes
endangering the welfare of such child.
                                             
 IV. A person who pursuant to the tenets of a recognized religion
fails to conform to an otherwise existing duty of care or protection is
not guilty of an offense under this section.
                                             
 V. A person who endangers the welfare of a child or incompetent by
violating paragraph III of this section is guilty of a class B felony.
All other violations of this section are misdemeanors.
                                             
 VI. No person acting in accordance with the provisions of RSA 132-A
shall be guilty of an offense under this section.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1983, 448:1. 2002, 195:2. 2003, 40:2, eff. June
4, 2003. 2016, 159:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 639:4

 **639:4 Non-Support. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of non-support if such person knowingly fails
to provide support which such person is legally obliged to provide and
which such person can provide to a spouse, child or other dependent. The
fine, if any, shall be paid or applied in whole or in part to the
support of such spouse, child or other dependent as the court may
direct.
                                             
 II. In this section, non-support shall be:
                                             
 (a) A class B felony if the arrearage of support has remained
unpaid for a cumulative period of more than one year;
                                             
 (b) A class B felony if the amount of the arrearage is more than

                                             $10,000;
                                             
 (c) A class B felony if the obligor has been previously convicted
of non-support under this section or if the obligor has been convicted
of a similar criminal nonsupport offense in another state and the
arrearage of support in this state has remained unpaid for a cumulative
period of more than one year; or
                                             
 (d) A class A misdemeanor in all other cases.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1977, 588:14. 1999, 327:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 639:5

 **639:5 Concealing Death of a Newborn. –** A person is guilty of a
class B felony if he knowingly conceals the corpse of a newborn child.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.
