---
title: CHAPTER 641 FALSIFICATION IN OFFICIAL MATTERS
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 641
                                             
FALSIFICATION IN OFFICIAL MATTERS
---------------------------------

### Section 641:1

 **641:1 Perjury. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of a class B felony if in any official
proceeding:
                                             
 (a) He makes a false material statement under oath or
affirmation, or swears or affirms the truth of a material statement
previously made, and he does not believe the statement to be true; or
                                             
 (b) He makes inconsistent material statements under oath or
affirmation, both within the period of limitations, one of which is
false and not believed by him to be true. In a prosecution under this
section, it need not be alleged or proved which of the statements is
false but only that one or the other was false and not believed by the
defendant to be true.
                                             
 II. "Official proceeding'' means any proceeding before a
legislative, judicial, administrative or other governmental body or
official authorized by law to take evidence under oath or affirmation
including a notary or other person taking evidence in connection with
any such proceeding. "Material'' means capable of affecting the course
or outcome of the proceeding. A statement is not material if it is
retracted in the course of the official proceeding in which it was made
before it became manifest that the falsification was or would be exposed
and before it substantially affected the proceeding. Whether a statement
is material is a question of law to be determined by the court.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 641:2

 **641:2 False Swearing. –** A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if:
                                             
 I. He makes a false statement under oath or affirmation or swears or
affirms the truth of such a statement previously made and he does not
believe the statement to be true if:
                                             
 (a) The falsification occurs in an official proceeding, as
defined in RSA 641:1, II, or is made with a purpose to mislead a public
servant in performing his official function; or
                                             
 (b) The statement is one which is required by law to be sworn or
affirmed before a notary or other person authorized to administer oaths;
or
                                             
 II. He makes inconsistent statements under oath or affirmation, both
within the period of limitations, one of which is false and not believed
by him to be true. In a prosecution under this section, it need not be
alleged or proved which of the statements is false but only that one or
the other was false and not believed by the defendant to be true.
                                             
 III. No person shall be guilty under this section if he retracts the
falsification before it becomes manifest that the falsification was or
would be exposed.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 641:3

 **641:3 Unsworn Falsification. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if:
                                             
 (a) He or she makes a written or electronic false statement which
he or she does not believe to be true, on or pursuant to a form bearing
a notification authorized by law to the effect that false statements
made therein are punishable; or
                                             
 (b) With a purpose to deceive a public servant in the performance
of his or her official function, he or she:
                                             
 (1) Makes any written or electronic false statement which he
or she does not believe to be true; or
                                             
 (2) Knowingly creates a false impression in a written
application for any pecuniary or other benefit by omitting information
necessary to prevent statements therein from being misleading; or
                                             
 (3) Submits or invites reliance on any writing which he or she
knows to be lacking in authenticity; or
                                             
 (4) Submits or invites reliance on any sample, specimen, map,
boundary mark, or other object which he or she knows to be false.
                                             
 II. No person shall be guilty under this section if he or she
retracts the falsification before it becomes manifest that the
falsification was or would be exposed.
                                             
 III. A form adopted by a state agency pursuant to RSA 541-A, or in
use by a state agency prior to January 1, 2016, containing a
notification that false statements made therein are punishable under
this section shall be considered authorized by law.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 2003, 158:2, eff. June 17, 2003. 2016, 196:14,
eff. Aug. 5, 2016.

### Section 641:4

 **641:4 False Reports to Law Enforcement. –** A person is guilty of
a misdemeanor if he:
                                             
 I. Knowingly gives or causes to be given false information to any
law enforcement officer with the purpose of inducing such officer to
believe that another has committed an offense; or
                                             
 II. Knowingly gives or causes to be given information to any law
enforcement officer concerning the commission of an offense, or the
danger from an explosive or other dangerous substance, knowing that the
offense or danger did not occur or exist or knowing that he has no
information relating to the offense or danger.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 641:5

 **641:5 Tampering With Witnesses and Informants. –** A person is
guilty of a class B felony if:
                                             
 I. Believing that an official proceeding, as defined in RSA 641:1,
II, or investigation is pending or about to be instituted, he attempts
to induce or otherwise cause a person to:
                                             
 (a) Testify or inform falsely; or
                                             
 (b) Withhold any testimony, information, document or thing; or
                                             
 (c) Elude legal process summoning him to provide evidence; or
                                             
 (d) Absent himself from any proceeding or investigation to which
he has been summoned; or
                                             
 II. He commits any unlawful act in retaliation for anything done by
another in his capacity as witness or informant; or
                                             
 III. He solicits, accepts or agrees to accept any benefit in
consideration of his doing any of the things specified in paragraph I.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 641:6

 **641:6 Falsifying Physical Evidence. –** A person commits a class B
felony if, believing that an official proceeding, as defined in RSA
641:1, II, or investigation is pending or about to be instituted, he:
                                             
 I. Alters, destroys, conceals or removes any thing with a purpose to
impair its verity or availability in such proceeding or investigation;
or
                                             
 II. Makes, presents or uses any thing which he knows to be false
with a purpose to deceive a public servant who is or may be engaged in
such proceeding or investigation.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 641:7

 **641:7 Tampering With Public Records or Information. –** A person
is guilty of a misdemeanor if he:
                                             
 I. Knowingly makes a false entry in or false alteration of any thing
belonging to, received, or kept by the government for information or
record, or required by law to be kept for information of the government;
or
                                             
 II. Presents or uses any thing knowing it to be false, and with a
purpose that it be taken as a genuine part of information or records
referred to in paragraph I; or
                                             
 III. Purposely and unlawfully destroys, conceals, removes or
otherwise impairs the verity or availability of any such thing.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 641:8

 **641:8 False Filing With the Director of Charitable Trusts. –** A
person shall be guilty of a class B felony if he knowingly makes a false
entry in or false alteration of any registration statement, annual
report or other information required to be filed with the director of
charitable trusts.

**Source.** 1992, 239:3, eff. July 1, 1992.
