---
title: 'CHAPTER 644-A ELECTRONIC DEVICE LOCATION INFORMATION'
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 644-A
                                             
ELECTRONIC DEVICE LOCATION INFORMATION
--------------------------------------

### Section 644-A:1

 **644-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Electronic communication service'' means a service that provides
users the ability to send or receive wire or electronic communications.
                                             
 II. "Electronic device'' means a device that enables access to or
use of an electronic communication service, remote computing service, or
location information service, including without limitation a cellular
telephone.
                                             
 III. "Government entity'' means a federal, state, or local agency,
including but not limited to a law enforcement agency or any other
investigative entity, department, division, bureau, board, or
commission, or an individual acting or purporting to act for or on
behalf of a federal, state, or local agency. "Government entity'' shall
not apply to a federal government agency to the extent that federal
statute preempts such application.
                                             
 IV. "Individual'' means a natural person.
                                             
 V. "Location information'' means information concerning the location
of an electronic device, including both the current location and any
prior location of the device that, in whole or in part, is generated,
derived from, or obtained by the operation of an electronic device.
                                             
 VI. "Location information service'' means a global positioning
service or other mapping or directional information service.
                                             
 VII. "Owner'' means the individual or person having the legal title,
claim, or right to an electronic device.
                                             
 VIII. "Person'' means a corporation, trust, estate, partnership,
limited liability company, association, firm, or any other legal
entity.
                                             
 IX. "Remote computing service'' means computer storage or processing
services provided by means of an electronic communication service.
                                             
 X. "User'' means an individual, person, or government entity that
uses an electronic device.

**Source.** 2015, 262:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 644-A:2

 **644-A:2 Warrant Required for Acquisition of Location Information.
–**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in this chapter, a government entity shall not
obtain location information from an electronic device without a warrant
issued by a judge based on probable cause and on a case-by-case basis.
                                             
 II. No government entity shall place, locate, or install an
electronic device on the person or property of another, or obtain
location information from such an electronic device, without a warrant
issued by a judge based on probable cause and on a case-by-case basis.

**Source.** 2015, 262:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 644-A:3

 **644-A:3 Exceptions to Warrant Requirement. –** A government entity
may obtain the location information without a warrant:
                                             
 I. To respond to a call for emergency services, including a request
from an E-911 supervisor to an electronic communication service to
determine the location of a cellular telephone when the supervisor
informs the services that the information is required pursuant to an
emergency involving actual or potential death, serious physical injury
or major damage to property and the information is needed without delay.
Such a request shall not create a cause of action against the E-911
system or employee or the electronic communication service or its
employees;
                                             
 II. With the informed consent of the owner or user of the electronic
device concerned, except when the device is known or believed by the
owner or user to be in the lawful possession of a third party known to
the owner or user;
                                             
 III. With the informed consent of the parent or foster parent of a
minor who is the owner or user, or the legal guardian or next of kin of
the owner or user, if the owner or user is believed to be deceased or
reported missing and unable to be contacted;
                                             
 IV. If the government entity reasonably believes that an emergency
involving immediate danger of death or serious physical injury to a
person requires the disclosure, without delay, of location information
concerning a specific person and that a warrant cannot be obtained in
time to prevent the identified danger, and the possessor of the location
information, in good faith, believes that an emergency involving danger
of death or serious physical injury to a person requires the disclosure
without delay;
                                             
 V. Pursuant to a legally-recognized exception to the warrant
requirement;
                                             
 VI. If the government entity is the owner of the electronic device
and has issued it to an employee or it is attached to property owned by
the government entity; or
                                             
 VII. If an alcohol ignition interlock device has been installed in a
motor vehicle in compliance with an order issued by a court or the
commissioner of the department of safety.

**Source.** 2015, 262:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 644-A:4

 **644-A:4 Conditions of Use of Location Information. –** No
individual or person shall, without consent, place, locate, or install
an electronic device on the person or property of another and obtain
location information from such electronic device. No such consent shall
be required by the parent, foster parent, or legal guardian of a minor,
or by the legal guardian for the subject of his or her guardianship, or
for persons under house arrest or probation or parole supervision who
are issued ankle bracelets.

**Source.** 2015, 262:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 644-A:5

 **644-A:5 Action Against a Person. –** This chapter shall not be
construed to create a cause of action against a person or its officers,
employees, or agents for providing location information to a government
entity in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 262:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 644-A:6

 **644-A:6 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any individual acting or purporting to act for or on behalf of a
federal, state, or local agency who purposely violates this chapter
shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. An individual or person who is injured as a result of a
violation of this chapter may file a civil action against a government
entity, individual, or person that fails to comply with the provisions
of this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 262:1, eff. July 1, 2015.
