---
title: CHAPTER 645 PUBLIC INDECENCY
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 645
                                             
PUBLIC INDECENCY
----------------

### Section 645:1

 **645:1 Indecent Exposure and Lewdness. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if such person fornicates,
exposes his or her genitals, or performs any other act of gross lewdness
under circumstances which he or she should know will likely cause
affront or alarm.
                                             
 II. A person is guilty of a class B felony if:
                                             
 (a) Such person, under circumstances that may be reasonably
construed as being for the purpose of sexual gratification or arousal,
purposely fornicates, exposes his or her genitals, or performs any other
act of gross lewdness knowing that a child who is less than 16 years of
age is present.
                                             
 (b) Such person purposely performs any act of sexual penetration
or sexual contact on himself or herself or another in the presence of a
child who is less than 16 years of age.
                                             
 (c) Such person purposely transmits to a child who is less than
16 years of age, or an individual whom the actor reasonably believes is
a child who is less than 16 years of age, an image of himself or herself
fornicating, exposing his or her genitals, or performing any other act
of gross lewdness.
                                             
 (d) Having previously been convicted of an offense under
paragraph I, or of an offense that includes the same conduct under any
other jurisdiction, the person subsequently commits an offense under
paragraph I.
                                             
 III. A person shall be guilty of a class A felony if having
previously been convicted of 2 or more offenses under paragraph II, or a
reasonably equivalent statute in another state, the person subsequently
commits an offense under this section.

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1992, 254:10. 1993, 297:1. 1999, 321:1. 2008,
323:5. 2015, 200:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 645:1-a

 **645:1-a Public Urination or Defecation. –** A person is guilty of
a violation if such person urinates or defecates in a public place,
other than a public restroom, under circumstances where the person knew
or should have known would likely cause affront or alarm to another.

**Source.** 2008, 70:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 645:2

 **645:2 Prostitution and Related Offenses. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if the person:
                                             
 (a) Solicits, agrees to perform, or engages in sexual contact as
defined in RSA 632-A:1, IV or sexual penetration as defined in RSA
632-A:1, V, in return for consideration; or
                                             
 (b) Induces or otherwise purposely causes another to violate
subparagraph (a); or
                                             
 (c) Transports another into or within this state with the purpose
of promoting or facilitating such other in engaging in conduct in
violation of subparagraph (a); or
                                             
 (d) Not being a legal dependent incapable of self support,
knowingly is supported in whole or in part by the proceeds of violation
of subparagraph (a); or
                                             
 (e) Knowingly permits a place under such person's control to be
used for violation of subparagraph (a); or
                                             
 (f) Pays, agrees to pay, or offers to pay another person to
engage in sexual contact as defined in RSA 632-A:1, IV or sexual
penetration as defined in RSA 632-A:1, V, with the payor or with another
person.
                                             
 II. A person is guilty of a class B felony if such person violates
the provisions of subparagraphs (b), (c), (d), or (e) of paragraph I and
the violation:
                                             
 (a) Involves another person who is under the age of 18; or
                                             
 (b) Involved compelling another person by force or intimidation.
                                             
 III. A person is guilty under this section regardless of the sex of
the persons involved.
                                             
 IV. It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge under
subparagraph I(a) that the defendant engaged in the conduct because he
or she was the victim of trafficking in persons, as defined in RSA
633:7.
                                             
 V. A person under 18 years of age shall not be subject to a juvenile
delinquency proceeding under RSA 169-B or criminal prosecution for the
commission of an offense under subparagraph I(a).

**Source.** 1971, 518:1. 1977, 311:1. 1985, 228:6. 1991, 82:1. 1993,
168:1, 2. 1995, 229:1-3. 2009, 211:2. 2014, 257:5, eff. Oct. 23, 2014.

### Section 645:3

 **645:3 Adultery. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2014, 44:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.
                                             ]
