---
title: 'CHAPTER 646-A DESECRATION OF THE FLAG'
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 646-A
                                             
DESECRATION OF THE FLAG
-----------------------

### Section 646-A:1

 **646-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Desecration'' means the act of diverting from a sacred purpose
or use to which a flag has been devoted by another individual or group
of individuals. The act of desecration shall include burning, defacing,
mutilating, destroying or trampling upon the flag.
                                             
 II. "Flag of the United States'' means any flag that is the commonly
accepted "stars and stripes'' or that flag described in Executive Order

                                             #10834 of President Eisenhower, August 25, 1959, and succeeding
attachments to such Executive Order.
                                             
 III. "Properly displayed'' means any flag of the United States
attached to a public or private building by means of a pole or any other
attachment which renders the flag of the United States to be displayed
according to commonly accepted flag etiquette; any flag of the United
States displayed in a cemetery to mark a memorial or veteran's
gravesite; any flag of the United States displayed for a certain period
of time to mark a national holiday; any flag of the United States which
is historic and is maintained in a display case for public viewing; or
any flag of the United States displayed in accordance with Public Law
623, approved June 22, 1942 and amendments thereto.

**Source.** 1990, 135:2, eff. April 19, 1990.

### Section 646-A:2

 **646-A:2 Desecration Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be unlawful to knowingly desecrate a flag of the United
States while it is properly displayed.
                                             
 II. It shall be unlawful to knowingly desecrate a flag of the United
States while it is the property of another.

**Source.** 1990, 135:2, eff. April 19, 1990.

### Section 646-A:3

 **646-A:3 Destruction of a Worn Flag of the United States Allowed.
–** When the flag of the United States is worn or frayed or torn or in
such a condition that it is no longer a fitting emblem of the United
States, it should be destroyed in a dignified manner, preferably by
burning privately.

**Source.** 1990, 135:2, eff. April 19, 1990.

### Section 646-A:4

 **646-A:4 Penalties. –** Whoever knowingly casts contempt upon the
flag of the United States by desecrating the flag when it is properly
displayed or is the property of another shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1990, 135:2, eff. April 19, 1990.
