---
title: 'CHAPTER 649-A CHILD PORNOGRAPHY'
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 649-A
                                             
CHILD PORNOGRAPHY
-----------------

### Section 649-A:1

 **649-A:1 Declaration of Findings and Purposes. –**
                                             
 I. The legislature finds that there has been a proliferation of
exploitation of children through their use as subjects in sexual
performances. The care of children is a sacred trust and should not be
abused by those who seek to profit through a commercial network based
upon the exploitation of children. The public policy of the state
demands the protection of children from exploitation through sexual
performances.
                                             
 II. It is the purpose of this chapter to facilitate the prosecution
of those who exploit children in the manner specified in paragraph I. In
accordance with the United States Supreme Court's decision in New York
v. Ferber, this chapter makes the dissemination of visual
representations of children under the age of 16 engaged in sexual
activity illegal irrespective of whether the visual representations are
legally obscene; and the legislature urges law enforcement officers to
aggressively seek out and prosecute those who violate the provisions of
this chapter.

**Source.** 1983, 448:2, eff. Aug. 23, 1983.

### Section 649-A:2

 **649-A:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Child'' means any person under the age of 18 years.
                                             
 II. "Disseminate'' means to import, publish, produce, print,
manufacture, distribute, sell, lease, exhibit, or display.
                                             
 III. "Sexually explicit conduct'' means human masturbation, the
touching of the actor's or other person's sexual organs in the context
of a sexual relationship, sexual intercourse actual or simulated, normal
or perverted, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite
sex or between humans and animals, or any lewd exhibitions of the
buttocks, genitals, flagellation, bondage, or torture. Sexual
intercourse is simulated when it depicts explicit sexual intercourse
that gives the appearance of the consummation of sexual intercourse,
normal or perverted.
                                             
 IV. "Visual representation'' means any visual depiction, including
any photograph, film, video, digital image, picture, or computer or
computer-generated image or picture, whether made or produced by
electronic, mechanical, or other means, of sexually explicit conduct,
where:
                                             
 (a) The production of such visual depiction involves the use of a
child engaging in or being engaged in sexually explicit conduct; or
                                             
 (b) Such visual depiction is a digital image, computer image, or
computer-generated image of a child engaging in or being engaged in
sexually explicit conduct; or
                                             
 (c) Such visual depiction has been created, adapted, or modified
to appear that an identifiable child is engaging in or being engaged in
sexually explicit conduct.
                                             
 V. (a) "Identifiable child'' means a person:
                                             
 (1) Who was a child at the time the visual depiction was
created, adapted, or modified; or
                                             
 (2) Whose image as a child was used in creating, adapting, or
modifying the visual depiction; and
                                             
 (3) Who is recognizable as an actual person by the person's
face, likeness, or other distinguishing characteristic, such as a unique
birthmark or other recognizable feature.
                                             
 (b) The term "identifiable child'' shall not be construed to
require proof of the actual identity of the identifiable child.
                                             
 VI. "Previous conviction'' or "previously convicted'' means having
been convicted by a jury or a judge, or having plead guilty prior to the
commission of the current offense. For purposes of this paragraph, a
previous conviction need not have been affirmed on appeal.
                                             
 VII. "Computer'' means an electronic, magnetic, optical,
electrochemical, or other high speed data processing device performing
logical, arithmetic, or storage functions, and includes any data storage
facility or communications facility directly related to or operating in
conjunction with such device, but such term does not include an
automated typewriter or typesetter, a portable hand held calculator, or
other similar device.

**Source.** 1983, 448:2. 2008, 323:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 649-A:3

 **649-A:3 Possession of Child Sexual Abuse Images. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall knowingly:
                                             
 (a) Buy, procure, possess, or control any visual representation
of a child engaging in sexually explicit conduct; or
                                             
 (b) Bring or cause to be brought into this state any visual
representation of a child engaging in sexually explicit conduct.
                                             
 II. An offense under this section shall be a class A felony if such
person has had no previous convictions in this state or another
jurisdiction for the conduct prohibited by paragraph I. Upon conviction
of an offense under this section based on an indictment alleging that
the person has been previously convicted of an offense under this
section or a reasonably equivalent offense in another jurisdiction, the
defendant may be sentenced to a maximum sentence not to exceed 20 years
and a minimum sentence not to exceed 1/2 of the maximum sentence.
                                             
 III. It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of violating
paragraph I of this section that the defendant:
                                             
 (a) Possessed less than 3 images of any visual depiction
proscribed by that paragraph; and
                                             
 (b) Promptly and in good faith, and without retaining or allowing
any person, other than a law enforcement agency, to access any visual
depiction or copy thereof:
                                             
 (1) Took reasonable steps to destroy each such visual
depiction; or
                                             
 (2) Reported the matter to a law enforcement agency and
afforded that agency access to each such visual depiction.

**Source.** 1983, 448:2. 1991, 27:1. 1998, 361:1. 2008, 323:1, eff. Jan.
1, 2009.

### Section 649-A:3-a

 **649-A:3-a Distribution of Child Sexual Abuse Images. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall:
                                             
 (a) Knowingly sell, exchange, or otherwise transfer, or possess
with intent to sell, exchange, or otherwise transfer any visual
representation of a child engaging in or being engaged in sexually
explicit conduct;
                                             
 (b) Knowingly publish, exhibit, or otherwise make available any
visual representation of a child engaging in or being engaged in
sexually explicit conduct.
                                             
 II. (a) If such person has had no previous convictions in this state
or another state for the conduct prohibited by paragraph I, the
defendant may be sentenced to a maximum sentence not to exceed 20 years
and a minimum sentence not to exceed 1/2 of the maximum. Upon conviction
of an offense under this section based on an indictment alleging that
the person has been previously convicted of an offense under this
section or a reasonably equivalent offense in an out-of-state
jurisdiction, the defendant may be sentenced to a maximum sentence not
to exceed 30 years and a minimum sentence not to exceed 1/2 of the
minimum.
                                             
 (b) If such person has no previous convictions in this state or
another state for the conduct prohibited in paragraph I, and is
convicted under subparagraph I(b) with having less than 3 images or
visual representations, the defendant will be guilty of a class B
felony.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit any law
enforcement agency from possessing or displaying or otherwise make
available any images as may be necessary to the performance of a valid
law enforcement function.

**Source.** 2008, 323:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 649-A:3-b

 **649-A:3-b Manufacture of Child Sexual Abuse Images. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall knowingly create, produce, manufacture, or direct
a visual representation of a child engaging in or being engaged in
sexually explicit conduct, or participate in that portion of such visual
representation that consists of a child engaging in or being engaged in
sexually explicit conduct.
                                             
 II. If such person has had no previous convictions in this state or
another state for the conduct prohibited in this section, the defendant
may be sentenced to a maximum sentence not to exceed 30 years and a
minimum sentence not to exceed 1/2 of the maximum. Upon conviction of an
offense under this section based on an indictment alleging that the
person has been previously convicted of an offense under this section or
a reasonably equivalent offense in an out-of-state jurisdiction, a
person may be sentenced to life imprisonment or for such term as the
court may order.

**Source.** 2008, 323:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 649-A:4

 **649-A:4 Exemption. –** A person shall not be guilty of a violation
under this chapter if he is a librarian, or a paid or volunteer member
of a library staff working under the supervision of a librarian, engaged
in the normal course of his employment, or if he is regularly employed
by anybody as a motion picture projectionist, stage employee or
spotlight operator, cashier, doorman, usher, candy stand attendant,
porter or in any other nonmanagerial or nonsupervisory capacity in a
motion picture theatre; provided that he has no financial interest,
other than his employment, which employment does not encompass
compensation based upon any proportion of the gross receipts, in the
promotion of a sexual performance for sale, rental or exhibition or in
the promotion, presentation or direction of any sexual performance, and
provided further that he is not in any way responsible for acquiring
such material for sale, rental or exhibition.

**Source.** 1983, 448:2, eff. Aug. 23, 1983.

### Section 649-A:5

 **649-A:5 Justifiable Dissemination. –** It is an affirmative
defense to prosecution under this chapter that dissemination was:
                                             
 I. Restricted to institutions or persons having scientific, medical,
educational, governmental or other similar justification for possessing
a visual representation of a child engaging in sexual activity; or
                                             
 II. Of the same material available in the same or another form in
any public library in the state.

**Source.** 1983, 448:2. 1998, 361:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 649-A:6

 **649-A:6 Proving Age of Child. –** Whether a child depicted in a
visual representation is a minor for the purposes of this chapter is a
question of fact for the jury and may be found by expert or lay
testimony, or by viewing the images.

**Source.** 2008, 323:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 649-A:7

 **649-A:7 Discovery. –**
                                             
 I. In any criminal proceeding, any material that constitutes a
visual representation of a child engaging in or being engaged in
sexually explicit conduct shall remain in the care, custody, and control
of the state or the court.
                                             
 II. The state shall provide ample opportunity for the defendant, his
or her attorney, or any individual the defendant may seek to qualify to
furnish expert testimony at trial, or any expert retained in
anticipation of criminal litigation or for preparation for trial, to
inspect, view, and examine the property or material at a state
facility.
                                             
 III. Upon a defense motion or by agreement of the parties
establishing that it is necessary to copy, photograph, duplicate, or
otherwise reproduce such material or property in order to prepare a
defense, the court may authorize such action, provided that the court's
order include a protective order prohibiting disclosure of the material
or property to any one other than the defendant, his or her attorney, or
any individual the defendant may seek to qualify to furnish expert
testimony at trial, or any expert retained in anticipation of criminal
litigation or for preparation for trial. The court protective order
shall require that all such material or property provided to the defense
be kept secure against theft and inadvertent disclosure to any other
person and be maintained in a manner which deters copying or
dissemination. Any person either handling or viewing such material or
property shall sign a non-disclosure agreement agreeing to refrain from
copying or publishing any visual representation of a child engaging in
or being engaged in sexually explicit conduct. Any person who views any
of the images shall certify in writing that he or she has not knowingly
kept any material or property which would qualify as an image of child
sexual abuse under state or federal law, and that all materials,
property, and signed non-disclosure agreements shall be returned to the
state at the end of the case.

**Source.** 2008, 323:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.
