---
title: 'CHAPTER 649-B COMPUTER PORNOGRAPHY AND CHILD EXPLOITATION PREVENTION'
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 649-B
                                             
COMPUTER PORNOGRAPHY AND CHILD EXPLOITATION PREVENTION
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 649-B:1

 **649-B:1 Short Title. –** This chapter shall be known and may be
cited as the "Computer Pornography and Child Exploitation Prevention Act
of 1998.''

**Source.** 1998, 361:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 649-B:2

 **649-B:2 Definition. –** In this chapter, "child'' means any person
under the age of 16 years.

**Source.** 1998, 361:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 649-B:3

 **649-B:3 Computer Pornography Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall knowingly:
                                             
 (a) Compile, enter into, or transmit by means of computer;
                                             
 (b) Make, print, publish, or reproduce by other computerized
means;
                                             
 (c) Cause or allow to be entered into or transmitted by means of
computer; or
                                             
 (d) Buy, sell, receive, exchange, or disseminate by means of
computer, any notice, statement, or advertisement, or any minor's name,
telephone number, place of residence, physical characteristics, or other
descriptive or identifying information,
                                             
for purposes of facilitating, encouraging, offering, or soliciting
sexual conduct of or with any child, or the visual depiction of such
conduct.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty
of a class B felony.

**Source.** 1998, 361:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 649-B:4

 **649-B:4 Certain Uses of Computer Services Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall knowingly utilize a computer on-line service,
internet service, or local bulletin board service to seduce, solicit,
lure, or entice a child or another person believed by the person to be a
child, to commit any of the following:
                                             
 (a) Any offense under RSA 632-A, relative to sexual assault and
related offenses.
                                             
 (b) Indecent exposure and lewdness under RSA 645:1.
                                             
 (c) Endangering a child as defined in RSA 639:3, III.
                                             
 II. (a) A person who violates the provisions of paragraph I shall be
guilty of a class A felony if such person believed the child was under
the age of 13, otherwise such person shall be guilty of a class B
felony.
                                             
 (b) A person convicted under paragraph I based on an indictment
alleging that the person has been previously convicted of an offense
under this section or a reasonably equivalent offense in an out-of-state
jurisdiction shall be charged as a class A felony. If the indictment
also alleges that the person believed that the child was under the age
of 13, the person may be sentenced to a maximum sentence not to exceed
20 years and a minimum sentence not to exceed 10 years.
                                             
 (c) If the person has been previously convicted 2 or more times
for an offense under this section or a reasonably equivalent statute in
another state, the person may be sentenced to a maximum term not to
exceed 30 years.
                                             
 III. It shall not be a defense to a prosecution under this section
that the victim was not actually a child so long as the person
reasonably believed that the victim was a child.

**Source.** 1998, 361:3. 2008, 323:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 649-B:5

 **649-B:5 Owners or Operators of Computer Services Liable. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be a class A misdemeanor for any owner or operator of a
computer on-line service, Internet service, or local bulletin board
service knowingly to permit a subscriber to utilize the service to
commit a violation of this chapter.
                                             
 II. Any out-of-state computer service company doing business in New
Hampshire which receives a subpoena from the state of New Hampshire
resulting from an investigation of a violation of this chapter shall
respond to such subpoena within 14 days. Failure to respond may result
in the suspension or revocation of such company's right to do business
in New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1998, 361:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 649-B:6

 **649-B:6 State Criminal Jurisdiction. –** A person is subject to
prosecution for engaging in any conduct proscribed by this chapter
within this state, or for engaging in such conduct outside this state if
by such conduct the person commits a violation of this chapter involving
a child or an individual the person believes to be a child, residing
within this state.

**Source.** 1998, 361:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.
