---
title: 'CHAPTER 650-C NEGLIGENT STORAGE OF FIREARMS'
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 650-C
                                             
NEGLIGENT STORAGE OF FIREARMS
-----------------------------

### Section 650-C:1

 **650-C:1 Negligent Storage of Firearms. –**
                                             
 I. Nothing in this section shall be construed to reduce or limit any
existing right to purchase and own firearms or ammunition, or both, or
to provide authority to any state or local agency to infringe upon the
privacy of any family, home or business except by lawful warrant.
                                             
 II. As used in this section, "child,'' "juvenile'' or "youth'' shall
mean any person under 16 years of age.
                                             
 III. Any person who stores or leaves on premises under that person's
control a loaded firearm, and who knows or reasonably should know that a
child is likely to gain access to the firearm without the permission of
the child's parent or guardian, is guilty of a violation if a child
gains access to a firearm and:
                                             
 (a) The firearm is used in a reckless or threatening manner;
                                             
 (b) The firearm is used during the commission of any misdemeanor
or felony; or
                                             
 (c) The firearm is negligently or recklessly discharged.
                                             
 IV. Any person who violates paragraph III shall be fined not more
than 
                                             $1,000.
                                             
 V. This section shall not apply whenever any of the following
occurs:
                                             
 (a) The child has completed firearm safety instructions by a
certified firearms safety instructor or has successfully completed a
certified hunter safety course.
                                             
 (b) The firearm is kept secured in a locked box, gun safe, or
other secure locked space, or in a location which a reasonable person
would believe to be secure, or is secured with a trigger lock or similar
device that prevents the firearm from discharging.
                                             
 (c) The firearm is carried on the person or within such a close
proximity thereto so that the individual can readily retrieve and use
the firearm as if carried on the person.
                                             
 (d) The child obtains or obtains and discharges the firearm in a
lawful act of self-defense or defense of another person.
                                             
 (e) The person who keeps a loaded firearm on any premises which
are under such person's custody or control has no reasonable
expectation, based on objective facts and circumstances, that a child is
likely to be present on the premises.
                                             
 (f) The child obtains the firearm as a result of an illegal entry
of any premises by any person or an illegal taking of the firearm from
the premises of the owner without permission of the owner.
                                             
 VI. A parent or guardian of a child who is injured or who dies of an
accidental shooting shall be prosecuted under this section only in those
instances in which the parent or guardian behaved in a grossly negligent
manner.
                                             
 VII. Licensees shall conspicuously post at each purchase counter the
following warning in bold type not less than one inch in height: "IT IS
IMPORTANT THAT THE OWNER OF A FIREARM SEEK FIREARM SAFETY INSTRUCTIONS
FROM A CERTIFIED FIREARMS INSTRUCTOR AND KEEP FIREARMS SECURED FROM
UNAUTHORIZED USE.'' A licensee failing to display this warning to the
purchaser of a firearm shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 2000, 267:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.
