---
title: 'CHAPTER 651-E INTERBRANCH CRIMINAL AND JUVENILE JUSTICE COUNCIL'
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 651-E
                                             
INTERBRANCH CRIMINAL AND JUVENILE JUSTICE COUNCIL
-------------------------------------------------

### Section 651-E:1

 **651-E:1 Council Established. –** There is established an
interbranch criminal and juvenile justice council to provide leadership,
communication, and coordination among those involved in or affected by
the criminal and juvenile justice systems.

**Source.** 2008, 201:1, eff. June 16, 2008.

### Section 651-E:2

 **651-E:2 Membership and Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. The members of the council shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) The governor, or designee.
                                             
 (b) Two members of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (c) Three members of the house of representatives, one of whom
shall be from the criminal justice and public safety committee, and one
of whom shall be from the children and family law committee, appointed
by the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (d) The chief justice of the supreme court, or designee.
                                             
 (e) The attorney general, or designee.
                                             
 (f) The commissioner of the department of corrections, or
designee.
                                             
 (g) The commissioner of the department of safety, or designee.
                                             
 (h) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (i) The director of the division of juvenile justice services,
department of health and human services, or designee.
                                             
 (j) The director of the division of field services, department of
corrections, or designee.
                                             
 (k) The director of police standards and training, or designee.
                                             
 (l) The director of victim/witness services, department of
justice, or designee.
                                             
 (m) The chief justice of the superior court, or designee.
                                             
 (n) The administrative judge of the district court, or designee.
                                             
 (o) The administrative judge of the judicial branch family
division, or designee.
                                             
 (p) The executive director of the judicial council.
                                             
 (q) The president of the county attorneys affiliate of the New
Hampshire Association of Counties, or designee.
                                             
 (r) The president of the county corrections superintendents
affiliate of the New Hampshire Association of Counties, or designee.
                                             
 (s) The president of the New Hampshire Association of Chiefs of
Police, or designee.
                                             
 (t) The executive director of the New Hampshire Public Defender,
or designee.
                                             
 (u) The president of the New Hampshire Association of Criminal
Defense Lawyers, or designee.
                                             
 (v) The executive director of the New Hampshire Civil Liberties
Union, or designee.
                                             
 (w) The chairperson of the governor's commission on alcohol and
drug abuse prevention, treatment, and recovery, or designee.
                                             
 (x) The chairman of the adult parole board, or designee.
                                             
 (y) The executive director of the New Hampshire Coalition Against
Domestic and Sexual Violence, or designee.
                                             
 (z) The warden of the New Hampshire correctional facility for
women, or designee, appointed by the commissioner of the department of
corrections.
                                             
 II. Legislative members of the council shall receive mileage at the
legislative rate when attending to the duties of the council.

**Source.** 2008, 201:1. 2009, 199:1. 2014, 18:5; 221:1. 2015, 146:1,
eff. Aug. 11, 2015.

### Section 651-E:3

 **651-E:3 Duties. –** The council shall:
                                             
 I. Identify, study, develop, and implement effective criminal and
juvenile justice policy.
                                             
 II. Promote the effective allocation and use of public and private
resources within the criminal and juvenile justice system.
                                             
 III. Foster effective communication, understanding, cooperation, and
coordination among those involved in, or affected by, the criminal and
juvenile justice system.
                                             
 IV. Inform and engage the public regarding criminal and juvenile
justice matters.

**Source.** 2008, 201:1, eff. June 16, 2008.

### Section 651-E:4

 **651-E:4 Chairperson; Quorum. –**
                                             
 I. The members of the council shall elect a chairperson from among
the members. The first meeting of the council shall be called by the
speaker of the house of representatives or the speaker's designee. The
first meeting of the council shall be held within 45 days of the
effective date of this section. Twelve members of the council shall
constitute a quorum.
                                             
 II. The chairperson may invite any person to provide information in
council meetings, provided there is no objection from the council.

**Source.** 2008, 201:1. 2009, 199:2, eff. Sept. 13, 2009.

### Section 651-E:5

 **651-E:5 Report. –** The council shall submit a biennial report
beginning on December 1, 2014, together with its findings and any
recommendations for proposed legislation to the speaker of the house of
representatives, the senate president, the house clerk, the senate
clerk, the governor, and the state library.

**Source.** 2008, 201:1. 2014, 221:2, eff. Sept. 12, 2014.
