---
title: 'CHAPTER 651-D POST-CONVICTION DNA TESTING'
---

TITLE LXII
                                             
CRIMINAL CODE
=============

CHAPTER 651-D
                                             
POST-CONVICTION DNA TESTING
---------------------------

### Section 651-D:1

 **651-D:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Department'' means the department of safety.
                                             
 II. "Division'' means the division of state police, department of
safety.
                                             
 III. "DNA'' means deoxyribonucleic acid.
                                             
 IV. "DNA sample'' means a blood, tissue, or hair follicle sample
provided by any person or submitted to the division for analysis or
storage or both.
                                             
 V. "Investigating agency'' means the law enforcement agency that
investigated a case resulting in a conviction in which biological
material was collected as evidence during the course of the
investigation.

**Source.** 2004, 239:1, eff. June 15, 2004.

### Section 651-D:2

 **651-D:2 Post-Conviction DNA Testing of Biological Material. –**
                                             
 I. A person in custody pursuant to the judgment of the court may, at
any time after conviction or adjudication as a delinquent, petition the
court for forensic DNA testing of any biological material. The petition
shall, under penalty of perjury:
                                             
 (a) Explain why the identity of the petitioner was or should have
been a significant issue during court proceedings notwithstanding the
fact that the petitioner may have pled guilty or nolo contendere, or
made or is alleged to have made an incriminating statement or admission
as to identity.
                                             
 (b) Explain why, in light of all the circumstances, the requested
DNA testing will exonerate the petitioner and demonstrate his or her
innocence by proving that the petitioner has been misidentified as the
perpetrator of, or accomplice to, the crime for which the petitioner was
convicted.
                                             
 (c) Make every reasonable attempt to identify both the evidence
that should be tested and the specific type of DNA testing which is
sought.
                                             
 (d) Explain why the evidence sought to be tested by the
petitioner was not previously subjected to DNA testing, or explain how
the evidence can be subjected to retesting with different DNA techniques
that provide a reasonable probability of reliable and probative
results.
                                             
 II. The court shall notify the office of the attorney general, or
the county attorney who prosecuted the case, of a petition made under
this section and shall afford an opportunity to respond. Upon receiving
notice of a petition made under this section, the attorney general, or
county attorney who prosecuted the case, shall take such steps as are
necessary to ensure that any remaining biological material obtained in
connection with the case or investigation is preserved pending the
completion of proceedings under this section.
                                             
 III. The court may order DNA testing pursuant to an application made
under this section upon finding that the petitioner has established each
of the following factors by clear and convincing evidence:
                                             
 (a) The evidence to be tested was secured in relation to the
investigation or prosecution that resulted in the petitioner's
conviction or sentence, and is available and in a condition that would
permit the DNA testing that is requested in the motion.
                                             
 (b) The evidence to be tested has been subject to a chain of
custody sufficient to establish it has not been substituted, tampered
with, replaced, or altered in any material aspect.
                                             
 (c) The evidence sought to be tested is material to the issue of
the petitioner's identity as the perpetrator of, or accomplice to, the
crime.
                                             
 (d) DNA results of the evidence sought to be tested would be
material to the issue of the petitioner's identity as the perpetrator
of, or accomplice to, the crime that resulted in his or her conviction
or sentence.
                                             
 (e) If the requested DNA testing produces exculpatory results,
the testing will constitute new, noncumulative material evidence that
will exonerate the petitioner by establishing that he or she was
misidentified as the perpetrator or accomplice to the crime.
                                             
 (f) The evidence sought to be tested was not previously tested
using DNA technology or the technology requested was not available at
the time of trial.
                                             
 (g) If DNA or other forensic testing previously was done in
connection with the case, the requested DNA test would provide results
that are significantly more discriminating and probative on a material
issue of identity, and would have a reasonable probability of
contradicting prior test results.
                                             
 (h) The testing requested employs a method generally accepted
within the relevant scientific community.
                                             
 (i) The motion is timely and not unreasonably delayed.
                                             
 IV. If the court grants the motion for DNA testing, the court's
order shall:
                                             
 (a) Identify the specific evidence to be tested and the DNA
technology to be used.
                                             
 (b) If the court ordered different testing than requested by the
petitioner, the court shall explain why the different test was ordered.
                                             
 (c) Designate the New Hampshire state police forensic laboratory
to conduct the test. However, the court, upon a showing of good cause,
may order testing by another laboratory or agency accredited by the
American Society of Crime Laboratory Directors/Laboratory Accreditation
Board (ASCLD/LAB) or the National Forensic Science Training Center, if
requested by the petitioner.
                                             
 (d) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 V. The cost of DNA testing ordered under this section shall be paid
by the petitioner, or by the state, if the petitioner is indigent as
determined by the court. The court may appoint counsel for an indigent
petitioner under this section.
                                             
 VI. (a) If the results of DNA testing conducted under this section
are unfavorable to the petitioner, the court shall dismiss the
application and in cases where the petitioner was convicted of a sexual
offense, the court shall forward the test results to the New Hampshire
state prison, sex offender program.
                                             
 (b) In addition to any other substantive or procedural remedies
provided by applicable law, if the results of DNA testing conducted
under this section are favorable to the petitioner, the court shall
order a hearing and shall enter any order that serves the interests of
justice, including an order vacating and setting aside the judgment,
discharging the petitioner if the petitioner is in custody, resentencing
the petitioner, or granting a new trial.
                                             
 VII. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the
circumstances under which a person may obtain DNA testing or other
post-conviction relief under any other provision of state or federal
law.

**Source.** 2004, 239:1. 2010, 299:2, 3, 6, eff. Sept. 11, 2010.

### Section 651-D:3

 **651-D:3 Preservation of Biological Material for DNA Testing. –**
                                             
 I. The investigating agency shall preserve any biological material
obtained in connection with a criminal or delinquency investigation or
prosecution for 5 years from the date of conviction or adjudication, or
as long as any person connected with that case or investigation remains
in custody, whichever is longer.
                                             
 II. The investigating agency may, however, petition the court to
destroy or otherwise dispose of biological material after 5 years even
if a person connected with the case is still in custody. If the
investigating agency petitions the court to destroy evidence before the
person is released from custody, the investigating agency must serve a
copy of the petition to destroy biological evidence on the person who
remains in custody, any counsel of record, and the prosecuting agency.
The investigating agency may destroy biological material 90 days after
filing a petition, unless the investigating agency receives:
                                             
 (a) A court order preventing the destruction of biological
evidence; or
                                             
 (b) A motion to preserve biological evidence on the grounds that
the person in custody intends to file a petition for post-conviction DNA
testing pursuant to RSA 651-D:2 within 180 days of the motion to
preserve.

**Source.** 2004, 239:1, eff. June 15, 2004.

### Section 651-D:4

 **651-D:4 DNA Testing and Analysis. –**
                                             
 I. The DNA testing and analysis under this chapter shall be
performed under the direction of the division, following procedures in
conformance with the federal "DNA Identification Act of 1994.''
Identifying characteristics of the resulting DNA profile shall be stored
and maintained by the division consistent with division policy.
                                             
 II. The division shall prescribe procedures to be used in the
collection, submission, identification, analysis, storage, and
disposition of DNA samples and all DNA information obtained pursuant to
this chapter.
                                             
 III. The division may contract with third parties for the purposes
of this chapter. Any DNA sample sent to third parties for analysis shall
be coded to maintain confidentiality concerning the donor of the
sample.
                                             
 IV. A certificate and the results of the analysis shall be
admissible in any court as evidence of the facts stated in the analysis.

**Source.** 2004, 239:1, eff. June 15, 2004.

### Section 651-D:5

 **651-D:5 Victim Services. –** When post-conviction DNA testing is
being considered by the court, the state shall, upon request, reactivate
victim services for the victim of the crime being reinvestigated during
the reinvestigation of the case, during the pendency of the proceedings,
and, as determined by the court after consultation with the victim
and/or victim advocate, following final adjudication of the case.

**Source.** 2010, 299:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2010.
