---
title: 'CHAPTER 490-B COURT FACILITIES'
---

TITLE LI
                                             
COURTS
=========

CHAPTER 490-B
                                             
COURT FACILITIES
----------------

### Section 490-B:1

 **490-B:1 Statement of Purpose. –** It is the intention of the
legislature and the purpose of this chapter to improve the
administration of justice and the efficient operation of all courts in
this state by providing suitable court facilities and by transferring
the cost for said facilities from local units of government to the
state, effective January 1, 1986.

**Source.** 1985, 404:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1985.

### Section 490-B:2

 **490-B:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Costs'' means any expenses directly attributable to the court,
including, but not limited to, maintenance of the facility, heat, light,
and insurance.
                                             
 II. "Facility'' means any area used for the operation of a court.

**Source.** 1985, 404:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1985.

### Section 490-B:3

 **490-B:3 Responsibilities. –** The state, through the department of
administrative services, shall provide and maintain suitable court
facilities for the conduct of all court sessions held within each
judicial district and county, subject to the availability of
appropriated funds. The supreme court shall make recommendations to the
department of administrative services as to suitable court facilities,
and said facilities shall be accessible for the conduct of court
business at times and under conditions deemed appropriate by the supreme
court.

**Source.** 1985, 404:1. 1989, 371:5, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 490-B:4

 **490-B:4 Facilities Plan. –** Before March 1 of each year, the
supreme court shall submit a report to the commissioner of
administrative services setting forth the space and facility operating
requirements for each court location.

**Source.** 1985, 404:1. 1989, 371:6. 2007, 306:2, eff. July 13, 2007.

### Section 490-B:5

 **490-B:5 Included in Budget Request. –**
                                             
 I. Beginning with the moneys to be appropriated for fiscal year
1988, the supreme court shall include in each budget request sufficient
funding to continue the state financing of court facilities.
                                             
 II. The amount to be paid for each court facility shall be
negotiated by the department of administrative services and shall be
subject to final approval by the governor and council or the department
of administrative services, whichever is applicable under statutes,
rules, or the procedures of governor and council.

**Source.** 1985, 404:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1985; 411:11, eff. Sept. 1, 1985.
2011, 196:1, eff. June 14, 2011.
