---
title: 'CHAPTER 490-D JUDICIAL BRANCH FAMILY DIVISION'
---

TITLE LI
                                             
COURTS
=========

CHAPTER 490-D
                                             
JUDICIAL BRANCH FAMILY DIVISION
-------------------------------

### Section 490-D:1

 **490-D:1 Judicial Branch Family Division Established. –** The
general court hereby organizes, constitutes, and establishes the
judicial branch family division. The goals of the family division are
the respectful treatment of all citizens by justices, marital masters,
and other family division staff, the prompt and fair resolution of
family issues by justices and marital masters specially selected and
trained to deal effectively with such issues, the use of alternative
dispute resolution to reduce the adversarial nature of proceedings
involving families, and the assignment of all family matters of a single
family to one family division justice or marital master located in a
family division court that is geographically accessible to the family.

**Source.** 2005, 177:14, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 490-D:2

 **490-D:2 Jurisdiction. –** Notwithstanding any law to the contrary
and except for the limited need to allow an existing case to proceed
with the same judge who had presided over it before the implementation
of the judicial branch family division, following implementation of the
division at a division site in accordance with RSA 490-D:5, jurisdiction
over the following matters shall be exclusively exercised through the
judicial branch family division as procedurally jurisdiction was
previously exercised in the superior, district, and probate courts:
                                             
 I. Petitions for divorce, nullity of marriage, alimony, custody of
children, support, and to establish paternity.
                                             
 II. Actions for support or custody for children of unwed parties.
                                             
 III. Actions under RSA 169-B, relating to delinquent children except
for concurrent jurisdiction with the district court to enter temporary
detention orders under RSA 169-B:11, III and 169-B:12, IV(b).
                                             
 IV. Actions under RSA 169-C, relating to abused and neglected
children except for concurrent jurisdiction with the district court to
enter orders under RSA 169-C:6, VI and RSA 169-C:6-a.
                                             
 V. Actions under RSA 169-D, relating to children in need of services
except for concurrent jurisdiction with the district court to enter
orders under RSA 169-D:8, I, RSA 169-D:9-a, and RSA 169-D:10.
                                             
 VI. Actions under RSA 173-B, relating to protection of persons from
domestic violence except for concurrent jurisdiction with the district
division to enter temporary protective orders under RSA 173-B:4.
                                             
 VII. The adoption of children in abuse and neglect cases pursuant to
RSA 169-C, termination of parental rights cases pursuant to RSA 170-C,
and guardianships of the person of minors pursuant to paragraph VIII.
Jurisdiction over private, agency, and international adoptions shall
remain with the probate court.
                                             
 VIII. The guardianship of the person of minors. In cases involving
the guardianship of both the person of a minor and the estate of the
same minor, jurisdiction shall remain with the probate court.
                                             
 IX. The termination of parental rights.
                                             
 X. The change of names of persons who apply therefor in matters
relating to jurisdiction in paragraphs I-IX.

**Source.** 2005, 177:14, eff. July 1, 2005. 2013, 62:9, eff. Jan. 1,
2014.

### Section 490-D:3

 **490-D:3 Equity Jurisdiction. –** Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, the judicial branch family division shall have the powers of a
court of equity in cases where subject matter jurisdiction lies with the
judicial branch family division. Suits in equity where subject matter
jurisdiction lies with the judicial branch family division including,
but not limited to, petitions for divorce, nullity of marriage, alimony,
custody of children, support, and other similar proceedings may be heard
upon oral testimony or depositions, or both, or when both parties
consent, or service having been made and a notice of the time and place
of the hearing having been given, when both parties appear. Such suits
may be heard by any justice of the judicial branch family division at
any time, but nothing contained in this section shall be construed as
limiting the power of the judicial branch family division to have issues
of fact framed and tried by a jury, according to the rules in equity, or
the course of such proceedings at common law.

**Source.** 2005, 177:14, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 490-D:4

 **490-D:4 Sites. –** The judicial branch family division shall
operate at the following sites and such other sites as the supreme
court, from time to time, determines, covering the following districts
as delineated in RSA 502-A:1, except as otherwise indicated:

Grafton County


                                             
 I. The courthouses in Grafton county which will house the judicial
branch family division shall be the court facility in North Haverhill,
the Plymouth District Court, the Littleton District Court, and the
Lebanon District Court.
                                             
 II. (a) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Haverhill district shall be heard in the court facility in North
Haverhill.
                                             
 (b) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Plymouth-Lincoln district shall be heard in the Plymouth District
Court.
                                             
 (c) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Littleton district shall be heard in the Littleton District Court.
                                             
 (d) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Lebanon-Hanover district shall be heard in the Lebanon District Court.

Rockingham County


                                             
 III. The courthouses in Rockingham county which will house the
judicial branch family division shall be the court facility in
Brentwood, the Portsmouth District Court, the Salem District Court, the
Candia District Court, and the Derry District Court.
                                             
 IV. (a) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Portsmouth district, the Hampton district, and the towns of Newfields,
Newmarket, and Stratham shall be heard in the Portsmouth District
Court.
                                             
 (b) Matters arising in municipalities located within the Salem
district shall be heard in the Salem District Court.
                                             
 (c) Matters arising in municipalities located within the Derry
district shall be heard in the Derry District Court.
                                             
 (d) Matters arising in municipalities located within the Exeter
district (except for the towns of Newfields, Newmarket, and Stratham),
and the Plaistow district shall be heard in the court facility in
Brentwood.
                                             
 (e) Matters arising in municipalities located within the Candia
district shall be heard in the Candia District Court.

Coos County


                                             
 V. The courthouses in Coos county which will house the judicial
branch family division shall be the Colebrook District Court, the Berlin
District Court, and the court facility in Lancaster.
                                             
 VI. (a) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Colebrook district shall be heard in the Colebrook District Court.
                                             
 (b) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Berlin-Gorham district shall be heard in the Berlin District Court.
                                             
 (c) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Lancaster district shall be heard in the court facility in Lancaster.

Carroll County


                                             
 VII. The courthouses in Carroll county which will house the judicial
branch family division shall be the court facility in Ossipee and the
District Court for northern Carroll County.
                                             
 VIII. (a) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
district for southern Carroll county shall be heard in the court
facility in Ossipee.
                                             
 (b) Matters arising in municipalities located within the district
for northern Carroll county shall be heard in the District Court for
northern Carroll County.

Sullivan County


                                             
 IX. The courthouses in Sullivan county which will house the judicial
branch family division shall be the Newport District Court and the
Claremont District Court.
                                             
 X. (a) Matters arising in municipalities located within the Newport
district and the New London district in Merrimack county shall be heard
in the Newport District Court.
                                             
 (b) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Claremont district shall be heard in the Claremont District Court.

Strafford County


                                             
 XI. The courthouses in Strafford county which will house the
judicial branch family division shall be the Dover District Court and
the Strafford county court facility in Dover.
                                             
 XII. (a) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Dover-Somersworth-Durham district shall be heard in the Dover District
Court.
                                             
 (b) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Rochester district shall be heard in the Strafford county court facility
in Dover.

Belknap County


                                             
 XIII. The courthouse in Belknap county which will house the judicial
branch family division shall be a facility located in Laconia, provided,
however, that the facility meets the minimum standard prescribed by the
New Hampshire court accreditation commission pursuant to RSA 490:5-c.
                                             
 XIV. (a) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Laconia district shall be heard in the judicial branch family division
facility in Laconia.
                                             
 (b) Matters arising in the towns of Sanbornton and Tilton shall
be heard in the Franklin District Court in Merrimack county.

Hillsborough County


                                             
 XV. The courthouses in Hillsborough county which will house the
judicial branch family division shall be the Manchester District Court,
the Goffstown District Court, the Hillsborough County Superior Court for
the southern judicial district, the Milford District Court, the
Merrimack District Court and, upon completion of construction, the
Henniker-Hillsborough District Court.
                                             
 XVI. (a) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Manchester district shall be heard in the Manchester District Court.
                                             
 (b) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Goffstown district shall be heard in the Goffstown District Court.
                                             
 (c) Matters arising in municipalities located within the Nashua
district shall be heard in the Hillsborough County Superior Court for
the southern judicial district.
                                             
 (d) Matters arising in municipalities located within the Milford
district shall be heard in the Milford District Court.
                                             
 (e) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Merrimack district shall be heard in the Merrimack District Court.
                                             
 (f) Matters arising in Hillsborough county municipalities located
within the Jaffrey-Peterborough district shall be heard in the
Jaffrey-Peterborough District Court in Cheshire county.
                                             
 (g) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Hillsborough district shall be heard in the Henniker District Court in
Merrimack county until the completion of construction of the
Henniker-Hillsborough District Court facility in Hillsborough county,
whereupon those matters shall be heard in the Henniker-Hillsborough
District Court in Hillsborough county.

Merrimack County


                                             
 XVII. The courthouses in Merrimack county which will house the
judicial branch family division shall be the Franklin District Court,
the Hooksett District Court, the Henniker District Court until the
completion of construction of the Henniker-Hillsborough District Court
facility, and a facility located in Concord, provided, however, that the
facility meets the minimum standard prescribed by the New Hampshire
court accreditation commission pursuant to RSA 490:5-c.
                                             
 XVIII. (a) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Franklin district shall be heard in the Franklin District Court.
                                             
 (b) Matters arising in municipalities located within the Hooksett
district shall be heard in the Hooksett District Court.
                                             
 (c) Matters arising in municipalities located within the Concord
district shall be heard in the judicial branch family division facility
in Concord.
                                             
 (d) Matters arising in the towns of New London, Newbury, and
Wilmot shall be heard in the Newport District Court in Sullivan county.
                                             
 (e) Matters arising in municipalities located within the Henniker
district shall be heard in the Henniker District Court in Merrimack
county until the completion of construction of the Henniker-Hillsborough
District Court facility in Hillsborough county, whereupon those matters
shall be heard in the Henniker-Hillsborough District Court in
Hillsborough county.

Cheshire County


                                             
 XIX. The courthouses in Cheshire county which will house the
judicial branch family division shall be the Jaffrey-Peterborough
District Court and a facility located in Keene, provided, however, that
the facility meets the minimum standard prescribed by the New Hampshire
court accreditation commission pursuant to RSA 490:5-c.
                                             
 XX. (a) Matters arising in municipalities located within the
Jaffrey-Peterborough district shall be heard in the Jaffrey-Peterborough
District Court.
                                             
 (b) Matters arising in municipalities located within the Keene
district shall be heard in the judicial branch family division facility
in Keene.

**Source.** 2005, 177:14. 2006, 25:1. 2009, 165:1, 2, eff. July 8, 2009.
2010, 193:2, eff. June 21, 2010.

### Section 490-D:5

 **490-D:5 Implementation Plan. –** On the effective date of this
chapter, the judicial branch family division shall be operational in
Grafton and Rockingham counties. For the remaining counties, the
judicial branch family division shall be made operational by order of
the supreme court, generally in the order listed in RSA 490-D:4.

**Source.** 2005, 177:14, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 490-D:6

 **490-D:6 Judges and Marital Masters. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 88:29(1),
eff. July 1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 490-D:7

 **490-D:7 Nominations and Appointments of Marital Masters. –**
                                             
 I. The administrative judge of the judicial branch family division,
with the concurrence of the supreme court, shall recommend persons to
the governor and council for initial appointment as marital masters. In
recommending candidates for initial appointment as marital masters under
this chapter, the division shall utilize the procedures and standards
described in the rules of the judicial branch family division, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
                                             
 II. For appointments of new marital masters, the administrative
judge of the judicial branch family division, with the concurrence of
the supreme court, shall submit to the governor the name of a nominee.
The governor may accept the candidate nominated by the administrative
judge and submit the candidate to the council for confirmation or may
reject the candidate submitted by the administrative judge, and request
a new nominee. If the council rejects a candidate for confirmation, the
governor shall request a new nominee.
                                             
 III. Marital masters shall serve an initial term of 3 years.
Subsequent reappointments shall be made in accordance with judicial
branch family division rules. During appointment terms, the authority
and responsibility to conduct annual performance reviews, and
termination, if necessary, shall be with the administrative judge of the
judicial branch family division.

**Source.** 2005, 177:14. 2008, 128:1, eff. June 3, 2008.

### Section 490-D:8

 **490-D:8 Qualifications of Marital Masters. –**
                                             
 I. Marital masters shall possess the following qualifications:
                                             
 (a) Professional experience in family law matters.
                                             
 (b) Legal and personal qualities including, but not limited to:
                                             
 (1) Knowledge of family matters, including related matters
such as tax and pension law;
                                             
 (2) Personal maturity so as to understand and make decisions
on matters before the court; and
                                             
 (3) Personal qualities of patience and understanding of the
difficult personal matters which are the subject of divorce and a
willingness to deal with complex family matters in a non-adversarial
manner.
                                             
 II. Each marital master shall complete a course in court process and
procedures and mediation and negotiation.

**Source.** 2005, 177:14, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 490-D:9

 **490-D:9 Recommendations of Marital Masters. –** All
recommendations of marital masters shall be signed by a judge. The judge
signing such recommendations shall certify that he or she has read the
recommendations and agrees that the marital master has applied the
correct legal standard to the facts determined by the marital master.

**Source.** 2005, 177:14, eff. July 1, 2005. 2010, 320:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2011.

### Section 490-D:10

 **490-D:10 Referee. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 88:29(2), eff. July 1,
2011.
                                             ]

### Section 490-D:11

 **490-D:11 Staff. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 88:29(3), eff. July 1,
2011.
                                             ]

### Section 490-D:12

 **490-D:12 Judicial Branch Family Division Clerks; Fees. –**
                                             
 I. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. Fees as established by the supreme court under RSA 490:26-a
shall be paid to the clerk of the applicable circuit court established
in RSA 490-F for the benefit of the state. The clerk shall set aside 6
percent of each entry fee paid into the court for deposit into a special
escrow account established under RSA 490:26-c and 30 percent of each
entry fee paid into the court for deposit into the judicial branch
information technology fund established under RSA 490:26-h. The proceeds
of fees for motions to appear in court pro hac vice shall be paid into
the law library revolving fund established in RSA 490:25, III.
                                             
 III. The sum of 
                                             $5 shall be added to each entry fee collected by
the circuit court clerk on cases which, prior to the establishment of
the judicial branch family division, would have been filed in the
probate court. Sums collected under this paragraph shall be deposited in
the mediation and arbitration fund established under RSA 490-E:4.

**Source.** 2005, 177:14. 2007, 234:4. 2008, 123:1. 2009, 144:296, eff.
July 1, 2009. 2011, 88:2, 29(4), eff. July 1, 2011. 2013, 88:3, eff.
July 1, 2013.

### Section 490-D:13

 **490-D:13 Alternative Dispute Resolution. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011,
88:29(5), eff. July 1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 490-D:14

 **490-D:14 Statutory References. –** During the implementation of
the judicial branch family division, references in statutes involving
the jurisdiction of the division to the superior, district, or probate
courts shall be deemed to include the judicial branch family division.
Following the full implementation of the division, those references
shall be deemed to be to the judicial branch family division where it
has exclusive jurisdiction of a subject matter and to the superior,
district, or probate court and the judicial branch family division where
the judicial branch family division has concurrent jurisdiction with one
or more of those courts.

**Source.** 2005, 177:14, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 490-D:15

 **490-D:15 Marital Masters' Expenses. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 88:29(6),
eff. July 1, 2011.
                                             ]
