---
title: 'CHAPTER 490-E OFFICE OF MEDIATION AND ARBITRATION'
---

TITLE LI
                                             
COURTS
=========

CHAPTER 490-E
                                             
OFFICE OF MEDIATION AND ARBITRATION
-----------------------------------

### Section 490-E:1

 **490-E:1 Office Established. –** There is hereby established within
the judicial branch an office of mediation and arbitration.

**Source.** 2007, 344:2, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 490-E:2

 **490-E:2 Duties. –** The office of mediation and arbitration
shall:
                                             
 I. Guide the development of alternative dispute resolution
programs;
                                             
 II. Promote alternative dispute resolution solutions;
                                             
 III. Serve as an alternative dispute resolution resource to courts;
                                             
 IV. Support the administration of alternative dispute resolution
programs in all courts; and
                                             
 V. Facilitate voluntary pre-suit mediation or arbitration services,
in accordance with rules adopted by the supreme court, as an option in
cases which would otherwise be filed in the trial courts.

**Source.** 2007, 344:2. 2009, 136:1, 2, eff. June 29, 2009.

### Section 490-E:3

 **490-E:3 Administration. –** The office of mediation and
arbitration shall be administered by the judicial branch administrative
council.

**Source.** 2007, 344:2, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 490-E:4

 **490-E:4 Mediation and Arbitration Fund. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established in the state treasury a separate fund
to be known as the mediation and arbitration fund, which shall be used
to help fund paid mediation and arbitration in the judicial branch and
support the operation of the office of mediation and arbitration. The
fund shall consist of:
                                             
 (a) All moneys collected pursuant to RSA 461-A:7, X, RSA 490:27,
II, RSA 490-D:12, III, RSA 503:4, II, and RSA 502-A:28, III.
                                             
 (b) Any moneys appropriated to the fund by the general court.
                                             
 (c) Any moneys collected by the office of mediation and
arbitration from fees, grants, and other contributions, gifts, bequests,
and donations.
                                             
 II. Moneys in the mediation and arbitration fund shall be nonlapsing
and continually appropriated to the office of mediation and arbitration
for costs of mediation and arbitration programs.

**Source.** 2007, 344:2. 2008, 123:2. 2009, 253:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.
2011, 224:71, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 490-E:5

 **490-E:5 Immunity From Civil Liability. –** No mediator,
arbitrator, or other neutral party involved in dispute resolution under
contract with the New Hampshire judicial branch shall be held liable for
civil damages for any aspect of judicial branch dispute resolution
processes, unless such person acted willfully.

**Source.** 2007, 344:2, eff. July 1, 2007.
