---
title: 'CHAPTER 490-H MENTAL HEALTH COURTS'
---

TITLE LI
                                             
COURTS
=========

CHAPTER 490-H
                                             
MENTAL HEALTH COURTS
--------------------

### Section 490-H:1

 **490-H:1 Purpose; Policy and Goals. –**
                                             
 I. The general court recognizes the critical need in this state for
the criminal justice system to identify effective sentencing options
when an offender has committed a crime that is a result of or related to
mental illness. All offenders must be held accountable for their
actions. However, a growing body of research demonstrates that
traditional sentencing options may not be effective if an offender has a
mental illness. Requiring that accountability and rehabilitative
treatment, in addition to or in place of, conventional and expensive
incarceration, will promote public safety, promote the welfare of the
individuals involved, reduce the burden upon the public treasury, and
benefit the common welfare of this state. The goals of this chapter
shall include:
                                             
 (a) Enhancing community safety and quality of life for citizens;
                                             
 (b) Reducing recidivism;
                                             
 (c) Increasing the accountability of offenders;
                                             
 (d) Restoring offenders to productive, law-abiding, and taxpaying
citizens;
                                             
 (e) Promoting effective interaction and use of resources among
criminal justice and community agencies, including, but not limited to,
effective treatment of mental illnesses;
                                             
 (f) Reducing the costs of incarceration; and
                                             
 (g) Improving the efficiency of the criminal justice system by
promoting evidence-based sentencing for offenders with mental illness.
                                             
 II. While working in a mental health court reshapes the traditional
roles of judges and lawyers, ethical duties do not significantly differ
from those in traditional courtrooms. Mental health court judges and
lawyers must adhere to the standards set forth in the Model Code of
Judicial Conduct, the Model Rules of Professional Conduct, and the
American Bar Association Standards of Criminal Justice. The proper
exercise of the role of judge or lawyer in the mental health court need
not conflict with the professional's ethical obligations and can enable
judges and attorneys to fulfill the highest aspirations of their
professional ethics while embarking on an innovative way to break the
cycle of crime. Mental health court judges and attorneys must remain
continually cognizant of the due process rights guaranteed to all
citizens and the state's substantial interest in maintaining effective
and efficient judicial and penal systems.

**Source.** 2014, 222:1, eff. July 14, 2014.

### Section 490-H:2

 **490-H:2 Implementation of Mental Health Courts. –**
                                             
 I. Any superior or circuit court may establish one or more mental
health courts under which the courts monitor offenders with mental
illnesses for compliance with individual services to change behavior
which would otherwise result in criminal conduct. In this chapter
"mental health court'' means a judicial intervention process that
incorporates the following elements:
                                             
 (a) Planning and administration guided by a broad-based group of
stakeholders representing the community, criminal justice, mental
health, substance abuse treatment, and related systems;
                                             
 (b) A target population is established that takes into account
eligibility criteria that addresses public safety and considers a
community's treatment capacity, in addition to the availability of
alternatives to pretrial detention for defendants with mental illnesses.
The eligibility criteria shall also take into account the relationship
between mental illness and a defendant's offenses, while allowing the
individual circumstances of each case to be considered;
                                             
 (c) Participants are identified, referred, and accepted into
mental health court and linked to community based service providers as
quickly as possible;
                                             
 (d) The terms of participation are clear, promote public safety,
facilitate the defendant's engagement in treatment, are individualized
to correspond to the level of risk that the defendant presents to the
community, and provide for positive legal outcomes for those individuals
who successfully complete the program;
                                             
 (e) Informed choice occurs, meaning that defendants fully
understand the program requirements before agreeing to participate in a
mental health court. Defendants are provided legal counsel to inform
them regarding this decision and subsequent decisions about program
involvement. Procedures exist in the mental health court to address, in
a timely fashion, concerns about a defendant's competency whenever they
arise;
                                             
 (f) The mental health courts connect participants to available
comprehensive and individualized treatment supports and services in the
community. They strive to use and increase the availability of treatment
and services that are evidence-based;
                                             
 (g) Health and legal information is shared in a way that protects
potential participants' confidentiality rights and their constitutional
rights as defendants. Information gathered as part of the participants'
court-ordered treatment program or services are safeguarded in the event
that participations are returned to traditional court processing;
                                             
 (h) Criminal justice staff, mental health staff and services, and
treatment providers receive special, ongoing training and help mental
health court participants achieve treatment and criminal justice goals
by regularly reviewing and revising the court process;
                                             
 (i) Criminal justice and mental health staff collaboratively
monitor participants' adherence to court conditions, offer
individualized graduated incentives and sanctions, and modify treatment
as necessary to promote public safety and participants' recovery; and
                                             
 (j) Data is collected and analyzed to demonstrate the impact of
the mental health court, its performance is assessed periodically and
procedures are modified accordingly, court processes are
institutionalized, and support for the court in the community is
cultivated and expanded.
                                             
 II. Upon successful completion of a program recommended by the
mental health court, an offender's case may be disposed of by the judge
in the manner prescribed by the agreement and by the applicable policies
and procedures adopted by the mental health court. This may include, but
is not limited to, withholding criminal charges or dismissal of
charges.
                                             
 III. A person sentenced by a mental health court may, at least 6
months after successful completion of all programs and conditions
imposed by the mental health court, petition for annulment of the
charges, arrest, conviction, and sentence that relate to such person's
entry into the mental health court.
                                             
 IV. The mental health court may convene a local committee made up of
community members who can provide support for the mental health court.

**Source.** 2014, 222:1, eff. July 14, 2014.
