---
title: 'CHAPTER 490-G DRUG COURTS AND ALTERNATIVE DRUG OFFENDER GRANT PROGRAM'
---

TITLE LI
                                             
COURTS
=========

CHAPTER 490-G
                                             
DRUG COURTS AND ALTERNATIVE DRUG OFFENDER GRANT PROGRAM
-------------------------------------------------------

### Section 490-G:1

 **490-G:1 Purpose; Policy and Goals. –**
                                             
 I. The legislature recognizes that a critical need exists in this
state for the criminal justice system to reduce the incidence of
substance abuse and the crimes resulting from it. For the criminal
justice system to maintain credibility, all drug offenders must be held
accountable for their actions. A growing body of research demonstrates
the impact of substance abuse on public safety, personal health and
health care costs, the spread of communicable disease, educational
performance and attainment, work force reliability and productivity,
family safety, and financial stability. Requiring that accountability
and rehabilitating treatment, in addition to or in place of,
conventional and expensive incarceration, will promote public safety,
the welfare of the individuals involved, reduce the burden upon the
public treasury and benefit the common welfare of this state. The goals
of this chapter shall include:
                                             
 (a) To enhance community safety and quality of life for
citizens;
                                             
 (b) To reduce recidivism;
                                             
 (c) To reduce substance abuse;
                                             
 (d) To increase the personal, familial, and societal
accountability of drug offenders;
                                             
 (e) To restore drug offenders to productive, law-abiding, and
taxpaying citizens;
                                             
 (f) To promote effective interaction and use of resources among
criminal justice and community agencies;
                                             
 (g) To reduce the costs of incarceration; and
                                             
 (h) To improve the efficiency of the criminal justice system by
enacting an effective methodology.
                                             
 II. While working in drug court reshapes the traditional roles of
judges and lawyers, ethical duties do not significantly differ from
those in traditional courtrooms. Drug court judges and lawyers must
adhere to the standards set forth in the Model Code of Judicial Conduct,
the Model Rules of Professional Conduct, the American Bar Association
Standards of Criminal Justice, and the Model Drug Offender
Accountability and Treatment Act. The proper exercise of the roles of
judge or lawyer in the drug court need not conflict with the
professionals' ethical obligations and can enable judges and attorneys
to fulfill the highest aspirations of their professional ethics while
embarking on an innovative way to break the cycle of substance abuse and
crime. Drug court judges and attorneys must remain continually cognizant
of the due process rights guaranteed to all citizens and the state's
substantial interest in maintaining effective and efficient judicial and
penal systems.

**Source.** 2012, 218:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2013.

### Section 490-G:2

 **490-G:2 Implementation of Drug Courts. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Each superior or circuit court may establish one or more drug
courts under which drug offenders may be processed to address
appropriately an identified substance abuse problem. "Drug court'' means
a judicial intervention process that incorporates and substantially
complies with the Ten Key Components listed in subparagraph (b) and may
include:
                                             
 (1) "Pre-adjudication'' where a drug offender is ordered to
participate in drug court before charges are filed or before
conviction;
                                             
 (2) "Post-adjudication'' where a drug offender is ordered to
participate in drug court after entering a plea of guilty or nolo
contendre or having been found guilty;
                                             
 (3) "Reentry'' where a drug offender is ordered to participate
in drug court upon release from a sentence of incarceration; or
                                             
 (4) "Combination program'' which may include pre-adjudication,
post-adjudication, and/or reentry.
                                             
 (b) "Ten Key Components'' as outlined in the Model Drug Offender
Accountability and Treatment Act and as defined by the United States
Department of Justice, are:
                                             
 (1) Drug courts integrate alcohol and other drug treatment
services with justice system case processing;
                                             
 (2) Using a nonadversarial approach, prosecution and defense
counsel promote public safety while protecting participants' (drug
offenders') due process rights;
                                             
 (3) Eligible participants (drug offenders) are identified
early and promptly placed in the drug court program;
                                             
 (4) Drug courts provide access to a continuum of alcohol,
drug, and other related treatment and rehabilitation services;
                                             
 (5) Abstinence is monitored by frequent alcohol and other drug
testing;
                                             
 (6) A coordinated strategy governs drug court responses to
participants' (drug offenders') compliance;
                                             
 (7) Ongoing judicial interaction with each drug court
participant (drug offender) is essential;
                                             
 (8) Monitoring and evaluation measure the achievement of
program (drug court) goals and gauge effectiveness;
                                             
 (9) Continuing interdisciplinary education promotes effective
drug court planning, implementation, and operations; and
                                             
 (10) Forging partnerships among drug courts, public agencies,
and community-based organizations generates local support and enhances
drug court effectiveness.
                                             
 II. Upon successful completion of a program recommended by the drug
court, a drug offender's case may be disposed of by the judge in the
manner prescribed by the agreement and by the applicable policies and
procedures adopted by the drug court. This may include, but is not
limited to, withholding criminal charges, dismissal of charges,
probation, deferred sentencing, suspended sentencing, split sentencing,
or a reduced period of incarceration.
                                             
 III. A person sentenced by a drug court may, at least one year after
successful completion of all programs and conditions imposed by the drug
court, petition for annulment of the charges, arrest, conviction, and
sentence that relate to such person's entry into the drug court.
                                             
 IV. The drug court may convene a local steering committee made up of
community leaders who can provide support for the drug court.

**Source.** 2012, 218:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2013.

Drug Offender Grant Program
---------------------------

### Section 490-G:3

 **490-G:3 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Alternative drug offender program'' means a program offered by a
county as an alternative to operating a drug court for nonviolent
offenders including diversion programs and programs utilizing intensive
probation, random drug testing, and evidence-based cognitive therapy.
                                             
 II. "Best practices'' means research-based, specific,
practitioner-focused drug court guidance published by the National
Association of Drug Court Professionals. For alternative drug offender
programs, best practices include evidence-based programs which divert
nonviolent offenders out of the criminal justice system or utilize
intensive probation supervision, sanctions, and behavior therapy to
address behavior.
                                             
 III. "Office'' means the office of drug offender program coordinator
within the administrative office of the superior court.
                                             
 IV. "Drug court'' means drug courts as described in RSA 490-G:1 and
RSA 490-G:2.

**Source.** 2016, 264:2, eff. June 15, 2016.

### Section 490-G:4

 **490-G:4 Grant Program Created. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a statewide drug offender grant program
which shall provide state matching funds as appropriated to support drug
courts or alternative drug offender programs in state superior court
districts. The grant program shall be available to counties operating
either a drug court or an alternative drug offender program prior to the
effective date of this section, and to counties that have not yet
implemented a drug court or an alternative drug offender program. A
county shall be eligible for a drug court or an alternative drug
offender grant, but not both. Beginning in fiscal year 2018, the
statewide drug offender grant program shall continue as long as it is
funded through appropriations in the state operating budget.
                                             
 II. There is established the office of drug offender program
coordinator within the administrative office of the superior court. The
office shall be responsible for developing an application process by
which counties may apply for a state grant and evaluating the operating
drug courts and alternative drug offender programs. Subject to approval
of the chief justice of the superior court, the office shall:
                                             
 (a) Determine approval requirements including the New Hampshire
drug court and alternative drug offender program approval checklists.
Prior to accepting applications for grants, the approval checklists
shall be posted on the judicial branch website. The checklists shall be
updated on the website as revisions are made.
                                             
 (b) Establish and periodically update best practices for
operating drug courts and alternative drug offender programs.
                                             
 (c) Develop draft policies and procedures including a participant
handbook, program outline, and implementation plan.
                                             
 (d) Measure recidivism rates and other outcome measures.
                                             
 (e) Evaluate compliance with relevant standards.
                                             
 (f) Assist in creating drug courts or alternative drug offender
programs in counties seeking to implement or continue either of them.
                                             
 (g) Assist counties in obtaining ongoing training.
                                             
 III. A county operating a drug court or alternative drug offender
program which is not funded by the judicial branch pursuant to RSA
592-B:9, or which seeks to establish such a program, may be eligible for
a state grant which shall pay 50 percent of the cost up to the amounts
indicated in RSA 490-G:5, I from funds administered by the
administrative office of the superior court. The remaining cost shall be
funded by the county.

**Source.** 2016, 264:2, eff. June 15, 2016.

### Section 490-G:5

 **490-G:5 Eligibility for Grants. –**
                                             
 I. For the purpose of grants, the superior court districts of each
county shall be grouped into 3 categories: small, medium, and large,
based on the number of court filings in each district and subject to
annual review by the chief justice of the superior court. Coos, Carroll,
and Sullivan counties shall initially be categorized as small. Grafton,
Belknap, and Cheshire counties shall initially be categorized as medium.
The districts of Hillsborough county superior court north and
Hillsborough county superior court south, and Strafford, Merrimack, and
Rockingham counties shall initially be categorized as large. Subject to
available state appropriations, large counties and districts shall each
be eligible for a grant of up to 
                                             $245,000 per year; medium counties
shall each be eligible for a grant of up to 
                                             $150,000 per year; and
small counties shall each be eligible for a grant of up to 
                                             $100,000 per
year. Grants shall be awarded based on the date of program approval on a
first-come, first-served basis, but shall not be retroactive. Counties
may apply for grants during the year and grants may be prorated for a
portion of the year for the number of months the grant will be in effect
for that year. Grants shall not be prorated based on the amount of
appropriation available. Any state drug offender grant program funds
which are not expended by a county at the end of the county's fiscal
year shall be returned to the judicial branch administrative office of
the superior court for deposit in the state general fund.
                                             
 II. To be eligible for a state grant, a county operating either a
drug court or an alternative drug offender program which is not funded
by the judicial branch pursuant to RSA 592-B:9 shall receive a
recommendation for approval from the office. Grants shall be paid by the
administrative office of the superior court following receipt of
recommendations by the office and final approval of the chief justice of
the superior court. The office shall determine how often approval shall
be required and the office shall recommend subsequent grants when the
currently operating drug court or alternative drug offender program
establishes compliance with the New Hampshire drug court or alternative
drug offender program approval checklist as promulgated by the office.
                                             
 III. A county without a drug offender program which seeks to
implement either a drug court or an alternative drug offender program
shall first apply for a federal grant for the purpose of establishing a
program. A county shall be required to apply for a federal grant only
once. Any county that applied for a federal grant before the effective
date of this section shall not be required to apply again. In the event
the county is awarded a federal grant, or any other grant from a
nonprofit organization, designed to fund a drug court or alternative
drug offender program, the county shall be eligible for a state grant
only after the federal or other nonprofit grant has expired. If the
county does not receive a federal or other nonprofit grant for which it
applied, then it shall be eligible to apply for a state grant.
                                             
 IV. (a)(1) A county seeking to implement either a drug court or an
alternative drug offender program may obtain a state grant for the
purpose of establishing a program after satisfying the conditions in
paragraph III. To obtain a state grant, a county shall:
                                             
 (A) Submit a budget for the total cost of the program to
the office for review;
                                             
 (B) Obtain from the office draft policies and procedures,
including a participant handbook or program outline and implementation
plan, which the county may amend and return to the office for
consideration and approval; and
                                             
 (C) Obtain and complete drug offender program training as
approved by the office.
                                             
 (2) Based on the information provided in subparagraphs
(1)(A)-(C), the office shall recommend programs for final approval of
the chief justice of the superior court.
                                             
 (b) If the county's proposed program and required documentation
is approved, the county shall receive the grant amount of 50 percent of
the approved budget up to the amounts indicated in RSA 490-G:5, I for
one year.
                                             
 (c)(1) An alternative drug offender program may be established
either separately or jointly with another county for high risk and high
or moderate need offenders. The grant amount available to counties
applying jointly shall be the sum of the amounts each county would be
eligible for separately. The alternative drug offender program developed
shall be evidence-based, cost effective, and shall employ the use of an
evidence-based risk/need assessment to determine participant
eligibility. For counties to be eligible for a state grant, they shall
obtain approval from the office of the drug offender program
coordinator. Alternative drug offender programs shall comply with the
requirements of subparagraph (a).
                                             
 (2) Before obtaining a state grant, a county shall apply for
federal grants that may be applicable for the alternative drug offender
program. If denied, the county may be eligible for the state grant
pursuant to the conditions of this section. If the county obtains a
federal grant, it becomes eligible for the state grant only after the
federal grant has been exhausted. The county shall be required to apply
for a federal grant only once.
                                             
 (d) To receive funding for subsequent years, the county shall
obtain approval from the office. The office shall determine how often
approval shall be required. Subject to final approval by the chief
justice of the superior court, the office shall grant approval if the
county:
                                             
 (1) Establishes compliance with the New Hampshire alternative
drug offender program approval checklist as promulgated by the office;
and
                                             
 (2) Provides a complete accounting of program activities,
expenditures, and outcome measures for the past year including, but not
limited to, the number of participants, number of graduates, and the
number of recidivists; and
                                             
 (3) Establishes that the program is cost effective.
                                             
 V. The judicial branch administrative office of the superior court
is authorized to expend from appropriated sums the amounts necessary to
fund the grants certified by the office.

**Source.** 2016, 264:2, eff. June 15, 2016.

### Section 490-G:6

 **490-G:6 Report. –** Beginning with a report due on or before
January 1, 2018, the office of drug offender program coordinator shall
prepare an annual report on the activities, expenditures, and outcome
measures for the drug offender grant program, and the operation of drug
courts or alternative drug offender programs. The report shall include
the information provided by each county and shall be presented by state
superior court district and on a statewide basis. The report shall be
forwarded to the speaker of the house of representatives, the president
of the senate, and the office of the legislative budget assistant to be
posted on the website of the office of the legislative budget assistant.
If the required report is not provided by January 30 in any year, the
drug courts and alternative drug offender grant program shall be
suspended until such report is provided.

**Source.** 2016, 264:2, eff. June 15, 2016.
