---
title: 'CHAPTER 490-A UNIFIED COURT SYSTEM'
---

TITLE LI
                                             
COURTS
=========

CHAPTER 490-A
                                             
UNIFIED COURT SYSTEM
--------------------

### Section 490-A:1

 **490-A:1 Statement of Purpose. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 383:77, eff.
June 22, 1983.
                                             ]

### Section 490-A:2

 **490-A:2 Chief Justices of the Supreme and Superior Courts. –** The
chief justice of the supreme court, with the advice and consent of the
chief justice of the superior court in respect to all matters affecting
the superior court, shall be responsible for supervising the efficient
operation of all courts in New Hampshire. In meeting this
responsibility, the chief justices shall receive the advice and
cooperation of all persons and bodies interested in the administration
of justice, including, but not limited to, the justices of all courts in
New Hampshire, the judicial council, the administrative committee of
probate courts, the New Hampshire probate judges association, the New
Hampshire superior court clerks association, the court accreditation
commission, the New Hampshire Bar Association, and all county and local
bar associations.

**Source.** 1971, 459:1. 2006, 267:1, eff. June 9, 2006.

### Section 490-A:3

 **490-A:3 Authority Granted. –**
                                             
 I. The chief justice of the supreme court, with the advice and
consent of the chief justice of the superior court in respect to all
matters affecting the superior court, shall have the duties, power and
authority to:
                                             
 (a) Issue rules to provide for the expeditious disposition of all
litigated matters, not inconsistent with any rules adopted pursuant to
RSA 490:4 and RSA 491:10;
                                             
 (b) Recommend provisions for adequate staff and personnel,
including court administrators and stenographers, to meet increasing
case loads;
                                             
 (c) Recommend in formal oral or written address to each session
of the general court such legislation as he deems necessary to improve
the administration of justice in New Hampshire;
                                             
 (d) Issue rules requiring the keeping of regular records as to
the number, nature, and disposition of all matters handled by each judge
at each level of the court system;
                                             
 (e) Supervise and direct the work of the court accreditation
commission;
                                             
 (f) Issue such other rules as may be necessary for the
improvement of the administration of justice, not inconsistent with any
rules adopted pursuant to RSA 490:4 and RSA 491:10.
                                             
 II. In carrying out the duties imposed by paragraph I, the chief
justices may seek the advice and assistance of all persons and bodies
interested in the administration of justice in New Hampshire, including,
but not limited to, those listed in RSA 490-A:2.

**Source.** 1971, 459:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1971.
