---
title: CHAPTER 493 TENURE OF JUDGES
---

TITLE LI
                                             
COURTS
=========

CHAPTER 493
                                             
TENURE OF JUDGES
----------------

### Section 493:1

 **493:1 Record of Birth. –** No judge of any court shall exercise
such office, perform any act therein, or receive any fee or salary
therefor until he shall have deposited in the office of the secretary of
state a copy of the record of his birth, attested by the clerk of the
town in which he was born, or, if there is no such record, an affidavit,
sworn to and subscribed by himself, stating, according to the best of
his belief, the date and place of his birth.

**Source.** RS 15:1. CS 15:1. GS 17:1. GL 18:1. PS 19:1. PL 18:1. RL
26:1.

### Section 493:2

 **493:2 Age Limitation. –** Whenever any judge shall attain the age
of 70 years, the office held by him shall become vacant, and such
vacancy shall be filled according to law.

**Source.** Const. II, 78. RS 15:2. CS 15:2. GS 17:2. GL 18:2. PS 19:2.
PL 18:2. RL 26:2.

### Section 493:3

 **493:3 Optional Retirement. –** Any supreme or superior court
judge, full-time district court judge, or full-time probate court judge
who is eligible to retire pursuant to the provisions of RSA 100-C may
retire. The judge shall give not less than 30 days' notice nor more than
90 days' notice of the judge's intention to retire to the chief justice
of the supreme court or the administrative judge of the judge's court
and to the governor and council and the board of trustees of the
judicial retirement plan under RSA 100-C. If a chief justice wishes to
retire, the chief justice shall give not less than 30 days' notice nor
more than 90 days' notice of the chief justice's intention to retire to
the senior associate justice of the chief justice's court and to the
governor and council and the board of trustees of the judicial
retirement plan under RSA 100-C. If an administrative judge wishes to
retire, the administrative judge shall give not less than 30 days'
notice nor more than 90 days' notice of the administrative judge's
intention to retire to the chief justice of the supreme court and to the
governor and council and the board of trustees of the judicial
retirement plan under RSA 100-C. Retirement shall be effective upon
acceptance by the governor and council. The vacancy created by the
retirement of a judge shall be filled according to law.

**Source.** 1971, 210:1. 1975, 369:1. 2005, 292:1, eff. July 1, 2005.
