---
title: CHAPTER 494 THE JUDICIAL COUNCIL
---

TITLE LI
                                             
COURTS
=========

CHAPTER 494
                                             
THE JUDICIAL COUNCIL
--------------------

### Section 494:1

 **494:1 Judicial Council. –** There is hereby established a judicial
council which shall consist of the following:
                                             
 I. The 4 members of the judicial branch administrative council,
appointed pursuant to supreme court rules.
                                             
 II. The attorney general or designee.
                                             
 III. A clerk of the superior court, selected by the chief justice of
the superior court.
                                             
 IV. A clerk of the circuit court, selected by the administrative
judge of the circuit court.
                                             
 V. The president-elect of the New Hampshire Bar Association.
                                             
 VI. The chairperson of the senate judiciary committee or a designee
from such committee appointed by the chairperson.
                                             
 VII. The chairperson of the house judiciary committee or a designee
from such committee appointed by the chairperson.
                                             
 VIII. Eight other members appointed by the governor and council, 3
of whom shall be members of the New Hampshire Bar Association of wide
experience who have been admitted to practice in the state for more than
5 years, and 5 of whom shall be members of the public who are not
lawyers.
                                             
 IX. Five other members appointed by the chief justice of the supreme
court, 3 of whom shall be members of the New Hampshire Bar Association
of wide experience who have been admitted to practice in the state for
more than 5 years, and 2 of whom shall be members of the public who are
not lawyers.

**Source.** 1945, 169:1, par. 1. 1951, 245:1. RSA 494:1. 1969, 395:1.
1971, 14:1. 1975, 330:1. 1981, 552:1. 1992, 284:16. 1995, 9:43, eff.
June 11, 1995. 2015, 114:1, eff. Aug. 7, 2015.

### Section 494:2

 **494:2 Appointment and Tenure of Office. –** The term of each
member except the members of the judicial branch administrative council,
the attorney general, the president-elect of the New Hampshire Bar
Association, and the chairpersons of the senate judiciary committee and
the house judiciary committee shall be for 3 years and until a successor
is appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder
of the term in the same manner and from the same group as the original
appointment. Each member of the judicial branch administrative council,
the attorney general, the president-elect of the New Hampshire Bar
Association, and the chairpersons of the senate judiciary and house
judiciary committees shall be ex officio members and shall serve during
their term of office.

**Source.** 1945, 169:1, par. 2. 1951, 245:2. RSA 494:2. 1969, 395:2.
1971, 456:5. 1975, 330:2. 1981, 552:2. 1992, 284:17. 1995, 9:44, eff.
June 11, 1995. 2015, 114:2, eff. Aug. 7, 2015.

### Section 494:3

 **494:3 Duties of the Council. –** It shall be the duty of the
judicial council:
                                             
 I. To serve as an institutional forum for the on-going and
disinterested consideration of issues affecting the administration of
justice.
                                             
 II. To survey and study continuously the administration of justice
within the state and the organization, procedure, practice, rules and
methods of administration and operation of the courts of the state.
                                             
 III. To devise ways of simplifying judicial procedure, expediting
the transaction of judicial business, and of improving the
administration of justice.
                                             
 IV. To recommend and provide general information to the general
court, to the supreme court, to the superior court, to the circuit
court, to any public official, department or agency or to the state bar
association, either upon request or upon the council's own motion, such
changes in the law or in the rules, organization, operation or methods
of conducting the business of the courts, or with respect to any other
matter pertaining to the administration of justice, as it may deem
desirable.
                                             
 V. To serve as a catalyst for the discussion of legal and judicial
issues through seminars, forums and special studies, and any other
means, within the limits of available state and private funding.
                                             
 VI. To administer the indigent defense delivery system and ensure
its quality and cost effectiveness, pursuant to RSA 604-A and RSA
604-B.
                                             
 VII. To provide legal and guardian-ad-litem services in child
protection cases, pursuant to RSA 169-C:10, RSA 604-A, and RSA
170-C:13.
                                             
 VIII. To provide legal services for indigent proposed wards in
guardianship proceedings brought under RSA 463 and RSA 464-A.

**Source.** 1945, 169:1, par. 3. RSA 494:3. 1992, 284:18, eff. Jan. 1,
1993. 2015, 114:3, eff. Aug. 7, 2015.

### Section 494:4

 **494:4 Biennial Reports. –** The council shall report to the
governor and council biennially on its activities and shall submit with
the report its recommendations, if any, for improving the administration
of justice. The biennial report, and any and all other reports, studies
and recommendations may be printed, based upon available funding, and
made available to members of the general court, the supreme, superior,
probate and district and municipal courts and to the public.

**Source.** 1945, 169:1, par. 4. RSA 494:4. 1992, 284:19, eff. Jan. 1,
1993.

### Section 494:5

 **494:5 Meetings. –** The regular meetings of the council shall be
held in January, April and October of each year, and at such other times
as the council or its chairman may determine.

**Source.** 1945, 169:1, par. 5. 1951, 245:3. RSA 494:5. 1975, 107:1.
1981, 552:3. 1992, 284:20, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 494:6

 **494:6 State and Other Officials; Cooperation. –** The judges and
clerks of the courts of the state, sheriffs, county attorneys and all
state, county or municipal officers shall render to the council such
reports as it may request of matters within the scope of its duties.

**Source.** 1945, 169:1, par. 6. RSA 494:6. 1959, 12:1, eff. May 10,
1959.

### Section 494:7

 **494:7 Organization of Council; Expenses. –** The council shall
elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among its members. The
council shall appoint an executive director who shall be qualified by
reason of education and experience and who shall serve at the pleasure
of the council. The executive director's annual salary shall be that
prescribed by RSA 94:1-a. The executive director shall serve as a
secretary when the council is meeting. The council may make all
necessary rules and regulations for its own procedures and the conduct
of its meetings. The meetings of the council shall be held in compliance
with the provisions of RSA 91-A, the right-to-know law. Members of the
council shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be
allowed their actual expenses while attending to the business of the
council, and the council shall be allowed its expenses to be paid out of
any funds appropriated for that purpose.

**Source.** 1945, 169:1, par. 7. RSA 494:7. 1992, 284:21, eff. Jan. 1,
1993. 2015, 114:4, eff. Aug. 7, 2015.
