---
title: CHAPTER 496 TERMS OF THE SUPERIOR COURT
---

TITLE LI
                                             
COURTS
=========

CHAPTER 496
                                             
TERMS OF THE SUPERIOR COURT
---------------------------

### Section 496:1

 **496:1 Time; Place. –**
                                             
 I. Terms of the superior court shall be held annually at the
following places in the following counties or judicial districts
thereof:
                                             
 (a) For the county of Belknap: At Laconia.
                                             
 (b) For the county of Carroll: At Ossipee.
                                             
 (c) For the county of Cheshire: At Keene.
                                             
 (d) For the county of Coos: At Lancaster.
                                             
 (e) For the county of Grafton: At North Haverhill in the Town of
Haverhill.
                                             
 (f) For the county of Hillsborough: At Manchester for the
northern judicial district and at Nashua for the southern judicial
district. The northern judicial district shall include and serve the
city of Manchester and the towns of Amherst, Antrim, Bedford,
Bennington, Deering, Francestown, Goffstown, Greenfield, Hancock,
Hillsborough, Lyndeborough, Mont Vernon, New Boston, Peterborough, Weare
and Windsor. The southern judicial district shall include and serve the
city of Nashua and the towns of Brookline, Greenville, Hollis, Hudson,
Litchfield, Mason, Merrimack, Milford, New Ipswich, Pelham, Sharon,
Temple and Wilton.
                                             
 (g) For the county of Merrimack: At Concord.
                                             
 (h) For the county of Rockingham: At Brentwood.
                                             
 (i) For the county of Strafford: At Dover.
                                             
 (j) For the county of Sullivan: At Newport.
                                             
 II. The times for holding the terms of court at the places
designated in each county shall be established by rule of the superior
court, which shall provide for the holding of not less than 2 terms
annually in each county.
                                             
 III. For offenses committed on or after the effective date of this
paragraph in the county of Hillsborough, where the trial is scheduled at
a time when the courthouse for the northern judicial district of the
county of Hillsborough is closed for renovations, the judicial district
for purposes of part I, article 17 of the New Hampshire Constitution, as
well as for jury selection pursuant to RSA 500-A:2, shall be the entire
county of Hillsborough.
                                             
 IV. For civil jury trials in the county of Hillsborough, where the
trial is scheduled at a time when the courthouse for the northern
judicial district of the county of Hillsborough is closed for
renovations, the judicial district for purposes of jury selection
pursuant to RSA 500-A:2, shall be the entire county of Hillsborough.

**Source.** 1901, 78:15. 1915, 158:1. 1919, 32:1. 1921, 146:1. PL 318:1.
1929, 158:1. 1933, 121:1. 1941, 143:1. RL 372:1. 1953, 93:1. RSA 496:1.
1965, 41:1. 1967, 59:1. 1969, 100:1; 174:1. 1983, 382:19. 1992, 284:22,
23. 2008, 385:3, eff. July 11, 2008. 2010, 193:3, 6, eff. June 21, 2010.

### Section 496:2

 **496:2 Return Days. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 328:3, XI, eff. Aug. 16,
1981.
                                             ]

### Section 496:3

 **496:3 Adjournment of Sitting to Another Place. –** In counties
having more than one place for holding terms, the court may, for the
convenience of parties, adjourn its sitting to any other of the places
in such county designated for holding terms.

**Source.** 1915, 158:2. 1921, 146:2. PL 318:2. RL 372:3.

### Section 496:4

 **496:4 Jurors' Mileage. –** When such adjournment involves
transferring the jury, jurors so transferred shall be entitled to such
extra mileage as may be reasonable, to be determined by the presiding
justice.

**Source.** 1915, 158:2. 1921, 146:2. PL 318:3. RL 372:4.

### Section 496:5

 **496:5 Officers' Compensation. –** The clerk of court, and the
sheriff and his deputies in attendance, shall, upon such adjournment, be
allowed such extra compensation as may be reasonable, to be determined
by the presiding justice.

**Source.** 1915, 158:2. 1921, 146:2. PL 318:4. RL 372:5.

### Section 496:6

 **496:6 Derry Session. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1967, 59:2, eff. June 12,
1967.
                                             ]
