---
title: 'CHAPTER 504-A PROBATIONERS AND PAROLEES'
---

TITLE LI
                                             
COURTS
=========

CHAPTER 504-A
                                             
PROBATIONERS AND PAROLEES
-------------------------

### Section 504-A:1

 **504-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of corrections.
                                             
 I-a. "Lifetime supervision'' means a sentence under the provisions
of RSA 632-A:10-a, V(a).
                                             
 I-b. "Lifetime supervision conditions'' means the restrictions and
limitations established by the court or the department of corrections
for persons sentenced to lifetime supervision under RSA 632-A:10-a,
V(a).
                                             
 II. "Officer'' means any probation or parole officer under the
supervision of the commissioner.
                                             
 III. "Parole board'' means the adult parole board established under
RSA 651-A:3.
                                             
 IV. "Parole conditions'' means the restrictions and limitations
established by the adult parole board for the conduct and behavior of a
parolee.
                                             
 V. "Parolee'' means a prisoner who has been paroled by the adult
parole board under the provisions of RSA 651-A.
                                             
 VI. "Prison-bound offender'' means a convicted felon on probation
who otherwise would be sentenced to a term in the state prison.
                                             
 VII. "Probation conditions'' means the restrictions and limitations
established by the court for the conduct and behavior of a probationer.
                                             
 VIII. "Probationer'' means a person, as defined in RSA 625:11, II,
who has been sentenced under RSA 651:2, V to a term of probation.

**Source.** 1986, 156:1. 1998, 240:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1999 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 504-A:2

 **504-A:2 Probationers and Parolees in or of Other Jurisdictions.
–** Under RSA 651-A:25, probationers or parolees may be transferred for
supervision and control between states which are signatories to a
compact entered into under that section. New Hampshire probationers and
parolees whose supervision has been transferred to other states are
subject to the rules, regulations, policies, and procedures in effect in
the state to which they are transferred. Probationers and parolees
transferred to New Hampshire for supervision shall be held accountable
and be supervised and controlled under the same rules, policies, and
procedures as apply to New Hampshire probationers and parolees.

**Source.** 1986, 156:1, eff. May 28, 1986.

### Section 504-A:3

 **504-A:3 Termination of Probation or Parole. –** The authority that
placed a person on probation or parole may terminate the probation or
parole at any time.

**Source.** 1986, 156:1, eff. May 28, 1986.

### Section 504-A:4

 **504-A:4 Violation of the Terms of Probation or Parole. –**
                                             
 I. Any probationer or parolee may be arrested without warrant at any
time by any probation or parole officer, or any other officer authorized
to arrest upon request of a probation or parole officer, when the
probation or parole officer has reason to believe that the probationer
or parolee has committed a new criminal offense or is conducting himself
in such a way as to be a menace to public safety, or there is probable
cause to believe that the probationer or parolee will abscond or commit
new criminal offenses if not arrested.
                                             
 II. When a parolee violates the conditions of his parole but does
not meet the criteria for immediate arrest, a probation or parole
officer with knowledge of the circumstances of the parole violation
shall report the facts surrounding the violation to any member of the
parole board who may issue a warrant for the arrest of the parolee.
                                             
 III. A probation or parole officer may require any probationer,
whose sentence includes a provision for jail sanctions pursuant to RSA
651:2, V(i), to serve a county house of corrections sanction one to 7
days, provided that the probationer is advised of and waives his or her
right to counsel and to a preliminary hearing under RSA 504-A:5 and
violation of probation hearing. If the probation officer intends to
impose this sanction, the officer shall advise the offender of the
violations alleged, the date or dates of the violation, and the number
of days the offender shall serve. If the offender objects to the
imposition of the jail sanction, a violation of probation hearing shall
be held. This short jail stay may not be issued for any violation of
probation which could warrant an additional, separate felony charge. In
the event that a probationer commits a fifth violation of probation
after having been incarcerated under this section on 4 separate
occasions during the term of probation, the probation/parole officer
shall file a violation of probation with the court.

**Source.** 1986, 156:1, eff. May 28, 1986. 2010, 247:3, eff. July 1,
2010. 2013, 156:9, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 504-A:5

 **504-A:5 Detention of Violators. –** Any probationer or parolee who
is arrested under the authority of RSA 504-A:4 or RSA 651-A:25 shall be
detained at the county jail closest to the location where he or she was
arrested or any other suitable confinement facility in reasonable
proximity to the location where he or she was arrested. Such probationer
or parolee shall be detained there pending a preliminary hearing which
shall be held within 72 hours from the time of arrest, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, or, if supervised pursuant to RSA
651-A:25, shall be detained pending a hearing, including a final
revocation hearing, or transfer to the sending state. No county
correctional superintendent shall refuse to accept a probationer or
parolee committed to his or her facility for detention by or under the
authority of a probation or parole officer.

**Source.** 1986, 156:1. 1993, 112:1. 2003, 237:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 504-A:6

 **504-A:6 Preliminary Hearing. –** The facts and circumstances
surrounding the arrest and detention of any probationer or parolee shall
be expeditiously reviewed at a preliminary hearing meeting the due
process requirements of federal law.

**Source.** 1986, 156:1, eff. May 28, 1986.

### Section 504-A:7

 **504-A:7 Transfer of Supervision. –** The department of corrections
may transfer supervision of a probationer or parolee from one probation
or parole officer to another at any time.

**Source.** 1986, 156:1, eff. May 28, 1986.

### Section 504-A:8

 **504-A:8 Appointment of State Officers. –** State probation and
parole officers shall be appointed by the commissioner under the rules
of the division of personnel, consistent with the funding provided for
full and part-time probation and parole officers.

**Source.** 1986, 156:1, eff. May 28, 1986.

### Section 504-A:9

 **504-A:9 Supervision by the Commissioner. –** The commissioner
shall exercise technical supervision over probation and parole officers
in the state.

**Source.** 1986, 156:1, eff. May 28, 1986.

### Section 504-A:10

 **504-A:10 Municipal Probation Officers. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987,
402:20, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.
                                             ]

### Section 504-A:11

 **504-A:11 Adult Probation Officers; Assignment and Removal. –**
Probation and parole officers fully funded by the state shall be
assigned or reassigned to geographical regions within the state in
consonance with the duties to be accomplished. They may be assigned any
duties determined appropriate by the commissioner. The commissioner
shall assign probation and parole officers to each judicial district, as
defined in RSA 502-A, consistent with the workload formula established
by administrative rule pursuant to RSA 541-A and available funding.

**Source.** 1986, 156:1. 1987, 402:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 504-A:12

 **504-A:12 Powers and Duties of Probation or Parole Officers. –**
The powers and duties of probation or parole officers shall be:
                                             
 I. To serve as officers of the court and to investigate at the
request of any court, the parole board, or the commissioner any case,
matter, or question, whether pending or not, and to report the results
of such investigation with recommendations to the authority which
ordered the investigation.
                                             
 II. To take charge of and to provide supervision to persons placed
on probation, parole, or lifetime supervision, attempting to assist them
in establishing law-abiding lives while monitoring their behavior
through office, home, work, and other contacts to insure that they
comply with their probation, parole, or lifetime supervision
conditions.
                                             
 III. To report promptly to the appropriate court or the parole board
violations of probation or parole conditions which are required by
statute, the parole board, or the court or which, in the opinion of the
officer, are serious enough to warrant consideration by the authority
authorizing probation or parole. Such reports shall include
recommendations as to any actions which the officer believes to be
appropriate.
                                             
 IV. To arrest expeditiously or cause to be arrested any probationer
or parolee against whom any arrest warrant or capias has been issued by
any authority.
                                             
 V. To arrest expeditiously or cause to be arrested any probationer
or parolee in accordance with RSA 504-A:4-6.
                                             
 VI. To collect or to supervise the collection of any fees, fines, or
restitution payments ordered and to administratively process these funds
under rules adopted under RSA 541-A by the commissioner.
                                             
 VII. To enforce the criminal laws, including the power of arrest;
provided that this authority shall be limited to times when such
officers:
                                             
 (a) Are transporting a probationer or parolee.
                                             
 (b) Are attempting to apprehend or arrest a probationer or
parolee under any of the powers granted under this chapter.
                                             
 (c) Are exercising authority over non-probationers or
non-parolees pursuant to RSA 627.
                                             
 VIII. To carry firearms, subject to written procedures adopted by
the commissioner.

**Source.** 1986, 156:1. 1996, 13:8. 1997, 220:1. 1998, 240:4, eff. Jan.
1, 1999 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 504-A:12-a

 **504-A:12-a Qualification and Certification of Probation or Parole
Officers. –** Every probation-parole officer shall meet the educational
and training standards for employment as probation-parole officer as
established by the police standards and training council under RSA
188-F:26, and shall be certified by the council as being qualified to be
a probation-parole officer.

**Source.** 1996, 13:9, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 504-A:13

 **504-A:13 Supervision and Service Charges. –**
                                             
 I. The court shall establish a supervision fee for probationers, and
the parole board shall establish a supervision fee for parolees. The fee
shall not be less than 
                                             $40 a month, unless waived in whole or in part
by the court, board or commissioner, and may be any greater amount as
established by the court or board. This fee shall be considered a
condition of release, and failure to satisfy this obligation shall be
grounds for a violation hearing, unless the probationer or parolee has
been found to be indigent and, for that reason, unable to pay the fee.
Service charges for collection of fines and fees, other than supervision
fees, shall be established at 10 percent of the funds collected.
                                             
 II. Monthly supervision fees collected under this section shall be
deposited as follows:
                                             
 (a) 
                                             $5 to the state general fund to defray expenses of providing
training to employees of the department of corrections.
                                             
 (b) The balance to be credited to the general fund.
                                             
 III. The court, for probationers, and the parole board, for parolees
and those under the jurisdiction of the court, may assess fees for
services as provided by the department of corrections, division of field
services, not otherwise provided for by this chapter.
                                             
 IV. (a) Any person under state probation or parole supervision who
requests a transfer of supervision to another state shall submit such
request on a form to be developed by the commissioner of the department
of corrections along with an application fee not to exceed 
                                             $100. The
commissioner may waive the fee as deemed appropriate under the
circumstances. All fees collected under this subparagraph shall be
deposited into the probation and parole receipts fund established in
subparagraph (b).
                                             
 (b) There is hereby established a probation and parole receipts
fund in the department of corrections which shall be administered by the
commissioner of the department of corrections. The fund shall be
nonlapsing and continually appropriated to the department of corrections
to offset the cost of annual dues and any extradition costs incurred by
the department pursuant to the interstate compact for adult offender
supervision under RSA 651-A:25 through RSA 651-A:38.

**Source.** 1986, 156:1. 1993, 331:9. 1995, 189:1, 2; 237:1. 1996,
286:4. 2009, 221:1, eff. Sept. 13, 2009. 2016, 319:10, eff. July 1,
2016.

### Section 504-A:14

 **504-A:14 Computerized Identification of Probationers and Parolees.
–** The computerized motor vehicle files under the control of the
commissioner of safety relative to probationers and parolees who have
been convicted of felonies or misdemeanors shall reflect their status so
that inquiring law enforcement officers shall be advised of the
probation or parole status of such persons when detained or inquired
about through motor vehicle records. Both the department of safety and
the department of corrections and their employees and agents shall not
be held liable for errors of omission or commission in maintenance of
this data file unless the error is shown to be malicious.

**Source.** 1986, 156:1, eff. May 28, 1986.

### Section 504-A:15

 **504-A:15 Risk Assessment and Length of Supervision. –**
                                             
 I. Every person placed on probation or parole shall be assessed by
the department of corrections, using a valid and objective risk
assessment tool, to determine that person's risk of recidivating. Based
on that assessment, the person shall be designated as low, medium, or
high risk.
                                             
 II. Any person placed on probation for a misdemeanor shall be
subject to active supervision for up to the first 9 months and
thereafter be placed on administrative supervision unless the
probationer has been designated high risk or has been adjudicated by the
court for a violation of the conditions of probation during the first 9
months under supervision.
                                             
 III. Any person placed on probation for a felony shall be subject to
active supervision for up to the first 12 months and thereafter be
placed on administrative supervision unless the probationer has been
designated high risk, has been adjudicated by the court for a violation
of the conditions of probation during the first 12 months under
supervision, or was placed on probation for a felony listed as a tier II
or tier III offense in RSA 651-B:1, IX and X, respectively.
                                             
 IV. Any person placed on parole for a felony shall be subject to
active supervision for up to the first 18 months and thereafter be
placed on administrative supervision unless the parolee has been
designated high risk, has violated the conditions of parole during the
first 18 months under supervision, or was placed on parole for a felony
listed as a tier II or tier III offense in RSA 651-B:1, IX and X,
respectively.

**Source.** 2010, 247:4, eff. July 1, 2010. 2011, 244:5, eff. July 13,
2011.
