---
title: 'CHAPTER 536-A REPLEVIN'
---

TITLE LV
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN SPECIAL CASES
============================

CHAPTER 536-A
                                             
REPLEVIN
--------------

### Section 536-A:1

 **536-A:1 Personal Property. –** A party may recover possession of
personal property wrongfully taken or detained by applying to the
superior court, or concurrently to a district court where the value of
the property is within the jurisdictional amount of a district court,
for a writ of replevin in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:2

 **536-A:2 Complaint. –** The complaint or application shall be
executed under penalties of perjury or be verified by oath and shall
state:
                                             
 I. That the applicant is the owner of the property claimed or
entitled to the possession thereof and the source of such title or right
and shall attach thereto a copy of any written instrument upon which
such title or right is claimed.
                                             
 II. The manner in which the property is wrongfully detained by the
defendant, the means by which the defendant came into possession of the
property and the cause of such detention.
                                             
 III. A particular description of the property, a statement of its
actual value, the location of the property and the name and address of
the defendant and any other person in possession of the property.
                                             
 IV. Whether or not the property is exempt from execution, and the
name and address of any known lienholder.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:3

 **536-A:3 Preliminary Notice to Show Cause. –** The court shall,
without delay, issue an order directed to the defendant to show cause
why the property should not be taken from the defendant and delivered to
the applicant. Such order shall fix the date and time for the hearing
thereon, which ordinarily shall be no sooner than ten days nor later
than twenty days from the issuance of the order, and shall direct the
time within which service thereof shall be made upon the defendant. Such
order shall inform the defendant that he may file affidavits on his
behalf with the court and may appear and present testimony on his behalf
at the time of such hearing, or that he may, at or prior to such
hearing, file with the court a written undertaking to stay the delivery
of the property and that, if he fails to appear, the court will issue a
writ of replevin. Such order shall fix the manner in which service
thereof shall be made, which shall be by personal service or certified
mail, return receipt requested, or in such other manner as the court may
determine under the circumstances appearing from the complaint and
affidavit.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:4

 **536-A:4 Temporary Restraining Order. –** Such preliminary notice
issued pursuant to RSA 536-A:3 shall include a temporary order
restraining the defendant from removing the property from the state or
otherwise from its location, or transferring, selling, pledging,
assigning or otherwise altering, damaging, disposing of, or permitting
it to become subject to a security interest or lien, until further order
of the court.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:5

 **536-A:5 Show Cause Hearing. –** If the defendant fails to appear
at the preliminary hearing, a writ of replevin shall issue. Otherwise,
upon the hearing on the order to show cause, the court shall consider
the showing made by the parties appearing, and shall make a preliminary
determination which party, with reasonable probability, is entitled to
possession, use, and disposition of the property, pending final
adjudication of the claims of the parties. If the court determines that
the action is one in which a prejudgment writ of replevin should issue,
it shall direct the issuance of such writ forthwith.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:6

 **536-A:6 Entry of Private Premises. –** A writ of replevin shall
not issue to enter the private premises or a building for the purpose of
seizure of property unless the court shall first determine from
competent evidence that there is probable cause to believe that the
property or some part thereof is located on or in the private premises
or building and the applicant is entitled to its possession.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:7

 **536-A:7 Security. –**
                                             
 I. A writ of replevin shall not issue at any stage of the
proceedings until the applicant has filed with the court a written
undertaking executed by the applicant and secured by a proper assignment
or conveyance of one or more sufficient securities, approved by the
court, in an amount of double the value of the property, as determined
by the court, to prosecute the applicant's action to completion and,
alternatively, for the return of the property to the defendant, if
return thereof be ordered, and for the payment to the defendant of any
sum as may from any cause arising out of the action be recovered against
the applicant.
                                             
 II. For purposes of this section, securities may include, but shall
not be limited to, bonds, letters of credit, security interests, or cash
in a form and amount acceptable to the court.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1. 1999, 132:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 536-A:8

 **536-A:8 Writ Content. –** The writ of replevin shall be directed
to a sheriff, constable, or police officer within whose jurisdiction the
property is located. It shall describe the specific property to be
seized, and shall specify the location or locations where, as determined
by the court from all the evidence, there is probable cause to believe
the property or some part thereof will be found. It shall direct the
levying officer to seize the same if it is found, and to retain it in
his custody. Upon probable cause later shown by further affidavit or
declaration by applicant or someone on his behalf, filed with the court,
a writ of replevin may be endorsed by the court, without further notice,
to direct the levying officer to search for the property at another
location or locations and to seize the same, if found.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:9

 **536-A:9 Powers of Officer. –** The levying officer shall forthwith
take the property, if it be in the possession of the defendant or his
agent, and retain it in his custody, either by removing the property to
a place of safekeeping or, upon good cause shown, by installing a
keeper. Provided that, when the property is used as a dwelling, such as
a housetrailer, mobile home, or boat, the same shall be taken by placing
a keeper in charge of the property, at the applicant's expense, for two
days. At the expiration of such period, the officer shall remove its
occupants and take the property into his immediate custody.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:10

 **536-A:10 Property Within a Building. –** If the property or any
part thereof is in a building or enclosure, the levying officer shall
demand its delivery, announcing his identity, purpose, and the authority
under which he acts. If the property is not voluntarily delivered, he
shall cause the building or enclosure to be broken open in such manner
as he reasonably believes will cause the least damage to the building or
enclosure, and take the property into his possession. He may call upon
any sheriff or police officer to aid and protect him, but if he
reasonably believes that entry and seizure of the property will involve
a substantial risk of death or serious bodily harm to any person, he
shall refrain from seizing the property, and shall forthwith make a
return before the court from which the writ issued, setting forth the
reasons for his belief that such risk exists. The court thereupon shall
make such orders and decrees as may be appropriate.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:11

 **536-A:11 Service. –** The levying officer shall, without delay,
serve upon the defendant a copy of the writ of replevin and written
undertaking, the complaint and affidavit, by delivering the same to him
personally, if he can be found, or to his agent from whose possession
the property is taken; or, if neither can be found, by leaving them at
the usual place of abode of either with some person of suitable age and
discretion; or, if neither have any known place of abode, by mailing
them to their last known address.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:12

 **536-A:12 Ex Parte Issuance of Writ. –** Upon specific request of
the applicant and examination of the complaint and affidavit and such
other evidence or testimony as the judge may thereupon require, a writ
of replevin may be issued prior to hearing, if probable cause appears
that any of the following exist:
                                             
 I. The defendant gained possession of the property by theft;
                                             
 II. The property consists of one or more negotiable instruments or
credit cards;
                                             
 III. By reason of specific, competent evidence shown, by affidavit
or by testimony within the personal knowledge of an affiant or witness,
the property is perishable, and will perish before any noticed hearing
can be had, or is in immediate danger of destruction, serious harm,
concealment, or removal from this state, or of sale to an innocent
purchaser, and that the holder of such property threatens to destroy,
harm, conceal, remove it from the state, or sell it to an innocent
purchaser.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:13

 **536-A:13 Shortened Hearing. –** Where a writ of replevin has been
issued ex parte and prior to hearing, the defendant or other person from
whom possession of such property has been taken may apply to the court
for an order shortening the time for hearing on the order to show cause;
and the court may, upon such application, shorten the time for such
hearing, and direct that the matter shall be heard on not less than
forty-eight hours' notice to the plaintiff.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:14

 **536-A:14 Retention of Property Upon Filing Security. –**
                                             
 I. At any time prior to the hearing of the order to show cause, or
before the delivery of the property to the plaintiff, the defendant may
require the return thereof upon filing with the court a written
undertaking executed by the defendant and secured by a proper assignment
or conveyance of one or more sufficient securities, approved by the
court, to the effect that the defendant shall be bound in double the
value of the property, as stated in the verified complaint of the
applicant, or as determined by the court, for the delivery thereof to
the applicant and for the payment to the applicant of such sum as may
for any cause be recovered against the defendant. At the time of filing
such undertaking, the defendant shall serve upon the applicant or the
applicant's attorney a notice of filing of such undertaking, to which a
copy of such undertaking shall be attached, and shall cause proof of
service thereof to be filed with the court. If such undertaking be filed
prior to hearing of the order to show cause, proceedings thereunder
shall terminate, unless exception is taken to the adequacy or
sufficiency of the securities. If, at the time of filing of such
undertaking, the property shall be in the custody of the levying
officer, such property shall be redelivered to the defendant 5 days
after service of notice of filing such undertaking unless objected to by
the applicant or the applicant's attorney.
                                             
 II. For purposes of this section, securities may include, but shall
not be limited to, bonds, letters of credit, security interests, or cash
in a form and amount acceptable to the court.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1. 1999, 132:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 536-A:15

 **536-A:15 Officer Exempt From Liability. –** Any officer shall be
exempt from liability to any person when acting in the proper
performance of the directions of the court issued hereunder. He may
require advance payment from a party of his costs of repossession and
storage reasonably to be anticipated and, in any event, shall have a
lien on the property repossessed for payment of the same.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:16

 **536-A:16 Delivery of Possession. –** When the levying officer has
taken property as provided in this chapter, he shall keep it in a secure
place and deliver it to the party preliminarily determined to be
entitled thereto, upon receiving his fees for taking and his necessary
expenses for keeping the same, after expiration of the time for filing
of an undertaking for redelivery and for exception to the sureties upon
any undertaking, unless the court shall by order stay such delivery.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:17

 **536-A:17 Return. –** The levying officer shall return the writ of
replevin, with his proceedings thereon, to the court in which the action
is pending, within twenty days after taking the property mentioned in
the writ.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:18

 **536-A:18 Judgment for Defendant. –** If the defendant shall
prevail, he shall have judgment for the return of such personal property
or part thereof, if he so elects, as remains in the possession of the
applicant and such further damages as may be awarded him.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 536-A:19

 **536-A:19 Contempt. –** The provisions of this chapter shall apply
to all cases of wrongful detention, including property attached in other
actions of replevin or pursuant to other process of law and may be
initiated at any stage of the proceedings and any violation of orders of
the court issued hereunder may be punished by contempt.

**Source.** 1973, 467:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.
