---
title: CHAPTER 539 WILFUL TRESPASS
---

TITLE LV
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN SPECIAL CASES
============================

CHAPTER 539
                                             
WILFUL TRESPASS
---------------

### Section 539:1,-2

 **539:1, 539:2 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 299:19, XX, eff. Jan.
1, 1996.
                                             ]

### Section 539:3

 **539:3 Damages to Fences; Penalty. –** Whoever shall knowingly
throw down, damage, or leave open any fence, gate, or bar belonging to
or enclosing land held in common, or belonging to another person, or
shall aid in such act, shall forfeit to the person injured treble
damages, and shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** RS 207:3. CS 220:3. GS 229:3. GL 248:3. PS 244:3. PL 355:3.
RL 411:3. RSA 539:3. 1988, 148:8. 1995, 299:17, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 539:3-a

 **539:3-a Civil Penalty. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 299:19, XX, eff. Jan.
1, 1996.
                                             ]

### Section 539:4

 **539:4 Stone, Etc. –** Whoever shall willfully and unlawfully dig
or carry away any stone, including stone from a stone wall, ore, gravel,
clay, sand, turf, mold, or loam upon or from land holden in common or
from the land of another person, or shall aid therein, shall forfeit to
the person injured treble damages based on the cost of materials and
restoration, and including attorney's fees and costs.

**Source.** RS 207:4. CS 220:4. GS 229:4. GL 248:4. PS 244:4. PL 355:4.
RL 411:4. 2009, 294:1, eff. Sept. 29, 2009.

### Section 539:5

 **539:5 State Lands. –** Whoever shall, without authority, wilfully
enter into or upon, or take possession of, land belonging to the state,
and continue in possession thereof without right for the space of three
months, shall forfeit one hundred dollars, to the use of the state.

**Source.** RS 207:6. CS 220:6. GS 229:5. GL 248:5. PS 244:5. PL 355:5.
RL 411:5.

### Section 539:6

 **539:6 No Right Acquired by Adverse Possession of State Lands. –**
No right shall be acquired by such entry or possession, nor by any
adverse possession of such land, as against the state or its grantees.

**Source.** RS 207:7. CS 220:7. GS 229:6. GL 248:6. PS 244:6. PL 355:6.
RL 411:6.

### Section 539:7

 **539:7 Theft of Utility Services. –**
                                             
 I. A person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, if a natural person,
or a felony, if any other person, who:
                                             
 (a) Knowingly injures, destroys, or causes to be injured or
destroyed any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other
device or attachment belonging to a person or corporation engaged in the
manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, or telephone
communications services;
                                             
 (b) Knowingly interferes with the proper action or just
registration of any meter or other recording device belonging to a
person or corporation described in subparagraph (a);
                                             
 (c) Knowingly participates in causing the prohibited result in
either subparagraph (a) or (b); or
                                             
 (d) Without the consent of the person or corporation described in
subparagraph (a), knowingly diverts, causes to be diverted, or allows to
be diverted for his use any utility service from such person or
corporation.
                                             
 II. The existence of any of the results prohibited in paragraph I
with reference to meters, recording devices or attachments shall be
evidence that the person to whom such utility service is at the time
being furnished by or through such meters, recording devices, or
attachments, has knowingly created or caused to be created the
conditions so existing; provided that the evidence referred to in this
paragraph shall not apply to any person who has been furnished with
electric, gas, water or telephone service for less than 31 days, or
until the first meter reading has been made; and, provided further that
the evidence referred to in this paragraph shall not apply to any person
whose electric meter, recording devices and attachments are on the
property of another person or under the control of another person.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this section shall limit any civil right of action
lying in favor of any utility as a result of damage occurring from any
act prohibited under paragraph I. Damages shall include the cost of the
utility service wrongfully used, the cost of the equipment repair or
replacement as necessary, attorney's fees, and all costs to the utility,
including labor in undertaking and completing the investigation
resulting in a determination of liability under this section.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section shall limit or restrict the prosecution
of a person under RSA 637:8.

**Source.** 1901, 41:1. PL 355:7. RL 411:7. RSA 539:7. 1973, 529:124.
1981, 448:1. 1985, 134:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 539:8

 **539:8 Limitation of Actions. –** No action under the provisions of
this chapter shall be maintained unless begun within two years after the
cause of action accrued.

**Source.** RS 207:9. CS 220:9. GS 229:7. GL 248:7. PS 244:7. PL 355:8.
RL 411:8.

### Section 539:9

 **539:9 Agricultural Vandalism; Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Whoever shall knowingly cut, fell, destroy, injure, damage, cause
to be damaged, carry away, tamper with, worry, or vandalize any legal
crop or legal crop bearing tree or plant, cropland, pasture or pasture
land, livestock or other farm raised animals, as defined in RSA 21:34-a,
and all farm buildings, enclosures, structures, or equipment used in the
care and production of crops, livestock or other farm raised animals, or
aid in such action without permission of the owner, shall forfeit to the
person injured up to 10 times the market value or repair cost.
                                             
 II. A person who violates the provisions of paragraph I shall also
be guilty of a class B felony if the actual loss or cost of repair is

                                             $10,000 or more, or a misdemeanor if the actual loss or cost of repair
is less than 
                                             $10,000.

**Source.** 2003, 181:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.
