---
title: 'CHAPTER 540-C VACATION OR RECREATIONAL RENTAL UNITS'
---

TITLE LV
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN SPECIAL CASES
============================

CHAPTER 540-C
                                             
VACATION OR RECREATIONAL RENTAL UNITS
-------------------------------------

### Section 540-C:1

 **540-C:1 Covered Units. –** This chapter shall apply to all
dwelling units which are:
                                             
 I. Rented for recreational or vacation use at least one month out of
the year; and
                                             
 II. Rented for residential purposes by persons who have no other
residence, during part or all of the non-recreational or vacation
period.

**Source.** 2006, 312:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 540-C:2

 **540-C:2 Lease Required. –** In order to evict an occupant from a
dwelling unit covered by this chapter without fulfilling the
requirements of RSA 540, the owner or the owner's authorized agent and
the tenant shall sign a lease which:
                                             
 I. States the date by which the tenant shall vacate the premises;
and
                                             
 II. Informs the tenant that if he or she remains on the premises
after the expiration of the lease without the written permission of the
owner or the owner's authorized agent, the tenant may be removed from
the premises by a law enforcement officer without any judicial process.

**Source.** 2006, 312:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 540-C:3

 **540-C:3 Removal Upon Expiration of Lease. –** Any law enforcement
officer of this state, upon presentation of the expired lease by the
owner or the owner's authorized agent, shall remove the occupants from
the dwelling unit. Upon removal the occupants shall be deemed to have
abandoned his or her rights of occupancy and the owner may then make
such unit available to other occupants.

**Source.** 2006, 312:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 540-C:4

 **540-C:4 Civil Penalty. –** Any person who directs a law
enforcement officer to remove a tenant from a dwelling unit covered by
this chapter without complying with RSA 540-C:3, or misrepresents to a
law enforcement officer that the unit is a covered unit under this
chapter shall be liable to any tenant who is involuntarily removed from
the unit by the law enforcement officer in an amount equivalent to 3
months rent, plus costs and attorneys fees.

**Source.** 2006, 312:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.
