---
title: 'CHAPTER 540-B RENTAL OF SHARED FACILITIES'
---

TITLE LV
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN SPECIAL CASES
============================

CHAPTER 540-B
                                             
RENTAL OF SHARED FACILITIES
---------------------------

### Section 540-B:1

 **540-B:1 Definition; Shared Facility. –**
                                             
 I. A "shared facility'' means real property rented for residential
purposes which has separate sleeping areas for each occupant and in
which each occupant has access to and shares with the owner of the
facility one or more significant portions of the facility in common,
such as kitchen, dining area, bathroom, or bathing area, for which the
occupant has no rented right of sole personal use.
                                             
 II. A shared facility shall not include:
                                             
 (a) Facilities rented to transient guests intended for use of
less than 90 days.
                                             
 (b) Rooms in hotels, motels, inns, tourist homes, and other
dwellings rented for recreational or vacationing use.
                                             
 (c) Rooms provided ancillary to other primary purposes such as
jails, student dormitories, nursing homes, hospitals, group homes, and
emergency shelters.

**Source.** 2001, 277:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

### Section 540-B:2

 **540-B:2 Nature of Tenancy. –** Every tenancy shall be deemed to be
at will, and the rent payable as agreed, unless a written contract
defines the terms of the tenancy differently. Except as otherwise
provided, a verbal rental agreement shall be permitted.

**Source.** 2001, 277:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

### Section 540-B:3

 **540-B:3 Termination of Tenancy; Notice of Termination. –**
                                             
 I. The owner or agent of the owner of a shared facility may
terminate any tenancy without stating any reason. A written 30-day
notice of termination shall be required.
                                             
 II. The owner or agent of the owner of a shared facility may
terminate any tenancy for nonpayment of rent. A written 7-day notice of
termination shall be required.
                                             
 III. The owner or agent of the owner of a shared facility may
terminate any tenancy for damage to the premises, or behavior of the
occupant or guest of any family member of the occupant which adversely
affects the health or safety of the other occupants or the owner or the
agent of the owner, or material breech of any rental agreement. A
written 72-hour notice of termination shall be required.

**Source.** 2001, 277:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

### Section 540-B:4

 **540-B:4 Termination by Occupant. –** An occupant may terminate any
at will tenancy by a written 30-day notice or in accordance with any
notice requirement of a written rental agreement.

**Source.** 2001, 277:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

### Section 540-B:5

 **540-B:5 Service of Notice. –**
                                             
 I. The owner or agent of the owner of a shared facility shall give
the notice of termination personally to the occupant or attach the
notice to the primary entrance to the occupant's separated area.
                                             
 II. The occupant shall give the notice of termination by the same
method used to pay rent or in accordance with any written rental
agreement.

**Source.** 2001, 277:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

### Section 540-B:6

 **540-B:6 Possessory Rights. –** The occupant shall have no
possessory rights to any portion of a shared facility. The owner or
agent of the owner may request law enforcement intervention for any
behavior if such action is deemed necessary. The law enforcement officer
shall not be precluded from any normal response based on the fact of the
rental agreement.

**Source.** 2001, 277:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

### Section 540-B:7

 **540-B:7 Remedies. –** Violations of this chapter shall be subject
to the remedies set forth in RSA 540-A:4.

**Source.** 2001, 277:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

### Section 540-B:8

 **540-B:8 Possession. –** The owner or agent of the owner of a
shared facility may take possession of the separated areas used by the
occupant at the end of the notice period. The owner or agent of the
owner may request law enforcement intervention as necessary.

**Source.** 2001, 277:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

### Section 540-B:9

 **540-B:9 Personal Property. –** The owner or agent of the owner of
a shared facility shall retain and exercise reasonable care in the
storage of the personal property of the occupant who has vacated the
premises for a period of 3 days after the date on which such occupant
has vacated. After the 3-day period, the owner or agent of the owner of
a shared facility may dispose of such property without notice to the
occupant.

**Source.** 2001, 277:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

### Section 540-B:10

 **540-B:10 Security Deposit. –** The owner or agent of the owner of
a shared facility may require a security deposit in an amount to be
determined by the owner or agent of the owner. If the deposit amount is
more than the equivalent of 30 days rent, there shall be a written
instrument acknowledging receipt and explaining where the deposit shall
be maintained and when it shall be returned. If there is no written
agreement, the deposit shall be returned within 20 days after the
occupant has vacated.

**Source.** 2001, 277:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.
