---
title: CHAPTER 541 REHEARINGS AND APPEALS IN CERTAIN CASES
---

TITLE LV
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN SPECIAL CASES
============================

CHAPTER 541
                                             
REHEARINGS AND APPEALS IN CERTAIN CASES
---------------------------------------

### Section 541:1

 **541:1 Definition. –** The word "commission'' as here used means
the public utilities commission, the milk sanitation board, or any state
department or official concerning whose decision a rehearing or appeal
is sought in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** RL 414:1. RSA 541:1. 1967, 345:2, 5. 1989, 138:8. 1996,
228:103, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 541:2

 **541:2 Uniform Procedure. –** When so authorized by law, any order
or decision of the commission may be the subject of a motion for
rehearing or of an appeal in the manner prescribed by the following
sections.

**Source.** RL 414:2.

### Section 541:3

 **541:3 Motion for Rehearing. –** Within 30 days after any order or
decision has been made by the commission, any party to the action or
proceeding before the commission, or any person directly affected
thereby, may apply for a rehearing in respect to any matter determined
in the action or proceeding, or covered or included in the order,
specifying in the motion all grounds for rehearing, and the commission
may grant such rehearing if in its opinion good reason for the rehearing
is stated in the motion.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:1. 1937, 107:14; 133:75. RL 414:3. RSA
541:3. 1994, 54:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 541:4

 **541:4 Specifications. –** Such motion shall set forth fully every
ground upon which it is claimed that the decision or order complained of
is unlawful or unreasonable. No appeal from any order or decision of the
commission shall be taken unless the appellant shall have made
application for rehearing as herein provided, and when such application
shall have been made, no ground not set forth therein shall be urged,
relied on, or given any consideration by the court, unless the court for
good cause shown shall allow the appellant to specify additional
grounds.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:2. 1937, 107:15; 133:76. RL 414:4.

### Section 541:5

 **541:5 Action on Motion. –** Upon the filing of such motion for
rehearing, the commission shall within ten days either grant or deny the
same, or suspend the order or decision complained of pending further
consideration, and any order of suspension may be upon such terms and
conditions as the commission may prescribe.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:3. 1937, 107:16; 133:77. RL 414:5.

### Section 541:6

 **541:6 Appeal. –** Within thirty days after the application for a
rehearing is denied, or, if the application is granted, then within
thirty days after the decision on such rehearing, the applicant may
appeal by petition to the supreme court.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:4. 1937, 107:17; 133:78. RL 414:6.

### Section 541:7

 **541:7 Petition. –** Such petition shall state briefly the nature
of the proceeding before the commission, and shall set forth the order
or decision complained of, and the grounds upon which the same is
claimed to be unlawful or unreasonable upon which the petitioner will
rely in the supreme court.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:5. 1937, 107:18; 133:79. RL 414:7.

### Section 541:8

 **541:8 Parties. –** Any person or corporation whose rights may be
directly affected by said appeal may appear and become a party, or the
court may order such persons and corporations to be joined as parties as
justice may require.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:6. 1937, 107:19; 133:80. RL 414:8.

### Section 541:9

 **541:9 Notice to Commission. –** Upon the filing of an appeal, the
clerk of court shall issue an order of notice requiring the commission
to file with the court a certified copy of the record in the proceeding,
together with such of the evidence introduced before or considered by
the commission as may be specified by any party in interest, as well as
such other evidence, so introduced and considered, as the commission may
deem proper to certify, together with the originals or copies of all
exhibits introduced in evidence before the commission.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:7. 1937, 107:20; 133:81. RL 414:9.

### Section 541:10

 **541:10 Other Notice. –** Such notice as the court may order shall
also be given to persons and corporations who were parties to the
proceeding before the commission, or who may be ordered joined by the
court.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:8. 1937, 107:21; 133:82. RL 414:10.

### Section 541:11

 **541:11 Fees for Copies. –** The commission shall collect from the
party making the appeal a fee of ten cents per folio of one hundred
words for the copy of the record and such testimony and exhibits as
shall be transferred, and five cents per folio for manifold copies, and
shall not be required to certify the record upon any such appeal, nor
shall said appeal be considered, until the fees for copies have been
paid.

**Source.** 1915, 99:3. PL 239:9. 1937, 107:22; 133:83. RL 414:11.

### Section 541:12

 **541:12 Argument. –** Upon the filing of said copy of the record,
evidence, and exhibits, the case shall be in order for argument at the
next regular session of the court, unless the same be postponed for good
cause shown.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:10. 1937, 107:23; 133:84. RL 414:12.

### Section 541:13

 **541:13 Burden of Proof. –** Upon the hearing the burden of proof
shall be upon the party seeking to set aside any order or decision of
the commission to show that the same is clearly unreasonable or
unlawful, and all findings of the commission upon all questions of fact
properly before it shall be deemed to be prima facie lawful and
reasonable; and the order or decision appealed from shall not be set
aside or vacated except for errors of law, unless the court is
satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the evidence before it, that such
order is unjust or unreasonable.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:11. 1937, 107:24; 133:85. RL 414:13.

### Section 541:14

 **541:14 Additional Evidence. –** No new or additional evidence
shall be introduced in the supreme court, but the case shall be
determined upon the record and evidence transferred, except that in any
case, if it shall be necessary in order that no party shall be deprived
of any constitutional right, or if the court shall be of the opinion
that justice requires the reception of evidence of facts which have
occurred since the hearing, or which by reason of accident, mistake, or
misfortune could not have been offered before the commission, it shall
remand the case to the commission to receive and consider such
additional evidence.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:12. 1937, 107:25; 133:86. RL 414:14.
1951, 203:13, eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 541:15

 **541:15 Action of Commission. –** Upon receipt of such evidence,
the commission shall consider the same and may alter, modify, amend, or
rescind the order or decision appealed from, and shall report its action
thereon to the court within said twenty days.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:15. 1937, 107:28; 133:89. RL 414:17.

### Section 541:16

 **541:16 Subsequent Proceedings. –** If the commission shall rescind
the order appealed from the appeal shall be dismissed; if it shall
alter, modify, or amend the same such altered, modified, or amended
order shall take the place of the original order complained of, and the
court shall render judgment with reference thereto in said appeal as
though said order had been made by the commission in the first instance,
after allowing any amendments of the pleadings or other incidental
proceedings desired by the parties which the changed situation may
require.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:16. 1937, 107:29; 133:90. RL 414:18.

### Section 541:17

 **541:17 Evidence, How Considered. –** All evidence transferred by
the commission shall be considered by the court regardless of any
technical rule which might have rendered the same inadmissible if
originally offered in the trial of an action at law.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:17. 1937, 107:30; 133:91. RL 414:19.
1951, 203:15, eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 541:18

 **541:18 Suspension of Order. –** No appeal or other proceedings
taken from an order of the commission shall suspend the operation of
such order; provided, that the supreme court may order a suspension of
such order pending the determination of such appeal or other proceeding
whenever, in the opinion of the court, justice may require such
suspension; but no order of the public utilities commission providing
for a reduction of rates, fares, or charges or denying a petition for an
increase therein shall be suspended except upon conditions to be imposed
by the court providing a means for securing the prompt repayment of all
excess rates, fares, and charges over and above the rates, fares, and
charges which shall be finally determined to be reasonable and just.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:18. 1937, 107:31; 133:92. RL 414:20.
1951, 203:16, eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 541:19

 **541:19 Conditions. –** Any order of the court suspending an order
of the public utilities commission fixing rates, fares, charges, or
prices shall, among other things, provide that the public utility
affected by the order suspended shall keep such accounts as shall
suffice to show the amount being collected by such public utility,
pending the appeal, in excess of the amounts which it would have
collected if the order or decree of the commission had not been
suspended, and shall provide such means as the court shall determine to
secure the prompt repayment of all excess rates, fares and charges over
and above the rates, fares and charges which shall finally be determined
to be reasonable and just.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:19. 1937, 107:32; 133:93. RL 414:21.
1951, 203:17, eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 541:20

 **541:20 Contempt of Court. –** Whenever there is occasion after
final decision for the distribution of said excess, any violation on the
part of any public utility, or of the officers or members thereof, of
the order of the court providing for the repayment of said excess may be
punished as a contempt of court.

**Source.** 1951, 203:18. RL 414:21-a.

### Section 541:21

 **541:21 Exceptions. –** The provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to appeals from the assessment of damages in eminent domain
proceedings, but such appeals shall be taken and prosecuted as otherwise
provided.

**Source.** 1951, 203:19. RL 414:21-b.

### Section 541:22

 **541:22 Remedy Exclusive. –** No proceeding other than the appeal
herein provided for shall be maintained in any court of this state to
set aside, enjoin the enforcement of, or otherwise review or impeach any
order of the commission, except as otherwise specifically provided.

**Source.** 1913, 145:18. PL 239:22. 1937, 107:33; 133:94. RL 414:22.
