---
title: 'CHAPTER 545-A UNIFORM FRAUDULENT TRANSFER ACT'
---

TITLE LV
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN SPECIAL CASES
============================

CHAPTER 545-A
                                             
UNIFORM FRAUDULENT TRANSFER ACT
-------------------------------

### Section 545-A:1

 **545-A:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Affiliate'' means:
                                             
 (a) A person who directly or indirectly owns, controls, or holds
with power to vote, 20 percent or more of the outstanding voting
securities of the debtor, other than a person who holds the securities:
                                             
 (1) As a fiduciary or agent without sole discretionary power
to vote the securities; or
                                             
 (2) Solely to secure a debt, if the person has not exercised
the power to vote;
                                             
 (b) A corporation 20 percent or more of whose outstanding voting
securities are directly or indirectly owned, controlled, or held with
power to vote, by the debtor or a person who directly or indirectly
owns, controls, or holds, with power to vote, 20 percent or more of the
outstanding voting securities of the debtor, other than a person who
holds the securities:
                                             
 (1) As a fiduciary or agent without sole power to vote the
securities; or
                                             
 (2) Solely to secure a debt, if the person has not in fact
exercised the power to vote;
                                             
 (c) A person whose business is operated by the debtor under a
lease or other agreement, or a person substantially all of whose assets
are controlled by the debtor; or
                                             
 (d) A person who operates the debtor's business under a lease or
other agreement or controls substantially all of the debtor's assets.
                                             
 II. "Asset'' means property of a debtor, but the term does not
include:
                                             
 (a) Property to the extent it is encumbered by a valid lien;
                                             
 (b) Property to the extent it is generally exempt under
nonbankruptcy law; or
                                             
 (c) An interest in property held in tenancy by the entireties to
the extent it is not subject to process by a creditor holding a claim
against only one tenant.
                                             
 III. "Claim'' means a right to payment, whether or not the right is
reduced to judgment, liquidated, unliquidated, fixed, contingent,
matured, unmatured, disputed, undisputed, legal, equitable, secured, or
unsecured.
                                             
 IV. "Creditor'' means a person who has a claim.
                                             
 V. "Debt'' means liability on a claim.
                                             
 VI. "Debtor'' means a person who is liable on a claim.
                                             
 VII. "Insider'' includes:
                                             
 (a) If the debtor is an individual:
                                             
 (1) A relative of the debtor or of a general partner of the
debtor;
                                             
 (2) A partnership in which the debtor is a general partner;
                                             
 (3) A general partner in a partnership described in
subparagraph (2); or
                                             
 (4) A corporation of which the debtor is a director, officer,
or person in control;
                                             
 (b) If the debtor is a corporation:
                                             
 (1) A director of the debtor;
                                             
 (2) An officer of the debtor;
                                             
 (3) A person in control of the debtor;
                                             
 (4) A partnership in which the debtor is a general partner;
                                             
 (5) A general partner in a partnership described in
subparagraph (4); or
                                             
 (6) A relative of a general partner, director, officer, or
person in control of the debtor;
                                             
 (c) If the debtor is a partnership:
                                             
 (1) A general partner in the debtor;
                                             
 (2) A relative of a general partner in, a general partner of,
or a person in control of the debtor;
                                             
 (3) Another partnership in which the debtor is a general
partner;
                                             
 (4) A general partner in a partnership described in
subparagraph (3); or
                                             
 (5) A person in control of the debtor;
                                             
 (d) An affiliate, or an insider of an affiliate as if the
affiliate were the debtor; and
                                             
 (e) A managing agent of the debtor.
                                             
 VIII. "Lien'' means a charge against or an interest in property to
secure payment of a debt or performance of an obligation, and includes a
security interest created by agreement, a judicial lien obtained by
legal or equitable process or proceedings, a common law lien, or a
statutory lien.
                                             
 IX. "Person'' means an individual, partnership, corporation,
association, organization, government or governmental subdivision or
agency, business trust, estate, trust, or any other legal or commercial
entity.
                                             
 X. "Property'' means anything that may be the subject of ownership.
                                             
 XI. "Relative'' means an individual related by consanguinity within
the third degree as determined by the common law, a spouse, or an
individual related to a spouse within the third degree as so determined,
and includes an individual in an adoptive relationship within the third
degree.
                                             
 XII. "Transfer'' means every mode, direct or indirect, absolute or
conditional, voluntary or involuntary, of disposing of or parting with
an asset or an interest in an asset, and includes payment of money,
release, lease, and creation of a lien or other encumbrance.
                                             
 XIII. "Valid lien'' means a lien that is effective against the
holder of a judicial lien subsequently obtained by legal or equitable
process or proceedings.

**Source.** 1987, 215:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 545-A:2

 **545-A:2 Insolvency. –**
                                             
 I. A debtor is insolvent if the sum of the debtor's debts is greater
than all of the debtor's assets at a fair valuation.
                                             
 II. A debtor who is generally not paying his debts as they become
due is presumed to be insolvent.
                                             
 III. A partnership is insolvent under paragraph I if the sum of the
partnership's debts is greater than the aggregate, at a fair valuation,
of all of the partnership's assets and the sum of the excess of the
value of each general partner's nonpartnership assets over the partner's
nonpartnership debts.
                                             
 IV. Assets under this section do not include property that has been
transferred, concealed, or removed with intent to hinder, delay, or
defraud creditors or that has been transferred in a manner making the
transfer voidable under this chapter.
                                             
 V. Debts under this section do not include an obligation to the
extent it is secured by a valid lien on property of the debtor not
included as an asset.

**Source.** 1987, 215:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 545-A:3

 **545-A:3 Value. –**
                                             
 I. Value is given for a transfer or an obligation if, in exchange
for the transfer or obligation, property is transferred or an antecedent
debt is secured or satisfied, but value does not include an unperformed
promise made otherwise than in the ordinary course of the promisor's
business to furnish support to the debtor or another person.
                                             
 II. For the purposes of RSA 545-A:4, I(b) and RSA 545-A:5, a person
gives a reasonably equivalent value if the person acquires an interest
of the debtor in an asset pursuant to a regularly conducted,
noncollusive foreclosure sale or execution of a power of sale for the
acquisition or disposition of the interest of the debtor upon default
under a mortgage, deed of trust, or security agreement.
                                             
 III. A transfer is made for present value if the exchange between
the debtor and the transferee is intended by them to be contemporaneous
and is in fact substantially contemporaneous.

**Source.** 1987, 215:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 545-A:4

 **545-A:4 Transfers Fraudulent as to Present and Future Creditors.
–**
                                             
 I. A transfer made or obligation incurred by a debtor is fraudulent
as to a creditor, whether the creditor's claim arose before or after the
transfer was made or the obligation was incurred, if the debtor made the
transfer or incurred the obligation:
                                             
 (a) With actual intent to hinder, delay, or defraud any creditor
of the debtor; or
                                             
 (b) Without receiving a reasonably equivalent value in exchange
for the transfer or obligation, and the debtor:
                                             
 (1) Was engaged or was about to engage in a business or a
transaction for which the remaining assets of the debtor were
unreasonably small in relation to the business or transaction; or
                                             
 (2) Intended to incur, or believed or reasonably should have
believed that he would incur, debts beyond his ability to pay as they
became due.
                                             
 II. In determining actual intent under subparagraph I(a),
consideration may be given, among other factors, to whether:
                                             
 (a) The transfer or obligation was to an insider;
                                             
 (b) The debtor retained possession or control of the property
transferred after the transfer;
                                             
 (c) The transfer or obligation was disclosed or concealed;
                                             
 (d) Before the transfer was made or obligation was incurred, the
debtor had been sued or threatened with suit;
                                             
 (e) The transfer was of substantially all the debtor's assets;
                                             
 (f) The debtor absconded;
                                             
 (g) The debtor removed or concealed assets;
                                             
 (h) The value of the consideration received by the debtor was
reasonably equivalent to the value of the asset transferred or the
amount of the obligation incurred;
                                             
 (i) The debtor was insolvent or became insolvent shortly after
the transfer was made or the obligation was incurred;
                                             
 (j) The transfer occurred shortly before or after a substantial
debt was incurred; and
                                             
 (k) The debtor transferred the essential assets of the business
to a lienor who transferred the assets to an insider of the debtor.

**Source.** 1987, 215:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 545-A:5

 **545-A:5 Transfers Fraudulent as to Present Creditors. –**
                                             
 I. A transfer made or obligation incurred by a debtor is fraudulent
as to a creditor whose claim arose before the transfer was made or the
obligation was incurred if the debtor made the transfer or incurred the
obligation without receiving a reasonably equivalent value in exchange
for the transfer or obligation and the debtor was insolvent at that time
or the debtor became insolvent as a result of the transfer or
obligation.
                                             
 II. A transfer made by a debtor is fraudulent as to a creditor whose
claim arose before the transfer was made if the transfer was made to an
insider for an antecedent debt, the debtor was insolvent at that time,
and the insider had reasonable cause to believe that the debtor was
insolvent.

**Source.** 1987, 215:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 545-A:6

 **545-A:6 When Transfer is Made or Obligation is Incurred. –** For
the purposes of this chapter:
                                             
 I. A transfer is made:
                                             
 (a) With respect to an asset that is real property other than a
fixture, but including the interest of a seller or purchaser under a
contract for the sale of the asset, when the transfer is so far
perfected that a good-faith purchaser of the asset from the debtor
against whom applicable law permits the transfer to be perfected cannot
acquire an interest in the asset that is superior to the interest of the
transferee; and
                                             
 (b) With respect to an asset that is not real property or that is
a fixture, when the transfer is so far perfected that a creditor on a
simple contract cannot acquire a judicial lien otherwise than under this
chapter that is superior to the interest of the transferee;
                                             
 II. If applicable law permits the transfer to be perfected as
provided in paragraph I and the transfer is not so perfected before the
commencement of an action for relief under this chapter, the transfer is
deemed made immediately before the commencement of the action;
                                             
 III. If applicable law does not permit the transfer to be perfected
as provided in paragraph I, the transfer is made when it becomes
effective between the debtor and the transferee;
                                             
 IV. A transfer is not made until the debtor has acquired rights in
the asset transferred;
                                             
 V. An obligation is incurred:
                                             
 (a) If oral, when it becomes effective between the parties; or
                                             
 (b) If evidenced by a writing, when the writing executed by the
obligor is delivered to or for the benefit of the obligee.

**Source.** 1987, 215:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 545-A:7

 **545-A:7 Remedies of Creditors. –**
                                             
 I. In an action for relief against a transfer or obligation under
this chapter, a creditor, subject to the limitations in RSA 545-A:8, may
obtain:
                                             
 (a) Avoidance of the transfer or obligation to the extent
necessary to satisfy the creditor's claim.
                                             
 (b) An attachment or other provisional remedy against the asset
transferred or other property of the transferee in accordance with the
procedure prescribed by RSA 498:8.
                                             
 (c) Subject to applicable principles of equity and in accordance
with applicable rules of civil procedure:
                                             
 (1) An injunction against further disposition by the debtor or
a transferee, or both, of the asset transferred or of other property;
                                             
 (2) Appointment of a receiver to take charge of the asset
transferred or of other property of the transferee; or
                                             
 (3) Any other relief the circumstances may require.
                                             
 (d) If a creditor has obtained a judgment on a claim against the
debtor, the creditor, if the court so orders, may levy execution on the
asset transferred or its proceeds.

**Source.** 1987, 215:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 545-A:8

 **545-A:8 Defenses, Liability, and Protection of Transferee. –**
                                             
 I. A transfer or obligation is not voidable under RSA 545-A:4, I(a)
against a person who took in good faith and for a reasonably equivalent
value or against any subsequent transferee or obligee.
                                             
 II. Except as otherwise provided in this section, to the extent a
transfer is voidable in an action by a creditor under RSA 545-A:7, I(a),
the creditor may recover judgment for the value of the asset
transferred, as adjusted under paragraph III, or the amount necessary to
satisfy the creditor's claim, whichever is less. The judgment may be
entered against:
                                             
 (a) The first transferee of the asset or the person for whose
benefit the transfer was made; or
                                             
 (b) Any subsequent transferee other than a good faith transferee
who took for value or from any subsequent transferee.
                                             
 III. If the judgment under paragraph II is based upon the value of
the asset transferred, the judgment must be for an amount equal to the
value of the asset at the time of the transfer, subject to adjustment as
the equities may require.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding voidability of a transfer or an obligation under
this chapter, a good-faith transferee or obligee is entitled, to the
extent of the value given the debtor for the transfer or obligation, to
                                             
 (a) A lien on or a right to retain any interest in the asset
transferred;
                                             
 (b) Enforcement of any obligation incurred; or
                                             
 (c) A reduction in the amount of the liability on the judgment.
                                             
 V. A transfer is not voidable under RSA 545-A:4, I(b) or RSA 545-A:5
if the transfer results from:
                                             
 (a) Termination of a lease upon default by the debtor when the
termination is pursuant to the lease and applicable law; or
                                             
 (b) Enforcement of a security interest in compliance with Article
9 of the Uniform Commercial Code.
                                             
 VI. A transfer is not voidable under RSA 545-A:5, II:
                                             
 (a) To the extent the insider gave new value to or for the
benefit of the debtor after the transfer was made unless the new value
was secured by a valid lien;
                                             
 (b) If made in the ordinary course of business or financial
affairs of the debtor and the insider; or
                                             
 (c) If made pursuant to a good-faith effort to rehabilitate the
debtor and the transfer secured present value given for that purpose as
well as an antecedent debt of the debtor.

**Source.** 1987, 215:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 545-A:9

 **545-A:9 Extinguishment of Claim for Relief. –** A claim for relief
with respect to a fraudulent transfer or obligation under this chapter
is extinguished unless action is brought:
                                             
 I. Under RSA 545-A:4, I(a), within 4 years after the transfer was
made or the obligation was incurred or, if later, within one year after
the transfer or obligation was or could reasonably have been discovered
by the claimant;
                                             
 II. Under RSA 545-A:4, I(b) or RSA 545-A:5, I, within 4 years after
the transfer was made or the obligation was incurred; or
                                             
 III. Under RSA 545-A:5, II, within one year after the transfer was
made or the obligation was incurred.

**Source.** 1987, 215:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 545-A:10

 **545-A:10 Supplementary Provisions. –** Unless displaced by the
provisions of this chapter, the principles of law and equity, including
the law merchant and the law relating to principal and agent, estoppel,
laches, fraud, misrepresentation, duress, coercion, mistake, insolvency,
or other validating or invalidating cause, supplement its provisions.

**Source.** 1987, 215:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 545-A:11

 **545-A:11 Uniformity of Application and Construction. –** This
chapter shall be applied and construed to effectuate its general purpose
to make uniform the law with respect to the subject of this chapter
among states enacting it.

**Source.** 1987, 215:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 545-A:12

 **545-A:12 Short Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the Uniform
Fraudulent Transfer Act.

**Source.** 1987, 215:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.
