---
title: 'CHAPTER 546-B UNIFORM INTERSTATE FAMILY SUPPORT ACT'
---

TITLE LV
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN SPECIAL CASES
============================

CHAPTER 546-B
                                             
UNIFORM INTERSTATE FAMILY SUPPORT ACT
-------------------------------------

ARTICLE 1
                                             
GENERAL PROVISIONS
------------------

### Section 546-B:1

 **546-B:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Child'' means an individual, whether over or under the age of
majority, who is or is alleged to be owed a duty of support by the
individual's parent or who is or is alleged to be the beneficiary of a
support order directed to the parent or another obligee.
                                             
 II. "Child support order'' means a support order for a child,
including a child who has attained the age of majority under the law of
the issuing state or foreign country.
                                             
 III. "Convention'' means the Convention on the International
Recovery of Child Support and Other Forms of Family Maintenance,
concluded at The Hague on November 23, 2007.
                                             
 IV. "Duty of support'' means an obligation imposed or imposable by
law to provide support for a child, spouse, or former spouse, including
an unsatisfied obligation to provide support.
                                             
 V. "Foreign country'' means a country, including a political
subdivision thereof, other than the United States, that authorizes the
issuance of support orders and:
                                             
 (a) Which has been declared under the law of the United States to
be a foreign reciprocating country;
                                             
 (b) Which has established a reciprocal arrangement for child
support with this state as provided in RSA 546-B:19;
                                             
 (c) Which has enacted a law or established procedures for the
issuance and enforcement of support orders which are substantially
similar to the procedures under this chapter; or
                                             
 (d) In which the Convention is in force with respect to the
United States.
                                             
 VI. "Foreign support order'' means a support order of a foreign
tribunal.
                                             
 VII. "Foreign tribunal'' means a court, administrative agency, or
quasi-judicial entity of a foreign country which is authorized to
establish, enforce, or modify support orders or to determine parentage
of a child. The term includes a competent authority under the
Convention.
                                             
 VIII. "Home state'' means the state or foreign country in which a
child lived with a parent or a person acting as parent for at least 6
consecutive months immediately preceding the time of the filing of a
petition or comparable pleading for support and, if a child is less than
6 months old, the state or foreign country in which the child lived from
birth with any of them. A period of temporary absence of any of them is
counted as part of the 6-month or other period.
                                             
 IX. "Income'' includes earnings or other periodic entitlements to
money from any source and/or any other property subject to withholding
for support under the law of this state.
                                             
 X. "Income-withholding order'' means an order or other legal
process, or a notice pursuant to RSA 458-B:6 directed to an obligor's
employer, as defined by RSA 458-B:1, V, to withhold support from the
income of the obligor.
                                             
 XI. "Initiating tribunal'' means the tribunal of a state or foreign
country from which a petition or comparable pleading is forwarded or in
which a petition or comparable pleading is filed for forwarding to
another state or foreign country.
                                             
 XII. "Issuing foreign country'' means the foreign country in which a
tribunal issues a support order or a judgment determining parentage of a
child.
                                             
 XIII. "Issuing state'' means the state in which a tribunal issues a
support order or a judgment determining parentage of a child.
                                             
 XIV. "Issuing tribunal'' means the tribunal of a state or foreign
country that issues a support order or a judgment determining parentage
of a child.
                                             
 XV. "Law'' includes decisional and statutory law and rules and
regulations having the force of law.
                                             
 XVI. "Obligee'' means:
                                             
 (a) An individual to whom a duty of support is, or is alleged to
be owed, or in whose favor a support order or a judgment determining
parentage of a child has been issued;
                                             
 (b) A foreign country, state, or political subdivision of a state
to which the rights under a duty of support or support order have been
assigned or which has independent claims based on financial assistance
provided to an individual obligee in place of child support;
                                             
 (c) An individual seeking a judgment determining parentage of the
individual's child; or
                                             
 (d) A person that is a creditor in a proceeding under Article 7.
                                             
 XVII. "Obligor'' means an individual or the estate of a decedent
that:
                                             
 (a) Owes or is alleged to owe a duty of support;
                                             
 (b) Is alleged, but has not been adjudicated, to be a parent of a
child;
                                             
 (c) Is liable under a support order; or
                                             
 (d) Is a debtor in a proceeding under Article 7.
                                             
 XVIII. "Outside this state'' means a location in another state or a
country other than the United States, whether or not the country is a
foreign country.
                                             
 XIX. "Person'' means an individual, corporation, business trust,
estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, association,
joint venture, public corporation, government or governmental
subdivision, agency, or instrumentality, or any other legal or
commercial entity.
                                             
 XX. "Record'' means information that is inscribed on a tangible
medium or that is stored in an electronic or other medium and is
retrievable in perceivable form.
                                             
 XXI. "Register'' means to file in a tribunal of this state a support
order or judgment determining parentage of a child issued in another
state or foreign country.
                                             
 XXII. "Registering tribunal'' means a tribunal in which a support
order or judgment determining parentage of a child is registered.
                                             
 XXIII. "Responding state'' means a state in which a petition or
comparable pleading for support or to determine parentage of a child is
filed or to which a petition or comparable pleading is forwarded for
filing from another state or a foreign country.
                                             
 XXIV. "Responding tribunal'' means the authorized tribunal in a
responding state or foreign country.
                                             
 XXV. "Spousal support order'' means a support order for a spouse or
former spouse of the obligor.
                                             
 XXVI. "State'' means a state of the United States, the District of
Columbia, Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, or any
territory or insular possession subject to the jurisdiction of the
United States. The term includes an Indian nation or tribe.
                                             
 XXVII. "Support enforcement agency'' means a public official or
governmental entity, or private agency authorized to:
                                             
 (a) Seek enforcement of support orders or laws relating to the
duty of support;
                                             
 (b) Seek establishment or modification of child support;
                                             
 (c) Request determination of parentage of a child;
                                             
 (d) Attempt to locate obligors or their assets; or
                                             
 (e) Request determination of the controlling child support
order.
                                             
 XXVIII. "Support order'' means a judgment, decree, order, decision,
or directive, whether temporary, final, or subject to modification,
issued in a state or foreign country for the benefit of a child, a
spouse, or a former spouse, which provides for monetary support, health
care, arrearages, retroactive support, or reimbursement for financial
assistance provided to an individual obligee in place of child support.
The term may include related costs and fees, interest, income
withholding, automatic adjustment, reasonable attorney's fees, and other
relief.
                                             
 XXIX. "Tribunal'' means a court, administrative agency, or
quasi-judicial entity authorized to establish, enforce, or modify
support orders or to determine parentage of a child.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:1-a

 **546-B:1-a State Tribunal and Support Enforcement Agency. –**
                                             
 I. The circuit court, the department of health and human services,
or a combination, are the tribunals of this state.
                                             
 II. The department of health and human services, division of child
support services, is the support enforcement agency of this state.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:2

 **546-B:2 Remedies Cumulative. –**
                                             
 I. Remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and do not
affect the availability of remedies under other law, or the recognition
of a support order, on the basis of comity.
                                             
 II. This chapter does not:
                                             
 (a) Provide the exclusive method of establishing or enforcing a
support order under the law of this state; or
                                             
 (b) Grant a tribunal of this state jurisdiction to render
judgment or issue an order relating to child custody or parenting time
in a proceeding under this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:2-a

 **546-B:2-a Application of Chapter to Resident of Foreign Country
and Foreign Support Proceeding. –**
                                             
 I. A tribunal of this state shall apply Articles 1 through 6 and, as
applicable, Article 7, to a support proceeding involving:
                                             
 (a) A foreign support order;
                                             
 (b) A foreign tribunal; or
                                             
 (c) An obligee, obligor, or child residing in a foreign country.
                                             
 II. A tribunal of this state that is requested to recognize and
enforce a support order on the basis of comity may apply the procedural
and substantive provisions of Articles 1 through 6.
                                             
 III. Article 7 applies only to a support proceeding under the
Convention. In such a proceeding, if a provision of Article 7 is
inconsistent with Articles 1 through 6, Article 7 controls.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

ARTICLE 2
                                             
JURISDICTION
------------

### Section 546-B:3

 **546-B:3 Bases for Jurisdiction Over Nonresident. –**
                                             
 I. In a proceeding to establish or enforce a support order or to
determine parentage of a child, a tribunal of this state may exercise
personal jurisdiction over a nonresident individual or the individual's
guardian or conservator if:
                                             
 (a) The individual is personally served with notice within this
state;
                                             
 (b) The individual submits to the jurisdiction of this state by
consent in a record, by entering a general appearance, or by filing a
responsive document having the effect of waiving any contest to personal
jurisdiction;
                                             
 (c) The individual resided with the child in this state;
                                             
 (d) The individual resided in this state and provided prenatal
expenses or support for the child;
                                             
 (e) The child resides in this state as a result of the acts or
directives of the individual;
                                             
 (f) The individual engaged in sexual intercourse in this state
and the child may have been conceived by that act of intercourse;
                                             
 (g) The individual asserted parentage of a child in the putative
father registry maintained in this state by the department of health and
human services; or
                                             
 (h) There is any other basis consistent with the constitutions of
this state and the United States for the exercise of personal
jurisdiction.
                                             
 II. The bases of personal jurisdiction set forth in paragraph I or
in any other law of this state may not be used to acquire personal
jurisdiction for a tribunal of this state to modify a child support
order of another state unless the requirements of RSA 546-B:49 are met,
or in the case of a foreign support order, unless the requirement of
546-B:52-a are met.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:4

 **546-B:4 Duration of Personal Jurisdiction. –** Personal
jurisdiction acquired by a tribunal of this state in a proceeding under
this chapter or other law of this state relating to a support order
continues as long as a tribunal of this state has continuing exclusive
jurisdiction to modify its order or continuing jurisdiction to enforce
its order as provided by RSA 546-B:7, RSA 546-B:8, and RSA 546-B:11-b.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:5

 **546-B:5 Initiating and Responding Tribunal of This State. –**
Under this chapter, a tribunal of this state may serve as an initiating
tribunal to forward proceedings to a tribunal of another state, and as a
responding tribunal for proceedings initiated in another state or a
foreign country.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:6

 **546-B:6 Simultaneous Proceedings. –**
                                             
 I. A tribunal of this state may exercise jurisdiction to establish a
support order if the petition or comparable pleading is filed after a
petition or comparable pleading is filed in another state or a foreign
country only if:
                                             
 (a) The petition or comparable pleading in this state is filed
before the expiration of the time allowed in the other state or the
foreign country for filing a responsive pleading challenging the
exercise of jurisdiction by the other state or the foreign country;
                                             
 (b) The contesting party timely challenges the exercise of
jurisdiction in the other state or foreign country; and
                                             
 (c) If relevant, this state is the home state of the child.
                                             
 II. A tribunal of this state may not exercise jurisdiction to
establish a support order if the petition or comparable pleading is
filed before a petition or comparable pleading is filed in another state
or foreign country if:
                                             
 (a) The petition or comparable pleading in the other state or
foreign country is filed before the expiration of the time allowed in
this state for filing a responsive pleading challenging the exercise of
jurisdiction by this state;
                                             
 (b) The contesting party timely challenges the exercise of
jurisdiction in this state; and
                                             
 (c) If relevant, the other state or foreign country is the home
state of the child.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:7

 **546-B:7 Continuing, Exclusive Jurisdiction To Modify Child Support
Order. –**
                                             
 I. A tribunal of this state that has issued a support order
consistent with the law of this state has and shall exercise continuing,
exclusive jurisdiction to modify its child support order if the order is
the controlling order and:
                                             
 (a) At the time of the filing of a request for modification this
state is the residence of the obligor, the individual obligee, or the
child for whose benefit the support order is issued; or
                                             
 (b) Even if this state is not the residence of the obligor, the
individual obligee, or the child for whose benefit the support order is
issued, the parties consent in a record or in open court that the
tribunal of this state may continue to exercise jurisdiction to modify
its order.
                                             
 II. A tribunal of this state that has issued a child support order
consistent with the law of this state may not exercise continuing
exclusive jurisdiction to modify the order if:
                                             
 (a) All of the parties who are individuals file consent in a
record with the tribunal of this state that a tribunal of another state
that has jurisdiction over at least one of the parties who is an
individual or that is located in the state of residence of the child may
modify the order and assume continuing, exclusive jurisdiction; or
                                             
 (b) Its order is not the controlling order.
                                             
 III. If a tribunal of another state has issued a child support order
pursuant to the Uniform Interstate Family Support Act or a law
substantially similar to that act, which modifies a child support order
of a tribunal of this state, tribunals of this state shall recognize the
continuing, exclusive jurisdiction of the tribunal of the other state.
                                             
 IV. A tribunal of this state that lacks continuing, exclusive
jurisdiction to modify a child support order may serve as an initiating
tribunal to request a tribunal of another state to modify a support
order issued in that state.
                                             
 V. A temporary support order issued ex parte or pending resolution
of a jurisdictional conflict does not create continuing, exclusive
jurisdiction in the issuing tribunal.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:8

 **546-B:8 Continuing Jurisdiction to Enforce Child Support Order.
–**
                                             
 I. A tribunal of this state that has issued a child support order
consistent with the law of this state may serve as an initiating
tribunal to request a tribunal of another state to enforce:
                                             
 (a) The order if the order is the controlling order and has not
been modified by a tribunal of another state that assumed jurisdiction
pursuant to the Uniform Interstate Family Support Act; or
                                             
 (b) A money judgment for arrears of support and interest on the
order accrued before a determination that an order of a tribunal of
another state is the controlling order.
                                             
 II. A tribunal of this state having continuing jurisdiction over a
support order may act as a responding tribunal to enforce the order.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:9

 **546-B:9 Determination of Controlling Child Support Order. –**
                                             
 I. If a proceeding is brought under this chapter, and only one
tribunal has issued a child support order, the order of that tribunal
controls and must be so recognized.
                                             
 II. If a proceeding is brought under this chapter, and 2 or more
child support orders have been issued by tribunals of this state,
another state, or a foreign country with regard to the same obligor and
same child, a tribunal of this state having personal jurisdiction over
both the obligor and individual obligee shall apply the following rules
and by order shall determine which order controls and must be
recognized:
                                             
 (a) If only one of the tribunals would have continuing, exclusive
jurisdiction under this chapter, the order of that tribunal controls.
                                             
 (b) If more than one of the tribunals would have continuing,
exclusive jurisdiction under this chapter:
                                             
 (1) An order issued by a tribunal in the current home state of
the child controls; or
                                             
 (2) If an order has not been issued in the current home state
of the child, the order most recently issued controls.
                                             
 (c) If none of the tribunals would have continuing, exclusive
jurisdiction under this chapter, the tribunal of this state shall issue
a child support order, which controls.
                                             
 III. If 2 or more child support orders have been issued for the same
obligor and same child, upon request of a party who is an individual or
that is a support enforcement agency, a tribunal of this state having
personal jurisdiction over both the obligor and the obligee who is an
individual shall determine which order controls under paragraph II. The
request may be filed with a registration for enforcement or registration
for modification pursuant to Article 6, or may be filed as a separate
proceeding.
                                             
 IV. A request to determine which is the controlling order must be
accompanied by a copy of every child support order in effect and the
applicable record of payments. The requesting party shall give notice of
the request to each party whose rights may be affected by the
determination.
                                             
 V. The tribunal that issued the controlling order under paragraph I,
II, or III has continuing jurisdiction to the extent provided in RSA
546-B:7 or RSA 546-B:8.
                                             
 VI. A tribunal of this state that determines by order which is the
controlling order under subparagraph II(a) or (b), or paragraph III, or
that issues a new controlling order under subparagraph II(c) shall state
in that order:
                                             
 (a) The basis upon which the tribunal made its determination;
                                             
 (b) The amount of prospective support, if any; and
                                             
 (c) The total amount of consolidated arrears and accrued
interest, if any, under all of the orders after all payments made are
credited as provided by RSA 546-B:11.
                                             
 VII. Within 30 days after issuance of the order determining which is
the controlling order, the party obtaining the order shall file a
certified copy of it in each tribunal that issued or registered an
earlier order of child support. A party or support enforcement agency
obtaining the order that fails to file a certified copy is subject to
appropriate sanctions by a tribunal in which the issue of failure to
file arises. The failure to file does not affect the validity or
enforceability of the controlling order.
                                             
 VIII. An order that has been determined to be the controlling order,
or a judgment for consolidated arrears of support or interest, if any,
made pursuant to this section must be recognized in proceedings under
this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:10

 **546-B:10 Child Support Orders for 2 or More Obligees. –** In
responding to registrations or petitions for enforcement of 2 or more
child support orders in effect at the same time with regard to the same
obligor and different individual obligees, at least one of which was
issued by a tribunal of another state or a foreign country, a tribunal
of this state shall enforce those orders in the same manner as if the
orders had been issued by a tribunal of this state.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:11

 **546-B:11 Credit for Payments. –** A tribunal of this state shall
credit amounts collected for a particular period pursuant to any child
support order against the amounts owed for the same period under any
other child support order for support of the same child issued by a
tribunal of this state, another state, or a foreign country.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:11-a

 **546-B:11-a Application of This Chapter to Nonresident Subject to
Personal Jurisdiction. –** A tribunal of this state exercising personal
jurisdiction over a nonresident in a proceeding under this chapter,
under other law of this state relating to a support order, or
recognizing a foreign support order may receive evidence from outside
this state pursuant to RSA 546-B:27, communicate with a tribunal outside
this state pursuant to RSA 546-B:28, and obtain discovery through a
tribunal outside this state pursuant to RSA 546-B:29. In all other
respects, Articles 3 through 6 do not apply, and the tribunal shall
apply the procedural and substantive law of this state.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:11-b

 **546-B:11-b Continuing, Exclusive Jurisdiction to Modify Spousal
Support Order. –**
                                             
 I. A tribunal of this state issuing a spousal support order
consistent with the law of this state has continuing, exclusive
jurisdiction to modify the spousal support order throughout the
existence of the support obligation.
                                             
 II. A tribunal of this state may not modify a spousal support order
issued by a tribunal of another state or a foreign country having
continuing, exclusive jurisdiction over that order under the law of that
state or foreign country.
                                             
 III. A tribunal of this state that has continuing, exclusive
jurisdiction over a spousal support order may serve as:
                                             
 (a) An initiating tribunal to request a tribunal of another state
to enforce the spousal support order issued in this state; or
                                             
 (b) A responding tribunal to enforce or modify its own spousal
support order.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

ARTICLE 3
                                             
CIVIL PROVISIONS OF GENERAL APPLICATION
---------------------------------------

### Section 546-B:12

 **546-B:12 Proceedings Under This Chapter. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this article
applies to all proceedings under this chapter.
                                             
 II. An individual petitioner or a support enforcement agency may
initiate a proceeding authorized under this chapter by filing a petition
in an initiating tribunal for forwarding to a responding tribunal or by
filing a petition or a comparable pleading directly in a tribunal of
another state or foreign country which has or can obtain personal
jurisdiction over the respondent.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:13

 **546-B:13 Proceeding by Minor Parent. –** A minor parent, or a
guardian or other legal representative of a minor parent, may maintain a
proceeding on behalf of or for the benefit of the minor's child.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:14

 **546-B:14 Application of Law of This State. –** Except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, a responding tribunal of this state shall:
                                             
 I. Apply the procedural and substantive law, generally applicable to
similar proceedings originating in this state and may exercise all
powers and provide all remedies available in those proceedings; and
                                             
 II. Determine the duty of support and the amount payable in
accordance with the law and support guidelines of this state.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:15

 **546-B:15 Duties of Initiating Tribunal. –**
                                             
 I. Upon the filing of a petition authorized by this chapter, an
initiating tribunal of this state shall forward the petition and its
accompanying documents:
                                             
 (a) To the responding tribunal or appropriate support enforcement
agency in the responding state; or
                                             
 (b) If the identity of the responding tribunal is unknown, to the
state information agency of the responding state with a request that
they be forwarded to the appropriate tribunal and that receipt be
acknowledged.
                                             
 II. If requested by the responding tribunal, a tribunal of this
state shall issue a certificate or other documents and make findings
required by the law of the responding state. If the responding tribunal
is in a foreign country, upon request the tribunal of this state shall
specify the amount of support sought, convert that amount into the
equivalent amount in the foreign currency under applicable official or
market exchange rate as publicly reported, and provide any other
documents necessary to satisfy the requirements of the responding
foreign tribunal.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:16

 **546-B:16 Duties and Powers of Responding Tribunal. –**
                                             
 I. When a responding tribunal of this state receives a petition or
comparable pleading from an initiating tribunal or directly pursuant to
RSA 546-B:12, II, it shall cause the petition or pleading to be filed
and notify the petitioner where and when it was filed.
                                             
 II. A responding tribunal of this state, to the extent not
prohibited by other law, may do one or more of the following:
                                             
 (a) Issue or enforce a support order, modify a child support
order, determine the controlling child support order, or determine
parentage;
                                             
 (b) Order an obligor to comply with a support order, specifying
the amount and the manner of compliance;
                                             
 (c) Order income withholding;
                                             
 (d) Determine the amount of any arrearages, and specify a method
of payment;
                                             
 (e) Enforce orders by civil or criminal contempt, or both;
                                             
 (f) Set aside property for satisfaction of the support order;
                                             
 (g) Place liens and order execution on the obligor's property;
                                             
 (h) Order an obligor to keep the tribunal informed of the
obligor's current residential address, telephone number, employer,
address of employment, and telephone number at the place of employment;
                                             
 (i) Issue a capias for an obligor who has failed after proper
notice to appear at a hearing ordered by the tribunal and enter the
capias in any local and state computer systems for criminal warrants;
                                             
 (j) Order the obligor to seek appropriate employment by specified
methods;
                                             
 (k) Award reasonable attorney's fees and other fees and costs;
or
                                             
 (l) Grant any other available remedy.
                                             
 III. A responding tribunal of this state shall include in a support
order issued under this chapter, or in the documents accompanying the
order, the calculations on which the support order is based.
                                             
 IV. A responding tribunal of this state may not condition the
payment of a support order issued under this chapter upon compliance by
a party with provisions for visitation.
                                             
 V. If a responding tribunal of this state issues an order under this
chapter, the tribunal shall send a copy of the order to the petitioner
and the respondent and to the initiating tribunal, if any.
                                             
 VI. If requested to enforce a support order, arrears, or judgment or
modify a support order stated in a foreign currency, a responding
tribunal of this state shall convert the amount stated in the foreign
currency to the equivalent amount in dollars under the applicable
official or market exchange rate as publicly reported.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:17

 **546-B:17 Inappropriate Tribunal. –** If a petition or comparable
pleading is received by an inappropriate tribunal of this state, the
tribunal shall forward the pleading and accompanying documents to an
appropriate tribunal in this state or another state and notify the
petitioner where and when the pleading was sent.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:18

 **546-B:18 Duties of Support Enforcement Agency. –**
                                             
 I. In a proceeding under this chapter, a support enforcement agency
of this state, upon request:
                                             
 (a) Shall provide services to a petitioner residing in a state;
                                             
 (b) Shall provide services to a petitioner requesting services
through a central authority of a foreign country as described in RSA
546-B:1, V(a) or (d); and
                                             
 (c) May provide services to a petitioner who is an individual not
residing in a state.
                                             
 II. A support enforcement agency of this state that is providing
services to the petitioner shall:
                                             
 (a) Take all steps necessary to enable an appropriate tribunal of
this state, another state, or a foreign country to obtain jurisdiction
over the respondent;
                                             
 (b) Request an appropriate tribunal to set a date, time, and
place for a hearing;
                                             
 (c) Make a reasonable effort to obtain all relevant information,
including information as to income and property of the parties;
                                             
 (d) Within 10 days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays, after receipt of notice in a record from an initiating,
responding, or registering tribunal, send a copy of the notice to the
petitioner;
                                             
 (e) Within 10 days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays, after receipt of communication in a record from the respondent
or the respondent's attorney, send a copy of the communication to the
petitioner; and
                                             
 (f) Notify the petitioner if jurisdiction over the respondent
cannot be obtained.
                                             
 III. A support enforcement agency of this state that requests
registration of a child support order in this state for enforcement or
for modification shall make reasonable efforts:
                                             
 (a) To ensure that the order to be registered is the controlling
order; or
                                             
 (b) If 2 or more child support orders exist and the identity of
the controlling order has not been determined, to ensure that a request
for such a determination is made in a tribunal having jurisdiction to do
so.
                                             
 IV. A support enforcement agency of this state that requests
registration and enforcement of a support order, arrears, or judgment
stated in a foreign currency shall convert the amounts stated in the
foreign currency into the amounts in dollars under the applicable
official or market exchange rate as publicly reported.
                                             
 V. A support enforcement agency of this state shall issue or request
a tribunal of this state to issue a child support order and an income
withholding order that redirect payment of current support, arrears, and
interest if requested to do so by a support enforcement agency of
another state pursuant to RSA 546-B:30.
                                             
 VI. This chapter does not create or negate a relationship of
attorney and client or other fiduciary relationship between a support
enforcement agency or the attorney for the agency and the individual
being assisted by the agency.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:19

 **546-B:19 Duty of Attorney General. –**
                                             
 I. If the attorney general determines that the support enforcement
agency is neglecting or refusing to provide services to an individual,
the attorney general may order the agency to perform its duties under
this chapter or may provide those services directly to the individual.
                                             
 II. The department of health and human services, division of child
support services, may determine that a foreign country or political
subdivision has established a reciprocal arrangement for child support
with this state and take appropriate action for notification of the
determination.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:20

 **546-B:20 Private Counsel. –** An individual may employ private
counsel to represent the individual in proceedings authorized by this
chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:21

 **546-B:21 Duties of State Information Agency. –**
                                             
 I. The department of health and human services, division of child
support services is the state information agency under this chapter.
                                             
 II. The state information agency shall:
                                             
 (a) Compile and maintain a current list, including addresses, of
the tribunals in this state which have jurisdiction under this chapter
and any support enforcement agencies in this state and transmit a copy
to the state information agency of every other state;
                                             
 (b) Maintain a register of names and addresses of tribunals and
support enforcement agencies of other states;
                                             
 (c) Forward to the appropriate tribunal in the county in this
state in which the obligee who is an individual or the obligor resides,
or in which the obligor's property is believed to be located, all
documents concerning a proceeding under this chapter received from
another state or a foreign country; and
                                             
 (d) Obtain information concerning the location of the obligor and
the obligor's property within this state not exempt from execution, by
such means as postal verification and federal or state locator services,
examination of telephone directories, requests for the obligor's address
from employers, and examination of governmental records including, to
the extent not prohibited by other law, those relating to real property,
vital statistics, law enforcement, taxation, motor vehicles, driver's
licenses, and social security.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:22

 **546-B:22 Pleadings and Accompanying Documents. –**
                                             
 I. In a proceeding under this chapter, a petitioner seeking to
establish a support order, or to determine parentage of a child, or to
register and modify a support order of a tribunal of another state or a
foreign country must file a petition. Unless otherwise ordered under RSA
546-B:23, the petition or accompanying documents shall provide, so far
as known, the name, residential address, and social security numbers of
the obligor and the obligee or the parent and alleged parent, and the
name, sex, residential address, social security number, and date of
birth of each child for whose benefit support is sought or whose
parentage is to be determined. Unless filed at the time of registration,
the petition shall be accompanied by a copy of any support order known
to have been issued by another tribunal. The petition may include any
other information that may assist in locating or identifying the
respondent.
                                             
 II. The petition shall specify the relief sought. The petition and
accompanying documents shall conform substantially with the requirements
imposed by the forms mandated by federal law for use in cases filed by a
support enforcement agency.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:23

 **546-B:23 Nondisclosure of Information in Exceptional
Circumstances. –** If a party alleges in an affidavit or a pleading
under oath that the health, safety, or liberty of a party or child would
be jeopardized by disclosure of specific identifying information, that
information must be sealed and may not be disclosed to the other party
or the public. After a hearing in which a tribunal takes into
consideration the health, safety, or liberty of the party or child, the
tribunal may order disclosure of information that the tribunal
determines to be in the interest of justice.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:24

 **546-B:24 Costs and Fees. –**
                                             
 I. The petitioner may not be required to pay a filing fee or other
costs.
                                             
 II. If an obligee prevails, a responding tribunal of this state may
assess against an obligor filing fees, reasonable attorney's fees, other
costs, and necessary travel and other reasonable expenses incurred by
the obligee and the obligee's witnesses. The tribunal may not assess
fees, costs, or expenses against the obligee or the support enforcement
agency of either the initiating or the responding state or foreign
country, except as provided by other law. Attorney's fees may be taxed
as costs, and may be ordered paid directly to the attorney, who may
enforce the order in the attorney's own name. Payment of support owed to
the obligee has priority over fees, costs, and expenses.
                                             
 III. The tribunal shall order the payment of costs and reasonable
attorney's fees if it determines that a hearing was requested primarily
for delay. In a proceeding under Article 6, a hearing is presumed to
have been requested primarily for delay if a registered support order is
confirmed or enforced without change.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:25

 **546-B:25 Limited Immunity of Petitioner. –**
                                             
 I. Participation by a petitioner in a proceeding under this chapter
before a responding tribunal, whether in person, by private attorney, or
through services provided by the support enforcement agency, does not
confer personal jurisdiction over the petitioner in another proceeding.
                                             
 II. A petitioner is not amenable to service of civil process while
physically present in this state to participate in a proceeding under
this chapter.
                                             
 III. The immunity granted by this section does not extend to civil
litigation based on acts unrelated to a proceeding under this chapter
committed by a party while present in this state to participate in the
proceeding.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:26

 **546-B:26 Nonparentage as Defense. –** A party whose parentage of a
child has been previously determined by or pursuant to law may not plead
nonparentage as a defense to a proceeding under this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:27

 **546-B:27 Special Rules of Evidence and Procedure. –**
                                             
 I. The physical presence of a nonresident party who is an individual
in a tribunal of this state is not required for the establishment,
enforcement, or modification of a support order or the rendition of a
judgment determining parentage of a child.
                                             
 II. An affidavit, a document substantially complying with federally
mandated forms, or a document incorporated by reference in any of them,
which would not be excluded under the hearsay rule if given in person,
is admissible in evidence if given under penalty of perjury by a party
or witness residing outside this state.
                                             
 III. A copy of the record of child support payments certified as a
true copy of the original by the custodian of the record may be
forwarded to a responding tribunal. The copy is evidence of facts
asserted in it, and is admissible to show whether payments were made.
                                             
 IV. Copies of bills for testing for parentage of a child, and for
prenatal and postnatal health care of the mother and child, furnished to
the adverse party at least 10 days before trial, are admissible in
evidence to prove the amount of the charges billed and that the charges
were reasonable, necessary, and customary.
                                             
 V. Documentary evidence transmitted from outside this state to a
tribunal of this state by telephone, telecopier, or other electronic
means that do not provide an original may not be excluded from evidence
on an objection based on the means of transmission.
                                             
 VI. In a proceeding under this chapter, a tribunal of this state
shall permit a party or witness residing outside this state to be
deposed or to testify by telephone, audiovisual means, or other
electronic means at a designated tribunal or other location. A tribunal
of this state shall cooperate with other tribunals in designating an
appropriate location for the deposition or testimony.
                                             
 VII. If a party called to testify at a civil hearing refuses to
answer on the ground that the testimony may be self-incriminating, the
trier of fact may draw an adverse inference from the refusal.
                                             
 VIII. A privilege against disclosure of communications between
spouses does not apply in a proceeding under this chapter.
                                             
 IX. The defense of immunity based on the relationship of husband and
wife or parent and child does not apply in a proceeding under this
chapter.
                                             
 X. A voluntary acknowledgment of paternity, certified as a true
copy, is admissible to establish parentage of the child.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:28

 **546-B:28 Communications Between Tribunals. –** A tribunal of this
state may communicate with a tribunal outside this state in a record, or
by telephone, electronic mail, or other means, to obtain information
concerning the laws, the legal effect of a judgment, decree, or order of
that tribunal, and the status of a proceeding. A tribunal of this state
may furnish similar information by similar means to a tribunal outside
this state.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:29

 **546-B:29 Assistance With Discovery. –** A tribunal of this state
may:
                                             
 I. Request a tribunal outside this state to assist in obtaining
discovery.
                                             
 II. Upon request, compel a person over which it has jurisdiction to
respond to a discovery order issued by a tribunal outside this state.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:30

 **546-B:30 Receipt and Disbursement of Payments. –**
                                             
 I. A support enforcement agency or other tribunal of this state
shall disburse promptly any amounts received pursuant to a support
order, as directed by the order. The agency or tribunal shall furnish to
a requesting party or tribunal of another state or a foreign country a
certified statement by the custodian of the record of the amounts and
dates of all payments received.
                                             
 II. If neither the obligor, nor the obligee who is an individual,
nor the child resides in this state, upon request from the support
enforcement agency of this state or another state, the department of
health and human services or a tribunal of this state shall:
                                             
 (a) Direct that the support payment be made to the support
enforcement agency in the state in which the obligee is receiving
services; and
                                             
 (b) Issue and send to the obligor's employer a conforming income
withholding order or an administrative notice of change of payee,
reflecting the redirected payments.
                                             
 III. The support enforcement agency of this state receiving
redirected payments from another state pursuant to a law similar to
paragraph II shall furnish to a requesting party or tribunal of the
other state a certified statement by the custodian of the record of the
amount and dates of all payments received.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

ARTICLE 4
                                             
ESTABLISHMENT OF SUPPORT ORDER OR DETERMINATION OF PARENTAGE
------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 546-B:31

 **546-B:31 Establishment of Support Order. –**
                                             
 I. If a support order entitled to recognition under this chapter has
not been issued, a responding tribunal of this state with personal
jurisdiction over the parties may issue a support order if:
                                             
 (a) The individual seeking the order resides outside this state;
or
                                             
 (b) The support enforcement agency seeking the order is located
outside this state.
                                             
 II. The tribunal may issue a temporary child support order if the
tribunal determines that such an order is appropriate and the individual
ordered to pay is:
                                             
 (a) A presumed father of the child;
                                             
 (b) Petitioning to have his paternity adjudicated;
                                             
 (c) Identified as the father of the child through genetic
testing;
                                             
 (d) An alleged father who has declined to submit to genetic
testing;
                                             
 (e) Shown by clear and convincing evidence to be the father of
the child;
                                             
 (f) An acknowledged father as provided by New Hampshire law;
                                             
 (g) The mother of the child; or
                                             
 (h) An individual who has been ordered to pay child support in a
previous proceeding and the order has not been reversed or vacated.
                                             
 III. Upon finding, after notice and opportunity to be heard, that an
obligor owes a duty of support, the tribunal shall issue a support order
directed to the obligor and may issue other orders pursuant to RSA
546-B:16.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:31-a

 **546-B:31-a Proceeding to Determine Parentage. –** A tribunal of
this state authorized to determine parentage of a child may serve as a
responding tribunal in a proceeding to determine parentage of a child
brought under this chapter or a law or procedure substantially similar
to this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

ARTICLE 5
                                             
ENFORCEMENT OF SUPPORT ORDER WITHOUT REGISTRATION
-------------------------------------------------

### Section 546-B:32

 **546-B:32 Employer's Receipt of Income-Withholding Order of Another
State. –** An income-withholding order issued in another state may be
sent by or on behalf of the obligee, or by the support enforcement
agency, to the person defined as the obligor's employer, under RSA
458-B, without first filing a petition or comparable pleading or
registering the order with a tribunal of this state.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:33

 **546-B:33 Employer's Compliance With Income-Withholding Order of
Another State. –**
                                             
 I. Upon receipt of an income-withholding order, the obligor's
employer shall immediately provide a copy of the order to the obligor.
                                             
 II. The employer shall treat an income-withholding order issued in
another state which appears regular on its face as if it had been issued
by a tribunal of this state.
                                             
 III. Except as otherwise provided by paragraph IV and RSA 546-B:34,
the employer shall withhold and distribute the funds as directed in the
withholding order by complying with the terms of the order which
specify:
                                             
 (a) The duration and the amount of periodic payments of current
child support, stated as a sum certain;
                                             
 (b) The person designated to receive payments and the address to
which the payments are to be forwarded;
                                             
 (c) Medical support, whether in the form of periodic cash
payment, stated as a sum certain, or ordering the obligor to provide
health insurance coverage for the child under a policy available through
the obligor's employment;
                                             
 (d) The amount of periodic payments of fees and costs for a
support enforcement agency, the issuing tribunal, and the obligee's
attorney, stated as sums certain; and
                                             
 (e) The amount of periodic payments of arrearages and interest on
arrearages, stated as sums certain.
                                             
 IV. The employer shall comply with the law of the state of the
obligor's principal place of employment for withholding from income with
respect to:
                                             
 (a) The employer's fee for processing an income-withholding
order;
                                             
 (b) The maximum amount permitted to be withheld from the
obligor's income;
                                             
 (c) The time periods within which the employer must implement the
withholding order and forward the child support payment.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:34

 **546-B:34 Employer's Compliance With 2 or More Income-Withholding
Orders. –** If the obligor's employer receives 2 or more
income-withholding orders with respect to the earnings of the same
obligor, the employer satisfies the terms of the orders if the employer
complies with the law of the state of the obligor's principal place of
employment to establish the priorities for withholding and allocating
income withheld for 2 or more child support obligees.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:35

 **546-B:35 Immunity From Civil Liability. –** An employer who
complies with an income-withholding order issued in another state in
accordance with this article is not subject to civil liability to an
individual or agency with regard to the employer's withholding child
support from the obligor's income.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:36

 **546-B:36 Penalties for Noncompliance. –** An employer that
willfully fails to comply with an income-withholding order issued in
another state and received for enforcement is subject to the same
penalties that may be imposed for noncompliance with an order issued by
a tribunal of this state.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:37

 **546-B:37 Contest by Obligor. –**
                                             
 I. An obligor may contest the validity of enforcement of an
income-withholding order issued in another state and received directly
by an employer in this state by registering the order in a tribunal of
this state and filing a contest to that order as provided in Article 6,
or otherwise contesting the order in the same manner as if the order had
been issued by a tribunal of this state.
                                             
 II. The obligor shall give notice of the contest to:
                                             
 (a) A support enforcement agency providing services to the
obligee;
                                             
 (b) Each employer which has directly received an
income-withholding order relating to the obligor; and
                                             
 (c) The person designated to receive payments in the
income-withholding order; or if no person is designated, to the obligee.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:38

 **546-B:38 Administrative Enforcement of Orders. –**
                                             
 I. A party or support enforcement agency seeking to enforce a
support order or an income-withholding order, or both, issued in another
state or a foreign support order may send the documents required for
registering the order to a support enforcement agency of this state.
                                             
 II. Upon receipt of the documents, the support enforcement agency,
without initially seeking to register the order, shall consider and, if
appropriate, use any administrative procedure authorized by the law of
this state to enforce a support order or an income-withholding order, or
both. If the obligor does not contest administrative enforcement, the
order need not be registered. If the obligor contests the validity or
administrative enforcement of the order, the support enforcement agency
shall register the order pursuant to this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

ARTICLE 6
                                             
REGISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND MODIFICATION OF SUPPORT ORDER
------------------------------------------------------------

Part 1
                                             
Registration for Enforcement of Support Order
---------------------------------------------

### Section 546-B:39

 **546-B:39 Registration of Order for Enforcement. –** A support
order or income-withholding order issued in another state or a foreign
support order may be registered in this state for enforcement.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:40

 **546-B:40 Procedure to Register Order for Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in RSA 546-B:53-e, a support order or
income-withholding order of another state or a foreign support order may
be registered in this state by sending the following records to the
appropriate tribunal in this state:
                                             
 (a) A letter of transmittal to the tribunal requesting
registration and enforcement;
                                             
 (b) Two copies, including one certified copy, of the order to be
registered, including any modification of the order;
                                             
 (c) A sworn statement by the person requesting registration or a
certified statement by the custodian of the records showing the amount
of any arrearage;
                                             
 (d) The name of the obligor and, if known:
                                             
 (1) The obligor's address and social security number;
                                             
 (2) The name and address of the obligor's employer and any
other source of income of the obligor; and
                                             
 (3) A description and the location of property of the obligor
in this state not exempt from execution; and
                                             
 (e) Except as otherwise provided in RSA 546-B:23, the name and
address of the obligee and, if applicable, the person to whom support
payments are to be remitted.
                                             
 II. On receipt of a request for registration, the registering
tribunal shall cause the order to be filed as an order of a tribunal of
another state or a foreign country, together with one copy of the
documents and information, regardless of their form.
                                             
 III. A petition or comparable pleading seeking a remedy that must be
affirmatively sought under other law of this state may be filed at the
same time as the request for registration or later. The pleading must
specify the grounds for the remedy sought.
                                             
 IV. If 2 or more orders are in effect, the person requesting
registration shall:
                                             
 (a) Furnish to the tribunal a copy of every support order
asserted to be in effect in addition to the documents specified in this
section;
                                             
 (b) Specify the order alleged to be the controlling order, if
any; and
                                             
 (c) Specify the amount of consolidated arrears, if any.
                                             
 V. A request for a determination of which is the controlling order
may be filed separately or with a request for registration and
enforcement or for registration and modification. The person requesting
registration shall give notice of the request to each party whose rights
may be affected by the determination.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:41

 **546-B:41 Effect of Registration for Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. A support order or income-withholding order issued in another
state or a foreign support order is registered when the order is filed
in the registering tribunal of this state.
                                             
 II. A registered support order issued in another state or a foreign
country is enforceable in the same manner and is subject to the same
procedures as an order issued by a tribunal of this state.
                                             
 III. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a tribunal of
this state shall recognize and enforce, but may not modify, a registered
support order if the issuing tribunal had jurisdiction.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:42

 **546-B:42 Choice of Law. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph IV, the law of the
issuing state or foreign country governs:
                                             
 (a) The nature, extent, amount, and duration of current payments
under a registered support order;
                                             
 (b) The computation and payment of arrearages and accrual of
interest on the arrearages under the support order; and
                                             
 (c) The existence and satisfaction of other obligations under the
support order.
                                             
 II. In a proceeding for arrears under a registered support order,
the statute of limitation of this state or of the issuing state or
foreign country, whichever is longer, applies.
                                             
 III. A responding tribunal of this state shall apply the procedures
and remedies of this state to enforce current child support and collect
arrears and interest due on a support order of another state or a
foreign country registered in this state.
                                             
 IV. After a tribunal of this state or another state determines which
is the controlling order and issues an order consolidating arrears, if
any, a tribunal of this state shall prospectively apply the law of the
state or foreign country issuing the controlling order, including its
law on interest on arrears, on current and future support, and on
consolidated arrears.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

Part 2
                                             
Contest of Validity or Enforcement
----------------------------------

### Section 546-B:43

 **546-B:43 Notice of Registration of Order. –**
                                             
 I. When a support order or income-withholding order issued in
another state or a foreign support order is registered, the registering
tribunal of this state shall notify the nonregistering party. The notice
must be accompanied by a copy of the registered order and the documents
and relevant information accompanying the order.
                                             
 II. A notice must inform the nonregistering party:
                                             
 (a) That a registered order is enforceable as of the date of
registration in the same manner as an order issued by a tribunal of this
state;
                                             
 (b) That a hearing to contest the validity or enforcement of the
registered order must be requested within 20 days after notice unless
the registered order is under RSA 546-B:53-f;
                                             
 (c) That failure to contest the validity or enforcement of the
registered order in a timely manner will result in confirmation of the
order and enforcement of the order and the alleged arrearages; and
                                             
 (d) Of the amount of any alleged arrearages.
                                             
 III. If the registering party asserts that 2 or more orders are in
effect, a notice must also:
                                             
 (a) Identify the 2 or more orders and the order alleged by the
registering party to be the controlling order and the consolidated
arrears, if any;
                                             
 (b) Notify the nonregistering party of the right to a
determination of which is the controlling order;
                                             
 (c) State that the procedures provided in paragraph II apply to
the determination of which is the controlling order; and
                                             
 (d) State that failure to contest the validity or enforcement of
the order alleged to be the controlling order in a timely manner may
result in confirmation that the order is the controlling order.
                                             
 IV. Upon registration of an income-withholding order for
enforcement, the support enforcement agency or the registering tribunal
shall notify the obligor's employer pursuant to RSA 458-B.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:44

 **546-B:44 Procedure to Contest Validity or Enforcement of
Registered Support Order. –**
                                             
 I. A nonregistering party seeking to contest the validity or
enforcement of a registered order in this state shall request a hearing
within the time required by RSA 546-B:43. The nonregistering party may
seek to vacate the registration, to assert any defense to an allegation
of noncompliance with the registered order, or to contest the remedies
being sought or the amount of any alleged arrearages pursuant to RSA
546-B:45.
                                             
 II. If the nonregistering party fails to contest the validity or
enforcement of the registered support order in a timely manner, the
order is confirmed by operation of law.
                                             
 III. If a nonregistering party requests a hearing to contest the
validity or enforcement of the registered order, the registering
tribunal shall schedule the matter for hearing and give notice to the
parties of the date, time, and place of the hearing.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:45

 **546-B:45 Contest of Registration or Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. A party contesting the validity or enforcement of a registered
support order or seeking to vacate the registration has the burden of
proving one or more of the following defenses:
                                             
 (a) The issuing tribunal lacked personal jurisdiction over the
contesting party;
                                             
 (b) The order was obtained by fraud;
                                             
 (c) The order has been vacated, suspended, or modified by a later
order;
                                             
 (d) The issuing tribunal has stayed the order pending appeal;
                                             
 (e) There is a defense under the law of this state to the remedy
sought;
                                             
 (f) Full or partial payment has been made;
                                             
 (g) The statute of limitation under RSA 546-B:42 precludes
enforcement of some or all of the alleged arrearages; or
                                             
 (h) The alleged controlling order is not the controlling order.
                                             
 II. If a party presents evidence establishing a full or partial
defense under paragraph I, a tribunal may stay enforcement of a
registered support order, continue the proceeding to permit production
of additional relevant evidence, and issue other appropriate orders. An
uncontested portion of the registered support order may be enforced by
all remedies available under the law of this state.
                                             
 III. If the contesting party does not establish a defense under
paragraph I to the validity or enforcement of a registered support
order, the registering tribunal shall issue an order confirming the
order.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:46

 **546-B:46 Confirmed Order. –** Confirmation of a registered support
order, whether by operation of law or after notice and hearing,
precludes further contest of the order with respect to any matter that
could have been asserted at the time of registration.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

Part 3
                                             
Registration and Modification of Child Support Order of Another State
---------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 546-B:47

 **546-B:47 Procedure to Register Child Support Order of Another
State for Modification. –** A party or support enforcement agency
seeking to modify, or to modify and enforce, a child support order
issued in another state shall register that order in this state in the
same manner provided in RSA 546-B:39 through RSA 546-B:46, if the order
has not been registered. A petition for modification may be filed at the
same time as a request for registration, or later. The pleading must
specify the grounds for modification.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:48

 **546-B:48 Effect of Registration for Modification. –** A tribunal
of this state may enforce a child support order of another state
registered for purposes of modification, in the same manner as if the
order had been issued by a tribunal of this state, but the registered
order may be modified only if the requirements of RSA 546-B:49 or RSA
546-B:51 have been met.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:49

 **546-B:49 Modification of Child Support Order of Another State.
–**
                                             
 I. If RSA 546-B:51 does not apply, upon petition a tribunal may
modify a child support order issued in another state which is registered
in this state, if, after notice and hearing, the tribunal finds that:
                                             
 (a) The following requirements are met:
                                             
 (1) Neither the child, nor the obligee who is an individual,
nor the obligor resides in the issuing state;
                                             
 (2) A petitioner who is a nonresident of this state seeks
modification; and
                                             
 (3) The respondent is subject to the personal jurisdiction of
the tribunal of this state; or
                                             
 (b) This state is the residence of the child, or a party who is
an individual, is subject to the personal jurisdiction of the tribunal
of this state, and all of the individual parties have filed consents in
a record in the issuing tribunal for a tribunal of this state to modify
the support order and assume continuing, exclusive jurisdiction.
                                             
 II. Modification of a registered child support order is subject to
the same requirements, procedures, and defenses that apply to the
modification of an order issued by a tribunal of this state and the
order may be enforced and satisfied in the same manner.
                                             
 III. A tribunal of this state may not modify any aspect of a child
support order that may not be modified under the law of the issuing
state, including the duration of the obligation of support. If 2 or more
tribunals have issued child support orders for the same obligor and same
child, the order that controls and must be so recognized under RSA
546-B:9 establishes the aspects of the support order which are
nonmodifiable.
                                             
 IV. In a proceeding to modify a child support order, the law of the
state that is determined to have issued the initial controlling order
governs the duration of the obligation of support. The obligor's
fulfillment of the duty of support established by that order precludes
imposition of a further obligation of support by a tribunal of this
state.
                                             
 V. On the issuance of an order by a tribunal of this state modifying
a child support order issued in another state, the tribunal of this
state becomes the tribunal of continuing, exclusive jurisdiction.
                                             
 VI. Notwithstanding paragraphs I-V and RSA 546-B:3, II, a tribunal
of this state retains jurisdiction to modify an order issued by a
tribunal of this state if:
                                             
 (a) One party resides in another state; and
                                             
 (b) The other party resides outside the United States.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:50

 **546-B:50 Recognition of Order Modified in Another State. –** If a
child support order issued by a tribunal of this state is modified by a
tribunal of another state which assumed jurisdiction pursuant to the
Uniform Interstate Family Support Act, a tribunal of this state:
                                             
 I. May enforce its order that was modified only as to arrears and
interest accruing before the modification;
                                             
 II. May provide appropriate relief for violations of its order which
occurred before the effective date of the modification; and
                                             
 III. Shall recognize the modifying order of the other state, upon
registration, for the purpose of enforcement.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:51

 **546-B:51 Jurisdiction to Modify Child Support Order of Another
State When Individual Parties Reside in This State. –**
                                             
 I. If all of the parties who are individuals reside in this state
and the child does not reside in the issuing state, a tribunal of this
state has jurisdiction to enforce and to modify the issuing state's
child support order in a proceeding to register that order.
                                             
 II. A tribunal of this state exercising jurisdiction under this
section shall apply the provisions of Articles 1 and 2, this article,
and the procedural and substantive law of this state to the proceeding
for enforcement or modification. Articles 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8 do not
apply.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:52

 **546-B:52 Notice to Issuing Tribunal of Modification. –** Within 30
days after issuance of a modified child support order, the party
obtaining the modification shall file a certified copy of the order with
the issuing tribunal that had continuing, exclusive jurisdiction over
the earlier order, and in each tribunal in which the party knows the
earlier order has been registered. A party who obtains the order and
fails to file a certified copy is subject to appropriate sanctions by a
tribunal in which the issue of failure to file arises. The failure to
file does not affect the validity or enforceability of the modified
order of the new tribunal having continuing, exclusive jurisdiction.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

Part 4
                                             
Registration and Modification of Foreign Child Support Order
------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 546-B:52-a

 **546-B:52-a Jurisdiction to Modify Child Support Order of Foreign
Country. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in 546-B:53-j, if a foreign country
lacks or refuses to exercise jurisdiction to modify its child support
order pursuant to its laws, a tribunal of this state may assume
jurisdiction to modify the child support order and bind all individuals
subject to the personal jurisdiction of the tribunal whether the consent
to modification of a child support order otherwise required of the
individual pursuant to RSA 546-B:49 has been given or whether the
individual seeking modification is a resident of this state or of the
foreign country.
                                             
 II. An order issued by a tribunal of this state modifying a foreign
child support order pursuant to this section is the controlling order.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:52-b

 **546-B:52-b Procedure to Register Child Support Order of Foreign
Country for Modification. –** A party or support enforcement agency
seeking to modify, or to modify and enforce, a foreign child support
order not under the Convention may register that order in this state
under RSA 546-B:39 through RSA 546-B:46 if the order has not been
registered. A petition for modification may be filed at the same time as
a request for registration, or at another time. The petition must
specify the grounds for modification.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

ARTICLE 7
                                             
SUPPORT PROCEEDINGS UNDER CONVENTION
------------------------------------

### Section 546-B:53

 **546-B:53 Definitions. –** In this article:
                                             
 I. "Application'' means a request under the Convention by an obligee
or obligor, or on behalf of a child, made through a central authority
for assistance from another central authority.
                                             
 II. "Central authority'' means the entity designated by the United
States or a foreign country described in RSA 546-B:1, V(d) to perform
the functions specified in the Convention.
                                             
 III. "Convention support order'' means a support order of a tribunal
of a foreign country described in RSA 546-B:1, V(d).
                                             
 IV. "Direct request'' means a petition filed by an individual in a
tribunal of this state in a proceeding involving an obligee, obligor, or
child residing outside the United States.
                                             
 V. "Foreign central authority'' means the entity designated by a
foreign country described in RSA 546-B:1, V(d) to perform the functions
specified in the Convention.
                                             
 VI. "Foreign support agreement'':
                                             
 (a) Means an agreement for support in a record that:
                                             
 (1) Is enforceable as a support order in the country of
origin;
                                             
 (2) Has been:
                                             
 (A) Formally drawn up or registered as an authentic
instrument by a foreign tribunal; or
                                             
 (B) Authenticated by, or concluded, registered, or filed
with a foreign tribunal; and
                                             
 (3) May be reviewed and modified by a foreign tribunal; and
                                             
 (b) Includes a maintenance arrangement or authentic instrument
under the Convention.
                                             
 VII. "United States central authority'' means the Secretary of the
United States Department of Health and Human Services.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:53-a

 **546-B:53-a Applicability. –** This article applies only to a
support proceeding under the Convention. In such a proceeding, if a
provision of this article is inconsistent with Articles 1 through 6,
this article controls.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:53-b

 **546-B:53-b Relationship of Department of Health and Human Services
to United States Central Authority. –** The department of health and
human services of this state is recognized as the agency designated by
the United States central authority to perform specific functions under
the Convention.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:53-c

 **546-B:53-c Initiation by Department of Health and Human Services
of Support Proceeding Under Convention. –**
                                             
 I. In a support proceeding under this article, the department of
health and human services of this state shall:
                                             
 (a) Transmit and receive applications; and
                                             
 (b) Initiate or facilitate the institution of a proceeding
regarding an application in a tribunal of this state.
                                             
 II. The following support proceedings are available to an obligee
under the Convention:
                                             
 (a) Recognition or recognition and enforcement of a foreign
support order;
                                             
 (b) Enforcement of a support order issued or recognized in this
state;
                                             
 (c) Establishment of a support order if there is no existing
order, including, if necessary, determination of parentage of a child;
                                             
 (d) Establishment of a support order if recognition of a foreign
support order is refused under RSA 546-B:53-g, II (b), (d), or (i);
                                             
 (e) Modification of a support order of a tribunal of this state;
and
                                             
 (f) Modification of a support order of a tribunal of another
state or a foreign country.
                                             
 III. The following support proceedings are available under the
Convention to an obligor against which there is an existing support
order:
                                             
 (a) Recognition of an order suspending or limiting enforcement of
an existing support order of a tribunal of this state;
                                             
 (b) Modification of a support order of a tribunal of this state;
and
                                             
 (c) Modification of a support order of a tribunal of another
state or a foreign country.
                                             
 IV. A tribunal of this state may not require security, bond, or
deposit, however described, to guarantee the payment of costs and
expenses in proceedings under the Convention.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:53-d

 **546-B:53-d Direct Request. –**
                                             
 I. A petitioner may file a direct request seeking establishment or
modification of a support order or determination of parentage of a
child. In the proceeding, the law of this state applies.
                                             
 II. A petitioner may file a direct request seeking recognition and
enforcement of a support order or support agreement. In the proceeding,
RSA 546-B:53-e through RSA 546-B:53-l apply.
                                             
 III. In a direct request for recognition and enforcement of a
Convention support order or foreign support agreement:
                                             
 (a) A security, bond, or deposit is not required to guarantee the
payment of costs and expenses; and
                                             
 (b) An obligee or obligor that in the issuing country has
benefited from free legal assistance is entitled to benefit, at least to
the same extent, from any free legal assistance provided for by the law
of this state under the same circumstances.
                                             
 IV. A petitioner filing a direct request is not entitled to
assistance from the department of health and human services.
                                             
 V. This article does not prevent the application of laws of this
state that provide simplified, more expeditious rules regarding a direct
request for recognition and enforcement of a foreign support order or
foreign support agreement.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:53-e

 **546-B:53-e Registration of Convention Support Order. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in this article, a party who is an
individual or a support enforcement agency seeking recognition of a
Convention support order shall register the order in this state as
provided in Article 6.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding RSA 546-B:22 and RSA 546-B:40, I, a request for
registration of a Convention support order must be accompanied by:
                                             
 (a) A complete text of the support order;
                                             
 (b) A record stating that the support order is enforceable in the
issuing country;
                                             
 (c) If the respondent did not appear and was not represented in
the proceedings in the issuing country, a record attesting, as
appropriate, either that the respondent had proper notice of the
proceedings and an opportunity to be heard or that the respondent had
proper notice of the support order and an opportunity to be heard in a
challenge or appeal on fact or law before a tribunal;
                                             
 (d) A record showing the amount of arrears, if any, and the date
the amount was calculated;
                                             
 (e) A record showing a requirement for automatic adjustment of
the amount of support, if any, and the information necessary to make the
appropriate calculations; and
                                             
 (f) If necessary, a record showing the extent to which the
applicant received free legal assistance in the issuing country.
                                             
 III. A request for registration of a Convention support order may
seek recognition and partial enforcement of the order.
                                             
 IV. A tribunal of this state may vacate the registration of a
Convention support order without the filing of a contest under RSA
546-B:53-f only if, acting on its own motion, the tribunal finds that
recognition and enforcement of the order would be manifestly
incompatible with public policy.
                                             
 V. The tribunal shall promptly notify the parties of the
registration or the order vacating the registration of a Convention
support order.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:53-f

 **546-B:53-f Contest of Registered Convention Support Order. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in this article, RSA 546-B:43
through RSA 546-B:46 apply to a contest of a registered Convention
support order.
                                             
 II. A party contesting a registered Convention support order shall
file a contest not later than 30 days after notice of the registration,
but if the contesting party does not reside in the United States, the
contest must be filed not later than 60 days after notice of the
registration.
                                             
 III. If the nonregistering party fails to contest the registered
Convention support order by the time specified in paragraph II, the
order is enforceable.
                                             
 IV. A contest of a registered Convention support order may be based
only on grounds set forth in RSA 546-B:53-g. The contesting party bears
the burden of proof.
                                             
 V. In a contest of a registered Convention support order, a tribunal
of this state:
                                             
 (a) Is bound by the findings of fact on which the foreign
tribunal based its jurisdiction; and
                                             
 (b) May not review the merits of the order.
                                             
 VI. A tribunal of this state deciding a contest of a registered
Convention support order shall promptly notify the parties of its
decision.
                                             
 VII. A challenge or appeal, if any, does not stay the enforcement of
a Convention support order unless there are exceptional circumstances.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:53-g

 **546-B:53-g Recognition and Enforcement of Registered Convention
Support Order. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph II, a tribunal of this
state shall recognize and enforce a registered Convention support
order.
                                             
 II. The following grounds are the only grounds on which a tribunal
of this state may refuse recognition and enforcement of a registered
Convention support order:
                                             
 (a) Recognition and enforcement of the order is manifestly
incompatible with public policy, including the failure of the issuing
tribunal to observe minimum standards of due process, which include
notice and an opportunity to be heard;
                                             
 (b) The issuing tribunal lacked personal jurisdiction consistent
with RSA 546-B:3;
                                             
 (c) The order is not enforceable in the issuing country;
                                             
 (d) The order was obtained by fraud in connection with a matter
of procedure;
                                             
 (e) A record transmitted in accordance with RSA 546-B:53-e lacks
authenticity or integrity;
                                             
 (f) A proceeding between the same parties and having the same
purpose is pending before a tribunal of this state and that proceeding
was the first to be filed;
                                             
 (g) The order is incompatible with a more recent support order
involving the same parties and having the same purpose if the more
recent support order is entitled to recognition and enforcement under
this chapter in this state;
                                             
 (h) Payment, to the extent alleged arrears have been paid in
whole or in part;
                                             
 (i) In a case in which the respondent neither appeared nor was
represented in the proceeding in the issuing foreign country:
                                             
 (1) If the law of that country provides for prior notice of
proceedings, the respondent did not have proper notice of the
proceedings and an opportunity to be heard; or
                                             
 (2) If the law of that country does not provide for prior
notice of the proceedings, the respondent did not have proper notice of
the order and an opportunity to be heard in a challenge or appeal on
fact or law before a tribunal; or
                                             
 (j) The order was made in violation of RSA 546-B:53-j.
                                             
 III. If a tribunal of this state does not recognize a Convention
support order under subparagraph II (b), (d), or (i):
                                             
 (a) The tribunal may not dismiss the proceeding without allowing
a reasonable time for a party to request the establishment of a new
Convention support order; and
                                             
 (b) The department of health and human services shall take all
appropriate measures to request a child support order for the obligee if
the application for recognition and enforcement was received under RSA
546-B:53-c.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:53-h

 **546-B:53-h Partial Enforcement. –** If a tribunal of this state
does not recognize and enforce a Convention support order in its
entirety, it shall enforce any severable part of the order. An
application or direct request may seek recognition and partial
enforcement of a Convention support order.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:53-i

 **546-B:53-i Foreign Support Agreement. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in paragraphs III and IV, a tribunal
of this state shall recognize and enforce a foreign support agreement
registered in this state.
                                             
 II. An application or direct request for recognition and enforcement
of a foreign support agreement must be accompanied by:
                                             
 (a) A complete text of the foreign support agreement; and
                                             
 (b) A record stating that the foreign support agreement is
enforceable as an order of support in the issuing country.
                                             
 III. A tribunal of this state may vacate the registration of a
foreign support agreement only if, acting on its own motion, the
tribunal finds that recognition and enforcement would be manifestly
incompatible with public policy.
                                             
 IV. In a contest of a foreign support agreement, a tribunal of this
state may refuse recognition and enforcement of the agreement if it
finds:
                                             
 (a) Recognition and enforcement of the agreement is manifestly
incompatible with public policy;
                                             
 (b) The agreement was obtained by fraud or falsification;
                                             
 (c) The agreement is incompatible with a support order involving
the same parties and having the same purpose in this state, another
state, or a foreign country if the support order is entitled to
recognition and enforcement under this chapter in this state; or
                                             
 (d) The record submitted under paragraph II lacks authenticity or
integrity.
                                             
 V. A proceeding for recognition and enforcement of a foreign support
agreement must be suspended during the pendency of a challenge to or
appeal of the agreement before a tribunal of another state or a foreign
country.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:53-j

 **546-B:53-j Modification of Convention Child Support Order. –**
                                             
 I. A tribunal of this state may not modify a Convention child
support order if the obligee remains a resident of the foreign country
where the support order was issued unless:
                                             
 (a) The obligee submits to the jurisdiction of a tribunal of this
state, either expressly or by defending on the merits of the case
without objecting to the jurisdiction at the first available
opportunity; or
                                             
 (b) The foreign tribunal lacks or refuses to exercise
jurisdiction to modify its support order or issue a new support order.
                                             
 II. If a tribunal of this state does not modify a Convention child
support order because the order is not recognized in this state, RSA
546-B:53-g, III applies.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:53-k

 **546-B:53-k Personal Information; Limit on Use. –** Personal
information gathered or transmitted under this article may be used only
for the purposes for which it was gathered or transmitted.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:53-l

 **546-B:53-l Record Original Language: English Translations. –** A
record filed with a tribunal of this state under this article must be in
the original language and, if not in English, must be accompanied by an
English translation.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

ARTICLE 8
                                             
INTERSTATE RENDITION
--------------------

### Section 546-B:54

 **546-B:54 Grounds for Rendition. –**
                                             
 I. For purposes of this article, "governor'' includes an individual
performing the functions of governor or the executive authority of a
state covered by this chapter.
                                             
 II. The governor of this state may:
                                             
 (a) Demand that the governor of another state surrender an
individual found in the other state who is charged criminally in this
state with having failed to provide for the support of an obligee; or
                                             
 (b) On the demand of the governor of another state, surrender an
individual found in this state who is charged criminally in the other
state with having failed to provide for the support of an obligee.
                                             
 III. A provision for extradition of individuals not inconsistent
with this chapter applies to the demand even if the individual whose
surrender is demanded was not in the demanding state when the crime was
allegedly committed and has not fled therefrom.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:55

 **546-B:55 Conditions of Rendition. –**
                                             
 I. Before making a demand that the governor of another state
surrender an individual charged criminally in this state with having
failed to provide for the support of an obligee, the governor of this
state may require a prosecutor of this state to demonstrate that at
least 60 days previously, the obligee had initiated proceedings for
support pursuant to this chapter or that the proceeding would be of no
avail.
                                             
 II. If, under this chapter or a law substantially similar to this
chapter, the governor of another state makes a demand that the governor
of this state surrender an individual charged criminally in that state
with having failed to provide for the support of a child or other
individual to whom a duty of support is owed, the governor may require a
prosecutor to investigate the demand and report whether a proceeding for
support has been initiated or would be effective. If it appears that a
proceeding would be effective but has not been initiated, the governor
may delay honoring the demand for a reasonable time to permit the
initiation of a proceeding.
                                             
 III. If a proceeding for support has been initiated and the
individual whose rendition is demanded prevails, the governor may
decline to honor the demand. If the petitioner prevails and the
individual whose rendition is demanded is subject to a support order,
the governor may decline to honor the demand if the individual is
complying with the support order.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

ARTICLE 9
                                             
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
------------------------

### Section 546-B:56

 **546-B:56 Uniformity of Application and Construction. –** In
applying and construing this uniform act consideration must be given to
the need to promote uniformity of the law with respect to its subject
matter among states that enact it.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:57

 **546-B:57 Rulemaking Authority. –** The commissioner of the
department of health and human services may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA
541-A, which are deemed necessary for the efficient administration of
the duties with which the department is charged under Title IV-D of the
Social Security Act, as amended, to provide interstate child support
services, provided that such rules shall not be inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:58

 **546-B:58 Transitional Provision. –** This chapter applies to
proceedings begun on or after January 1, 2016 to establish a support
order or determine parentage of a child or to register, recognize,
enforce, or modify a prior support order, determination, or agreement,
whenever issued or entered.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 546-B:59

 **546-B:59 Severability Clause. –** If any provision of this chapter
or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.

**Source.** 2015, 75:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.
