---
title: 'CHAPTER 546-A UNIFORM CIVIL LIABILITY FOR SUPPORT'
---

TITLE LV
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN SPECIAL CASES
============================

CHAPTER 546-A
                                             
UNIFORM CIVIL LIABILITY FOR SUPPORT
-----------------------------------

### Section 546-A:1

 **546-A:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "State'' includes any state, territory or possession of the
United States, the District of Columbia and the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico.
                                             
 II. "Obligor'' means any person owing a duty of support.
                                             
 III. "Obligee'' means any person to whom a duty of support is owed.
                                             
 IV. "Child'' means either a natural or adopted child.
                                             
 V. "Father'' or "mother'' means either a natural or adopted father
or mother.

**Source.** 1955, 206:1, par. 1. 1969, 478:2. 2006, 185:7, eff. May 26,
2006.

### Section 546-A:2

 **546-A:2 Liability. –** Every person whose income or other
resources are more than sufficient to provide for his or her reasonable
subsistence compatible with decency or health owes a duty to support or
contribute to the support of the following persons when in need: his or
her wife, husband, or child under the age of 18 or for as long as the
department of health and human services has the authority to recover
support for the child under Title IV of the Social Security Act.

**Source.** 1955, 206:1, par. 2, eff. June 20, 1955. 2013, 212:2, eff.
Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 546-A:3

 **546-A:3 Duties of Support. –** An obligor present or resident in
this state has the duty of support as defined in this chapter regardless
of the presence of residence of the obligee.

**Source.** 1955, 203:1, par. 3, eff. June 20, 1955.

### Section 546-A:4

 **546-A:4 Jurisdiction. –** The superior court shall have
jurisdiction of all proceedings brought under this chapter.

**Source.** 1955, 206:1, par. 4, eff. June 20, 1955.

### Section 546-A:5

 **546-A:5 Amount of Support. –** When determining the amount due for
support the court shall consider all relevant factors including but not
limited to: (a) the standard of living and situation of the parties; (b)
the relative wealth and income of the parties; (c) the ability of the
obligor to earn; (d) the ability of the obligee to earn; (e) the need of
the obligee; (f) the age of the parties; (g) the responsibility of the
obligor for the support of others.

**Source.** 1955, 206:1, par. 5, eff. June 20, 1955.

### Section 546-A:6

 **546-A:6 Modification of Order. –** The court shall retain
jurisdiction to modify or vacate the order of support where justice
requires.

**Source.** 1955, 206:1, par. 6, eff. June 20, 1955.

### Section 546-A:7

 **546-A:7 Enforcement of Rights. –** The obligee may enforce his
right of support against the obligor and the state or any political
subdivision thereof may proceed on behalf of the obligee to enforce his
right of support against the obligor. Whenever the state or a political
subdivision thereof furnishes support to an obligee, it has the same
right as the obligee to whom the support was furnished, for the purpose
of securing reimbursement and of obtaining continuing support.

**Source.** 1955, 206:1, par. 7, eff. June 20, 1955.

### Section 546-A:8

 **546-A:8 Appeals. –** Appeals may be taken from orders under this
chapter as in other civil actions.

**Source.** 1955, 206:1, par. 8, eff. June 20, 1955.

### Section 546-A:9

 **546-A:9 Evidence of Husband and Wife. –** Laws attaching a
privilege against the disclosure of communications between husband and
wife are inapplicable under this chapter.

**Source.** 1955, 206:1, par. 9, eff. June 20, 1955.

### Section 546-A:10

 **546-A:10 Rights Additional to Those Now Existing. –** The rights
herein created are in addition to and not in substitution for any other
rights.

**Source.** 1955, 206:1, par. 10, eff. June 20, 1955.

### Section 546-A:11

 **546-A:11 Uniformity of Interpretation. –** This chapter shall be
so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose to
make uniform the law of those states which enact it.

**Source.** 1955, 206:1, par. 11, eff. June 20, 1955.

### Section 546-A:12

 **546-A:12 Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the Uniform Civil
Liability For Support Act.

**Source.** 1955, 206:1, par. 12, eff. June 20, 1955.
