---
title: 'CHAPTER 592-B CRIMINAL PROCEDURE IN SUPERIOR COURT'
---

TITLE LIX
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN CRIMINAL CASES
=============================

CHAPTER 592-B
                                             
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE IN SUPERIOR COURT
------------------------------------

### Section 592-B:1


                                             


                                             [RSA 592-B:1 effective January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.
                                             ]

 **592-B:1 Jurisdiction. –**
                                             
 The superior court shall have exclusive jurisdiction over felony
complaints and misdemeanors and violation level charges that are
directly related to those felonies. The superior court shall also have
jurisdiction over de novo appeals of class A misdemeanors pursuant to
RSA 599:1.

**Source.** 2015, 249:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.

### Section 592-B:2


                                             


                                             [RSA 592-B:2 effective January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.
                                             ]

 **592-B:2 Implementation Plan. –**
                                             
 I. Beginning January 1, 2016, the felonies first project shall
become effective in the Cheshire county and Strafford county superior
courts. Beginning July 1, 2016, the felonies first project shall become
effective in Belknap county superior court.
                                             
 II. This chapter shall take effect in the remaining superior courts
as of the date set forth in an order issued by the supreme court. The
remaining superior courts shall be added to the project in approximately
the following order:
                                             
 (a) Merrimack county superior court.
                                             
 (b) Carroll county superior court.
                                             
 (c) Hillsborough county superior court-northern district and
Hillsborough county superior court-southern district. The municipalities
included in each district shall be as listed in RSA 496:1.
                                             
 (d) Grafton county superior court and Coos county superior
court.
                                             
 (e) Rockingham county superior court and Sullivan county superior
court.
                                             
 III. All felony and any directly related misdemeanor or violation
level offenses alleged to have occurred on or after the effective date
of this chapter in the county in which the offense allegedly occurred
shall be filed in the superior court. All felony and any directly
related misdemeanor or violation level offenses alleged to have occurred
prior to the effective date of this chapter in the applicable county
shall be filed under the law as it existed at the time of the alleged
offense.
                                             
 IV. The supreme court shall adopt rules and issue orders to
effectuate the purposes of the felonies first project.
                                             
 V. During the implementation of the felonies first project, this
chapter shall supersede any statutory references to the filing of felony
charges in circuit court district division or other statutes that are
inconsistent with this chapter.
                                             
 VI. Prior to the implementation of this chapter in counties other
than Cheshire county, Strafford county, and Belknap county, the judicial
council shall issue a report on the implementation of this chapter to
the senate president, the speaker of the house of representatives, and
the chairpersons of the senate and house judiciary committees. The
judicial council shall survey the municipalities and counties affected
by the felonies first project in order to obtain cost and effectiveness
opinions. The judicial council shall evaluate the number of probable
cause hearings requested, waived, denied, and held, and the final
disposition of each probable cause hearing held. The judicial council
shall also evaluate the number of discovery depositions requested,
denied, and approved. Beginning July 1, 2017 and ending in January 2020,
the judicial council shall issue an annual report on its recommendations
and the implementation of this chapter to the senate president, the
speaker of the house of representatives, and the chairpersons of the
senate and house judiciary committees.

**Source.** 2015, 249:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.

### Section 592-B:3


                                             


                                             [RSA 592-B:3 effective January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.
                                             ]

 **592-B:3 Commencement of Criminal Proceeding. –**
                                             
 I. Criminal proceedings in superior court shall be commenced by the
filing of a complaint by the attorney general, county attorney or the
county attorney's designee, or by indictment by the grand jury. If a
complaint is filed, the accused shall subsequently be indicted by a
grand jury or waive grand jury indictment pursuant to RSA 601:2 for the
case to proceed.
                                             
 II. The complaint shall be addressed to the court and shall set
forth by name or description the party accused and the offense charged.
The description of an accused may include an identifiable ridge skin
impression or a DNA profile. A complaint that contains only an
identifiable ridge skin impression or DNA profile, and that alleges one
or more of the following offenses shall, upon its filing, toll the
applicable statute of limitations under RSA 625:8 for:
                                             
 (a) Capital murder under RSA 630:1.
                                             
 (b) First degree murder under RSA 630:1-a.
                                             
 (c) Second degree murder under RSA 630:1-b.
                                             
 (d) Manslaughter under RSA 630:2.
                                             
 (e) Negligent homicide under RSA 630:3.
                                             
 (f) First degree assault under RSA 631:1.
                                             
 (g) Second degree assault under RSA 631:2.
                                             
 (h) Aggravated felonious sexual assault under RSA 632-A:2.
                                             
 (i) Felonious sexual assault under RSA 632-A:3.
                                             
 (j) Kidnapping under RSA 633:1.
                                             
 (k) Arson under RSA 634:1, I-III.
                                             
 (l) Robbery under RSA 636:1.

**Source.** 2015, 249:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.

### Section 592-B:4


                                             


                                             [RSA 592-B:4 effective January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.
                                             ]

 **592-B:4 Warrants. –**
                                             
 A justice of the peace or justice of the superior or circuit court,
upon such complaint or indictment, may issue a warrant for the arrest of
the person so charged with an offense committed or triable in the
county, directed to the sheriff of any county or his deputy or to any
constable or police officer of any town in the county.

**Source.** 2015, 249:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.

### Section 592-B:5


                                             


                                             [RSA 592-B:5 effective January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.
                                             ]

 **592-B:5 When Warrants Returnable to Superior Court. –**
                                             
 If such warrant is issued, it shall be made returnable before the
superior court having jurisdiction over the case and not elsewhere.

**Source.** 2015, 249:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.

### Section 592-B:6


                                             


                                             [RSA 592-B:6 effective January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.
                                             ]

 **592-B:6 Discovery. –**
                                             
 I. Prior to indictment, the accused shall have the same rights to
discovery and deposition as the accused has subsequent to indictment,
provided that all judicial proceedings with respect thereto shall be
within the jurisdiction of the superior court, and notice of petition
and hearing shall be given to the county attorney, or to the attorney
general if the attorney general shall have entered the case.
                                             
 II. For incarcerated defendants, the state shall provide or make
available to defense counsel, or directly to the defendant if he or she
is not represented by an attorney, copies of all discovery in its
possession, no more than 10 calendar days after the arraignment of the
defendant, unless otherwise ordered by the court. For non-incarcerated
defendants, the state shall provide or make available to defense
counsel, or directly to the defendant if he or she is not represented by
an attorney, copies of all discovery in its possession, no more than 20
calendar days after the arraignment of the defendant, unless otherwise
ordered by the court. The state may request an extension of the
discovery deadlines for complex case types.
                                             
 III. The court may, upon motion, authorize the delay of the
provision of discovery materials to the defense. Under such
circumstances, the court shall make findings in support of its order and
shall set a new date for the provision of such materials to the
defense.
                                             
 IV. If the court has determined that discovery has not been provided
pursuant to the timeline established in paragraph II or III, and the
defendant has not been indicted, the court shall schedule a probable
cause hearing without unreasonable delay as a matter of right.
                                             
 V. The state shall have a continuing obligation to provide discovery
to defendants as it becomes available.

**Source.** 2015, 249:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.

### Section 592-B:7


                                             


                                             [RSA 592-B:7 effective January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.
                                             ]

 **592-B:7 Probable Cause. –**
                                             
 I. A defendant may challenge probable cause during the period from
arrest to indictment by motion requesting a probable cause hearing under
the following conditions:
                                             
 (a) A complaint has been filed in superior court;
                                             
 (b) The defendant has not been indicted by the grand jury; and
                                             
 (c) The defendant asserts a claim that a material element of the
charge is without factual basis or that the charge is legally
insufficient to constitute a felony offense.
                                             
 II. Upon review of the motion, the court shall determine whether a
hearing is necessary to assist the court in its determination of
probable cause. The court shall not unreasonably deny a request for a
hearing. If a hearing is scheduled, it shall be held as soon as the
court docket permits, but in any event within 10 days of the filing of
the motion if the defendant is incarcerated and within 20 days of the
filing of the motion if the defendant is not incarcerated.
                                             
 III. If an arrest is supported by an affidavit that was filed under
seal, and the affidavit remains under seal at the time of the request
for a probable cause hearing, a hearing shall be scheduled.
                                             
 IV. If a hearing is held, the state shall bear the burden of proving
there is probable cause to believe that a felony has been committed and
that the person charged has committed it. At the hearing, the defendant
may call witnesses, cross-examine witnesses, and present evidence.

**Source.** 2015, 249:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.

### Section 592-B:8


                                             


                                             [RSA 592-B:8 effective January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.
                                             ]

 **592-B:8 Dispositional Conference. –**
                                             
 Upon entry of a plea of not guilty, the case shall be scheduled for
a dispositional conference in accordance with superior court rules.

**Source.** 2015, 249:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17.

### Section 592-B:9

 **592-B:9 Drug Courts or Alternative Drug Offender Programs. –**
                                             
 I. (a) In any county that has implemented or which will implement
the felonies first project established in this chapter within one year
of commencing operation of a drug court or alternative drug offender
program, the judicial branch shall fund and operate an approved drug
court or alternative drug offender program separate from the statewide
drug offender grant program established in RSA 490-G, and at no cost to
the county.
                                             
 (b) Before the judicial branch funds and operates a drug court or
alternative drug offender program in any county under subparagraph (a),
the county shall have first applied for a federal grant for the purpose
of establishing a program. A county shall be required to apply for a
federal grant only once. Any county that applied for a federal grant
before the effective date of this section shall not be required to apply
again. In the event the county is awarded a federal grant, or any other
grant from a nonprofit organization, designed to fund a drug court or
alternative drug offender program, the judicial branch shall fund and
operate a drug court or alternative drug offender program only after the
federal or other nonprofit grant has expired. If the county does not
receive a federal or other nonprofit grant for which it applied, the
drug court or alternative drug offender program shall commence
operation.
                                             
 (c) The cost of the drug court or alternative drug offender
program shall not exceed 
                                             $490,000 per judicial district in a large
county, 
                                             $300,000 in a medium county, and 
                                             $200,000 in a small county,
based on the number of court filings in each judicial district and
subject to annual review by the chief justice of the superior court.
                                             
 II. A county in which the judicial branch is funding and operating
an approved drug court or alternative drug offender program separate
from the statewide drug offender grant program established in RSA
490-G:4 shall not be eligible to receive funds under the statewide drug
offender grant program.

**Source.** 2016, 264:3, eff. June 15, 2016.
