---
title: CHAPTER 593 FINGERPRINTING AND MEASURING
---

TITLE LIX
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN CRIMINAL CASES
=============================

CHAPTER 593
                                             
FINGERPRINTING AND MEASURING
----------------------------

### Section 593:1

 **593:1 Order of Court. –** Any justice of the superior court may
order that the likeness or photograph of any person accused or convicted
of a crime be taken and used for the purposes of identification, or
otherwise, whenever he shall deem it necessary or proper to do so, and
the reasonable expenses thereof shall be paid by the county.

**Source.** 1883, 5:1. PS 248:16. PL 362:16. RL 421:16.

### Section 593:2

 **593:2 Custodian of Prisoner. –** Any officer or keeper of a prison
or other place of detention, having in custody any prisoner, suspicious
person or lodger, may, if deemed advisable, measure and describe, or
cause such person to be measured and described, in accordance with the
system commonly known as the Bertillon method for identification, and in
addition may take such photographs as are deemed necessary and also may
take copies of the fingerprints of such person in accordance with the
fingerprint system for identification.

**Source.** 1907, 24:1. PL 362:17. RL 421:17.

### Section 593:3

 **593:3 Order of County Attorney. –** The county attorney may order
an officer or keeper holding a person described in RSA 593:2 to make
such measurements and description of any prisoner so held, and, when so
ordered, the expense thereof shall be paid by the county.

**Source.** 1915, 113:1. PL 362:18. RL 421:18.

### Section 593:4

 **593:4 Discharge of Defendant. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1994, 224:3, eff.
Jan. 1, 1995.
                                             ]
