---
title: 'CHAPTER 595-A SEARCH WARRANTS'
---

TITLE LIX
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN CRIMINAL CASES
=============================

CHAPTER 595-A
                                             
SEARCH WARRANTS
---------------

### Section 595-A:1

 **595-A:1 Issuance of Search Warrants; Purposes. –** A search
warrant authorized by this chapter may be issued by any justice,
associate justice or special justice of the municipal, district or
superior courts to search for and seize any property which is:
                                             
 I. Stolen, embezzled or fraudulently obtained;
                                             
 II. Designed or intended for use or which is or has been used as the
means of committing a criminal offense;
                                             
 III. Contraband; or
                                             
 IV. Evidence of the crime to which the probable cause upon which the
search warrant is issued relates.

**Source.** 1969, 317:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1969.

### Section 595-A:2


                                             


                                             [RSA 595-A:2 effective until January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17; see also RSA 595-A:2 set out below.
                                             ]

 **595-A:2 Requisites of Warrant. –**
                                             
 Search warrants shall designate or describe the person, building,
vessel, or vehicle to be searched and shall particularly describe the
property or articles to be searched for. They shall be substantially in
the form prescribed in RSA 595-A:3 and shall be directed to a sheriff or
his deputy or to a constable or police officer, commanding him to search
in the daytime, or if the warrant so directs, in the nighttime, the
person, building, vessel, or vehicle where the property or articles for
which he is required to search are believed to be concealed, and to
bring such property or articles when found, and the persons in whose
possession they are found, before any district or municipal court named
therein.


                                             [RSA 595-A:2 effective January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015, 249:17;
see also RSA 595-A:2 set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
**595-A:2 Requisites of Warrant.** --
                                             
 Search warrants shall designate or describe the person, building,
vessel, or vehicle to be searched and shall particularly describe the
property or articles to be searched for. They shall be substantially in
the form prescribed in RSA 595-A:3 and shall be directed to a sheriff or
his deputy or to a constable or police officer, commanding him to search
in the daytime, or if the warrant so directs, in the nighttime, the
person, building, vessel, or vehicle where the property or articles for
which he is required to search are believed to be concealed, and to
bring such property or articles when found, and the persons in whose
possession they are found, before any circuit or superior court named
therein.

**Source.** 1969, 317:1. 1971, 255:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1971. 2015, 249:7,
eff. Jan. 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015, 249:17.

### Section 595-A:3

 **595-A:3 Form of Warrant. –** The warrant shall be in substantially
the following form:

The State of New Hampshire

    (County), ss. (Name) Court.


                                             
To the Sheriffs of our several counties, or their deputies, any State
Police Officer, or any Constable or Police Officer of any city or town,
within our said State.
                                             
 Proof by affidavit (supplemented by oral statements under oath)
having been made this day before (name of person authorized to issue
warrant) by (names of person or persons whose affidavits have been
taken) that there is probable cause for believing that (certain property
has been stolen, embezzled, or fraudulently obtained; certain property
is intended for use or has been used as the means of committing a crime;
contraband; evidence of the crime to which the probable cause upon which
the search warrant is issued relates.)
                                             
 We therefore command you in the daytime (or at any time of the day
or night) to make an immediate search of (identify premises) (occupied
by A.B.) and (of the person of A.B.) and of any person present who may
be found to have such property in his possession or under his control or
to whom such property may have been delivered, for the following
property:

(description of property)


                                             
and if you find any such property or any part thereof to bring it and
the persons in whose possession it is found before (name of court and
location).
                                             
 Dated at (city or town) this .......... day of .........., 20......

**Source.** 1969, 317:1. 1971, 255:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1971.

### Section 595-A:4

 **595-A:4 Affidavit in Support of Application for Warrant; Contents
and Form. –** A person seeking a search warrant shall appear personally
before a court or justice authorized to issue search warrants in
criminal cases and shall give an affidavit in substantially the form
hereinafter prescribed. Such affidavit shall contain facts, information,
and circumstances upon which such person relies to establish probable
cause for the issuance of the warrant and such affidavit may be
supplemented by oral statements under oath for the establishment of
probable cause. The person issuing the warrant shall retain the
affidavit and shall make notes, personally, of the substance, or arrange
for a transcript, of any oral statements under oath supplementing the
affidavit. The person issuing the search warrant shall deliver the
affidavit and the notes or transcript within 3 days after the issuance
of the warrant to the court to which the warrant is returnable. Upon the
return of said warrant, the affidavit and the notes or transcript shall
be attached to it and shall be filed therewith, and they shall be a
public document when the warrant is returned, unless otherwise ordered
by a court of record.
                                             
 The affidavit in support of the application for a search warrant
shall be in substantially the following form:

The State of New Hampshire

    (County), ss. (Name) Court.
     .................., 20......


                                             
 I, (name of applicant) being duly sworn, depose and say:
                                             
 1. I am (describe position, assignment, office, etc.).
                                             
 2. I have information, based upon (describe source, facts indicating
reliability of source and nature of information; if based on personal
knowledge, so state).
                                             
 3. Based upon the foregoing reliable information (and upon my
personal knowledge) there is probable cause to believe that the property
hereinafter described (has been stolen, etc.) and may be found (in the
possession of A.B. or any other person) at premises (identify).
                                             
 4. The property for which I seek the issuance of a search warrant is
the following: (here describe the property as particularly as
possible).
                                             
 Wherefore, I request that the court issue a warrant and order of
seizure, authorizing the search of (identify premises and the persons to
be searched) and directing that if such property or evidence or any part
thereof be found that it be seized and brought before the court;
together with such other and further relief that the court may deem
proper.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ...........................................................................
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

  -------
  Name.
  -------


                                             
 Then personally appeared the above named .......... and made oath
that the foregoing affidavit by him subscribed is true.
                                             
 Before me this .......... day of .........., 20......

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ...........................................................................
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ----------------------
  Justice of the Court
  ----------------------

**Source.** 1969, 317:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1969.

### Section 595-A:4-a

 **595-A:4-a Electronic Communication and Signature. –** The personal
appearance and authorization for a search warrant under RSA 595-A:4 may
be by means of telecommunication or electronic communication, and
electronic signature pursuant to RSA 294-E.

**Source.** 2005, 76:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 595-A:5

 **595-A:5 Receipt, Inventory, and Return. –** The officer taking
property under the warrant shall give to the person from whom, or from
whose premises, the property was taken a copy of the warrant and a
receipt for the property taken, or shall leave the copy and receipt at
the place from which the property was taken. The return shall be made
promptly and shall be accompanied by a written inventory of any property
taken. The inventory shall be made in the presence of the applicant for
the warrant and the person from whose possession or premises the
property was taken, if they are present, or in the presence of at least
one creditable person other than the applicant for the warrant or the
person from whose possession or premises the property was taken, and
shall be verified by the officer. The justice of a court of record shall
upon request deliver a copy of the inventory to the person from whom or
from whose premises the property was taken and to the applicant for the
warrant. The justice of a court of record shall attach to the warrant a
copy of the return, inventory and all other papers in connection
therewith and shall file them with the clerk of the court to which the
warrant is returnable. The return shall be in substantially the
following form:

Return


                                             
 I received the attached search warrant on .........., 20....., and
have executed it as follows:
                                             
 On .........., 20....., at .......... o'clock ... M, I searched (the
person) (the premises) described in the warrant and I left a copy of the
warrant with (name of person searched or owner) at (the place of search)
together with a receipt for the items seized.
                                             
 The following is an inventory of property taken pursuant to the
warrant:
                                             

...........................................................................
                                             

...........................................................................
                                             

...........................................................................
                                             

...........................................................................
                                             
 This inventory was made in the presence of .......... and
..........
                                             
 I swear that this inventory is a true and detailed account of all
the property taken by me on the warrant

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ...........................................................................
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                             
 Subscribed and sworn to and returned before me this .......... day
of .........., 20......

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ...........................................................................
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ----------------------
  Justice of the Court
  ----------------------

**Source.** 1969, 317:1. 1971, 255:3, eff. Aug. 22, 1971.

### Section 595-A:6

 **595-A:6 Seizure, Custody and Disposition of Articles; Exceptions.
–** If an officer in the execution of a search warrant, or by some other
authorized method, finds property or articles he is empowered to take,
he shall seize and safely keep them under the direction of the court or
justice so long as necessary to permit them to be produced or used as
evidence in any trial. Upon application by a prosecutor, defendant, or
civil claimants, the court, prior to trial or upon an appeal after
trial, shall, upon notice to a defendant and hearing, and except for
good cause shown, order returned to the rightful owners any stolen,
embezzled or fraudulently obtained property, or any other property of
evidential value, not constituting contraband. This section shall apply
regardless of how possession of the property was obtained by the state.
Photographs or other identification or analysis made of the returned
property shall be admissible at trial as secondary evidence, in lieu of
the originals, for all relevant purposes, including ownership. In the
case of unknown, unapprehended defendants, or defendants wilfully absent
from the jurisdiction, the court shall have discretion to appoint a
guardian ad litem to represent the interest of such unknown or absent
defendants. The judicial findings on such matters as ownership,
identification, chain of possession or value made at such an evidentiary
hearing for the restoration of property to the rightful owners shall
thereafter be admissible at trial, to be considered with other evidence
on the same issues, if any, as may be admitted before the finder of
fact. All other property seized in execution of a search warrant or
otherwise coming into the hands of the police shall be returned to the
owner of the property, or shall be disposed of as the court or justice
orders, which may include forfeiture and either sale or destruction as
the public interest requires, in the discretion of the court or justice,
and in accordance with due process of law. Any property, the forfeiture
and disposition of which is specified in any general or special law,
shall be disposed of in accordance therewith.

**Source.** 1969, 317:1. 1977, 320:1. 1981, 553:9. 1988, 88:3, eff. Jan.
1, 1989.

### Section 595-A:7

 **595-A:7 Time for Return of Warrant. –** Every officer to whom a
warrant to search is issued shall return the same to the court to which
it was made returnable as soon as it has been served, and in any event
not later than 7 days from the date of issuance thereof, with a return
of his actions thereon.

**Source.** 1969, 317:1. 1971, 255:4, eff. Aug. 22, 1971.

### Section 595-A:8

 **595-A:8 Assistants. –** An officer executing a search warrant may
take with him suitable assistants and suffer no others to be with him.

**Source.** 1969, 317:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1969.

### Section 595-A:9

 **595-A:9 Scope and Definition. –** This chapter does not modify any
act inconsistent with it regulating search, seizure and the issuance and
execution of search warrants in circumstances for which special
provision is made. The term "property'' is used in this chapter to
denote everything which is the subject of ownership.

**Source.** 1969, 317:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1969.
