---
title: 'CHAPTER 596-A PRELIMINARY EXAMINATIONS'
---

TITLE LIX
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN CRIMINAL CASES
=============================

CHAPTER 596-A
                                             
PRELIMINARY EXAMINATIONS
------------------------

### Section 596-A:1


                                             


                                             [RSA 596-A:1 effective until January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17; see also RSA 596-A:1 set out below.
                                             ]

 **596-A:1 Adjournments. –**
                                             
 When an accused person is brought before a district or municipal
court, upon a warrant or complaint, for trial or preliminary
examination, the proceedings may be adjourned for cause, from time to
time, as shall be adjudged reasonable, and the accused may be detained
in custody, or required to recognize, with or without sureties, for his
appearance, as the nature of the case may require.


                                             [RSA 596-A:1 effective January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015, 249:17;
see also RSA 596-A:1 set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
**596-A:1 Adjournments.** --
                                             
 When an accused person is brought before a circuit court, upon a
warrant or complaint, for trial, the proceedings may be adjourned for
cause, from time to time, as shall be adjudged reasonable, and the
accused may be detained in custody, or required to recognize, with or
without sureties, for the accused's appearance, as the nature of the
case may require.

**Source.** 1965, 116:1, eff. July 27, 1965. 2015, 249:8, eff. Jan. 1,
2016 and as provided by 2015, 249:17.

### Section 596-A:2


                                             


                                             [RSA 596-A:2 repealed by 2015, 249:16, III, effective January 1, 2016
and as provided by 2015, 249:17.
                                             ]

 **596-A:2 Record. –**
                                             
 Every district or municipal court shall, upon motion made by an
accused in a preliminary examination for probable cause, at least 5 days
before the date of hearing or any adjournment thereof, cause a written
transcript to be made of all proceedings before said court at the
expense of the defendant, or, in the case of an indigent defendant, in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 604-A. Every district or municipal
court, upon its own motion, may cause a written transcript to be made of
proceedings at a preliminary examination in any case where the magnitude
of the offense may seem to require it.

**Source.** 1965, 116:1. 1967, 167:1, eff. Aug. 8, 1967.

### Section 596-A:3


                                             


                                             [RSA 596-A:3 repealed by 2015, 249:16, IV, effective January 1, 2016
and as provided by 2015, 249:17.
                                             ]

 **596-A:3 Caution to Accused. –**
                                             
 The district or municipal court shall cause the complaint to be read
to the accused and shall inform him of his right to retain counsel and
of his right to have a preliminary examination. The court shall also
inform the accused that he is not required to make a statement or to
testify, but that any statement or testimony given by him may be used
against him. The court shall allow the accused reasonable time and
opportunity to consult, including an adjournment as provided in RSA
596-A:1, if necessary.

**Source.** 1965, 116:1, eff. July 27, 1965.

### Section 596-A:4


                                             


                                             [RSA 596-A:4 repealed by 2015, 249:16, V, effective January 1, 2016 and
as provided by 2015, 249:17.
                                             ]

 **596-A:4 Procedure. –**
                                             
 The accused shall not be called upon to plead, if the offense is
beyond the jurisdiction of the court to decide. If the accused waives
preliminary examination thereof, the court shall hold him to appear in
superior court as provided in RSA 596-A:7. If the accused does not waive
preliminary examination, the court shall hear the evidence within a
reasonable time. The accused may cross-examine the witnesses against him
and may introduce evidence in his own behalf.

**Source.** 1965, 116:1, eff. July 27, 1965.

### Section 596-A:5


                                             


                                             [RSA 596-A:5 repealed by 2015, 249:16, VI, effective January 1, 2016
and as provided by 2015, 249:17.
                                             ]

 **596-A:5 Testimony of Accused. –**
                                             
 If the accused elects to be examined himself, he shall be sworn, but
it shall always be a sufficient answer that he declines to answer the
question; and if at any time he declines to answer further, his
examination shall cease.

**Source.** 1965, 116:1, eff. July 27, 1965.

### Section 596-A:6


                                             


                                             [RSA 596-A:6 repealed by 2015, 249:16, VII, effective January 1, 2016
and as provided by 2015, 249:17.
                                             ]

 **596-A:6 Excluding Witnesses. –**
                                             
 Any of the witnesses for or against the accused may be excluded from
the place of examination, and be kept separate and apart from each other
during the examination of other witnesses.

**Source.** 1965, 116:1, eff. July 27, 1965.

### Section 596-A:7


                                             


                                             [RSA 596-A:7 repealed by 2015, 249:16, VIII, effective January 1, 2016
and as provided by 2015, 249:17.
                                             ]

 **596-A:7 Commitment and Bail. –**
                                             
 If from the evidence it appears to the district or municipal court
that there is probable cause to believe that an offense has been
committed which is beyond the jurisdiction of the court to try and that
the accused committed it, or if the accused waives preliminary
examination thereof, the court shall hold the accused to appear in
superior court as provided in RSA 502-A:13 or RSA 592-A:4; otherwise, if
no probable cause appears, the accused shall be discharged from custody.
If bound over, unless the offense is bailable only by the superior court
as provided in RSA 597:4, the accused may be admitted to bail by the
court as provided in RSA 597, but where the offense is bailable only by
the superior court, the accused shall be committed by warrant to a
county jail pending further proceedings in superior court.

**Source.** 1965, 116:1, eff. July 27, 1965.
