---
title: CHAPTER 597 BAIL AND RECOGNIZANCES
---

TITLE LIX
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN CRIMINAL CASES
=============================

CHAPTER 597
                                             
BAIL AND RECOGNIZANCES
----------------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 597:1

 **597:1 Release and Detention Authority Generally. –** Except as
provided in RSA 597:1-a, 597:1-c, or 597:1-d, all persons arrested for
an offense shall be eligible to be released pending judicial proceedings
upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** GS 240:18. GL 258:18. PS 252:12. PL 366:13. RL 425:13. RSA
597:1. 1969, 78:1. 1974, 34:4. 1988, 110:1. 1989, 386:1. 1993, 258:1,
eff. Aug. 14, 1993.

### Section 597:1-a

 **597:1-a Release or Detention of a Defendant Pending Sentence or
Appeal. –**
                                             
 I. After conviction for an offense punishable by death or, by a term
of life imprisonment without possibility of parole, or for aggravated
felonious sexual assault or felonious sexual assault, a defendant shall
not be allowed bail.
                                             
 II. Except as provided in paragraph I, the court shall order that a
person who has been found guilty of a felony and who is awaiting
imposition or execution of sentence be detained, unless the court finds
by clear and convincing evidence that the person is not likely to flee
or pose a danger to the safety of the person or to any other person or
the community. If the court makes such a finding, it shall order the
release of the person in accordance with the provisions of RSA 597:2.
                                             
 III. (a) The court shall order that a person found guilty of a
felony and sentenced to a term of imprisonment and who has made a good
faith representation that he or she shall file a timely appeal be
detained, unless the person establishes and the court finds:
                                             
 (1) By clear and convincing evidence, taking into
consideration the nature of the crime and the length of the sentence
imposed, that the person is not likely to fail to appear to answer the
judgment following the conclusion of the appellate proceeding, or to
pose a danger to himself or herself or to any other person or the
community, or to intimidate witnesses, or otherwise to interfere with
the administration of justice; and
                                             
 (2) By a preponderance of the evidence that the appeal will
not likely be frivolous or taken merely for delay.
                                             
 (b) Upon making the findings specified in subparagraph (a), the
court shall order the release of the person in accordance with the
provisions of RSA 597:2.
                                             
 IV. Any person who has been found guilty of a misdemeanor and who is
awaiting imposition or execution of sentence, or who has been sentenced
to a term of imprisonment and who has filed an appeal shall, before the
conclusion of the appellate proceeding, be released upon compliance with
the provisions of RSA 597:2.
                                             
 V. In any case where release is denied pending appeal, the court
shall provide for the record the reasons for such denial.
                                             
 VI. The court shall treat a defendant in a case in which an appeal
has been taken by the state pursuant to the provisions of RSA 606:10, in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 597:2, unless the defendant is
otherwise subject to a release or a detention order.

**Source.** 1975, 275:1. 1985, 26:1. 1988, 110:2. 1989, 386:2. 1992,
254:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1993. 2008, 200:1, eff. June 11, 2008.

### Section 597:1-b

 **597:1-b Probationers and Parolees Excepted. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988,
110:12, I, eff. June 17, 1988.
                                             ]

### Section 597:1-c

 **597:1-c Offenses Punishable by Life Imprisonment. –** Any person
arrested for an offense punishable by up to life in prison, where the
proof is evident or the presumption great, shall not be allowed bail.

**Source.** 1993, 258:2, eff. Aug. 14, 1993. 2006, 327:14, eff. Jan. 1,
2007.

### Section 597:1-d

 **597:1-d Probationees and Parolees. –**


                                             [Paragraph I effective until January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17; see also paragraph I set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. If there is a judicial finding of probable cause to believe that
a person has committed a violation of RSA 630, RSA 631, RSA 632-A:2-4 or
RSA 633:1-3 from an arrest warrant affidavit or an affidavit issued
pursuant to district court administrative order number 91-03 or any
other district court administrative order which supercedes it and the
person is on probation or parole for a conviction of a violent crime
listed in RSA 651:4-a or a substantially similar crime in any state or
federal court in this or any other state, the District of Columbia, the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any territory or possession of the
United States, it is presumed that release on bail and imposition of any
condition or set of conditions listed in RSA 597:2 will not reasonably
assure the appearance of the person as required and will endanger the
safety of the person or of any other person or the community.


                                             [Paragraph I effective January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015, 249:17;
see also paragraph I set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. If there is a judicial finding of probable cause to believe that
a person has committed a violation of RSA 630, RSA 631, RSA 632-A:2-4 or
RSA 633:1-3 from an arrest warrant affidavit and the person is on
probation or parole for a conviction of a violent crime listed in RSA
651:4-a or a substantially similar crime in any state or federal court
in this or any other state, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth
of Puerto Rico, or any territory or possession of the United States, it
is presumed that release on bail and imposition of any condition or set
of conditions listed in RSA 597:2 will not reasonably assure the
appearance of the person as required and will endanger the safety of the
person or of any other person or the community.
                                             
 II. The court shall not release such person on bail unless the court
finds by a preponderance of the evidence that some condition or set of
conditions found in RSA 597:2 will assure the person's appearance and
assure that release will not pose a danger to the safety of the person
or of any person or the community.
                                             
 III. Such person shall be detained without bail pending a bail
hearing before the court to be held as soon after arraignment as
possible but in no event later than 72 hours after arraignment. At such
hearing, the arresting agency shall present, and the court shall
consider, all relevant records or other documentation concerning the
arrested person's parole or probation, as well as the offense for which
the person is on parole or probation.

**Source.** 1993, 258:2, eff. Aug. 14, 1993. 2015, 249:9, eff. Jan. 1,
2016 and as provided by 2015, 249:17.

### Section 597:2

 **597:2 Release of a Defendant Pending Trial. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph III-c, upon the appearance before
the court or justice of a person charged with an offense, the court or
justice shall issue an order that, pending arraignment or trial, the
person be:
                                             
 (a) Released on his personal recognizance or upon execution of an
unsecured appearance bond, pursuant to the provisions of paragraph II;
                                             
 (b) Released on a condition or combination of conditions pursuant
to the provisions of paragraph III; or
                                             
 (c) Temporarily detained to permit revocation of conditional
release pursuant to the provisions of paragraph V.
                                             
 I-a. Except as provided in RSA 597:1-d, a person charged with a
probation violation shall be entitled to a bail hearing. The court shall
issue an order that, pending a probation violation hearing, the person
be:
                                             
 (a) Released on his or her personal recognizance or upon
execution of an unsecured appearance bond, pursuant to the provisions of
paragraph II;
                                             
 (b) Released on a condition or combination of conditions pursuant
to the provisions of paragraph III; or
                                             
 (c) Detained.
                                             
 II. The court or justice shall order the prearraignment or pretrial
release of the person on his or her personal recognizance, or upon
execution of an unsecured appearance bond in an amount specified by the
court, subject to the condition that the person not commit a crime
during the period of his or her release, and subject to such further
condition or combination of conditions that the court may require,
unless the court determines that such release will not reasonably assure
the appearance of the person as required or will endanger the safety of
the person or of any other person or the community. The court may also
consider as a factor in its determination under this paragraph or
paragraph III that a person who is detained as a result of his or her
inability to meet the required conditions or post the required bond is
the parent and sole caretaker of a child and whether, as a result, such
child would become the responsibility of the division of children,
youth, and families.
                                             
 III. If the court or justice determines that the release described
in paragraph II will not reasonably assure the appearance of the person
as required or, as described in paragraph II or VI, will endanger the
safety of the person or of any other person or the community, he shall
issue an order that includes the following conditions:
                                             
 (a) The condition that the person not commit a crime during the
period of release; and
                                             
 (b) Such further condition or combination of conditions that he
determines will reasonably assure the appearance of the person as
required and the safety of the person or of any other person or the
community, which may include the condition that the person:
                                             
 (1) Execute an agreement to forfeit, upon failing to appear
within 45 days of the date required, such designated property, including
money, as is reasonably necessary to assure the appearance of the person
as required, and post with the court such indicia of ownership of the
property or such percentage of the money as the court or justice may
specify;
                                             
 (2) Furnish bail for his appearance by recognizance with
sufficient sureties or by deposit of moneys equal to the amount of the
bail required as the court or justice may direct; and
                                             
 (3) Satisfy any other condition that is reasonably necessary
to assure the appearance of the person as required and to assure the
safety of the person or of any other person or the community.
                                             
In considering the conditions of release described in subparagraph
III(b)(1) or III(b)(2), the court may upon its own motion, or shall upon
the motion of the state, conduct an inquiry into the source of the
property to be designated for potential forfeiture or offered as
collateral to secure a bond, and shall decline to accept the
designation, or the use as collateral, of property that because of its
source will not reasonably assure the appearance of the person as
required.
                                             
 III-a. If a person is charged with any of the offenses listed in RSA
173-B:1, I or charged with violation of a protective order issued under
RSA 458:16, III or after arraignment for violation of a protective order
under RSA 173-B, the court or justice may order preventive detention
without bail, or, in the alternative, restrictive conditions including
but not limited to electronic monitoring and supervision, if there is
clear and convincing evidence that the person poses a danger to another.
The court or justice may consider, but shall not be limited to
considering, any of the following conduct as evidence of posing a
danger:
                                             
 (a) Threats of suicide.
                                             
 (b) Acute depression.
                                             
 (c) History of violating protective orders.
                                             
 (d) Possessing or attempting to possess a deadly weapon in
violation of an order.
                                             
 (e) Death threats or threats of possessiveness toward another.
                                             
 (f) Stalking, as defined in RSA 633:3-a.
                                             
 (g) Cruelty to or violence directed toward pets.
                                             
 III-b. A no-contact provision contained in any bail order shall not
be construed to:
                                             
 (a) Prevent counsel for the defendant to have contact with
counsel for any of the individuals protected by such provision; or
                                             
 (b) Prevent the parties, if the defendant and one of the
protected individuals are parties in a domestic violence or marital
matter, from attending court hearings scheduled in such matters or
exchanging copies of legal pleadings filed in court in such matters.
                                             
 III-c. If a person is charged with violation of a protective order
under RSA 173-B or RSA 633:3-a, the person shall be detained without
bail pending arraignment pursuant to RSA 173-B:9, I(a).
                                             
 IV. In a release order issued pursuant to the provisions of this
section, the court or justice shall include a written statement that
sets forth:
                                             
 (a) All of the conditions to which the release is subject, in a
manner sufficiently clear and specific to serve as a guide for the
person's conduct; and
                                             
 (b) The provisions of RSA 641:5, relative to intimidation of
witnesses and informants.
                                             
 V. A person charged with an offense who is, and was at the time the
offense was committed, on
                                             
 (a) Release pending trial for a felony or misdemeanor under
federal or state law;
                                             
 (b) Release pending imposition or execution of sentence, appeal
of sentence or conviction, or completion of sentence, for any offense
under federal or state law; or
                                             
 (c) Probation or parole for any offense under federal or state
law, except as provided in RSA 597:1-d, III may be detained for a period
of not more than 72 hours from the time of his arrest, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. The law enforcement agency making the
arrest shall notify the appropriate court, probation or parole official,
or federal, state or local law enforcement official. Upon such notice
the court shall also direct the clerk to notify by telephone the
division of field services, department of corrections, of the pending
bail hearing. If the official fails or declines to take the person into
custody during that period, the person shall be treated in accordance
with the provisions of law governing release pending trial. Probationers
and parolees who are arrested and fail to advise their supervisory
probation officer or parole officer in accordance with the conditions of
probations and parole may be subject to arrest and detention as
probation and parole violators.
                                             
 VI. Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, upon the appearance of
a person charged with a class B misdemeanor, the court or justice shall
issue an order that, pending arraignment, the person be released on his
personal recognizance, unless the court determines that such release
will endanger the safety of the person or of any other person or the
community. The court shall appoint an attorney to represent any indigent
person charged with a class B misdemeanor denied release for the purpose
of representing such person at any detention hearing.

**Source.** 1903, 28:1. 1919, 49:1. PL 366:14. RL 425:14. RSA 597:2.
1969, 78:2. 1989, 386:3. 1992, 269:3, 4. 1993, 258:3, eff. Aug. 14,
1993. 1999, 229:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2000. 2005, 230:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.
2006, 214:3, eff. July 31, 2006. 2009, 91:1, eff. Aug. 11, 2009. 2011,
236:2, eff. Sept. 3, 2011. 2015, 74:1-3, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 597:2-a

 **597:2-a Ten Percent Bail Authorized. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988, 110:12,
II, eff. June 17, 1988.
                                             ]

### Section 597:3

 **597:3 Money Deposited. –** All money deposited for bail shall be
held for the use of the state until the clerk of the superior court
where the bail is deposited shall certify that no liability exists
against the bail.

**Source.** 1903, 28:2. PL 366:15. RL 425:15. RSA 597:3. 1983, 383:60,
eff. Jan. 1, 1984.

### Section 597:4

 **597:4 In Superior Court. –** If any person is charged with murder,
the superior court or any justice thereof, upon application and notice
to the attorney general or county attorney, and examination of such
evidence as may be laid before them, may determine the amount of the
bail, and take the recognizance required or authorize the clerk or any
suitable justice to take it.

**Source.** GS 240:19. GL 258:19. PS 252:13. PL 366:16. RL 425:16. RSA
597:4. 1969, 78:3. 1973, 370:20, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 597:5


                                             


                                             [RSA 597:5 effective until January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17; see also RSA 597:5 set out below.
                                             ]

 **597:5 When Requirable. –**
                                             
 Every court and justice may, when a person is accused of an offense
in which said court or justice is authorized to receive bail, release
said person on personal recognizance or require him to recognize, with
sureties, to appear at a future time before himself or any other
competent tribunal.


                                             [RSA 597:5 effective January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015, 249:17;
see also RSA 597:5 set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
**597:5 When Requirable.** --
                                             
 Every court and justice may, when a person is accused of an offense
in which said court or justice is authorized to receive bail, release
said person on personal recognizance or require said person to
recognize, with sureties, to appear at a future time before said court
or justice or any other competent tribunal. Bail in felony cases is
returnable only to the superior court.

**Source.** RS 222:3. CS 237:3. GS 241:1. GL 259:1. PS 252:14. PL
366:17. RL 425:17. RSA 597:5. 1969, 78:4, eff. June 3, 1969. 2015,
249:10, eff. Jan. 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015, 249:17.

### Section 597:5-a

 **597:5-a When Requirable; Bail and Recognizances for Person
Detained for Probation Violation. –** Upon motion duly made, a court
shall schedule a bail hearing. Every court may, when a person is accused
of an offense or a probation violation in which said court is authorized
to receive bail, release said person on personal recognizance or require
him or her to recognize, with sureties, to appear at a future time
before the court or any other competent tribunal.

**Source.** 2005, 230:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 597:6


                                             


                                             [RSA 597:6 repealed by 2015, 249:16, IX, effective January 1, 2016 and
as provided by 2015, 249:17.
                                             ]

 **597:6 Appearance at Superior Court. –**
                                             
 If the offense is bailable by the municipal or district court, the
accused shall be ordered to recognize, in accordance with the provisions
of RSA 597:2, for the accused's appearance at the superior court, at the
next term thereof for the county or judicial district thereof at which a
grand jury is required to attend, and to stand committed until the order
is complied with.

**Source.** RS 222:3. CS 237:3. 1859, 2211:8. GS 240:6. 1873, 34:1. GL
258:6. PS 252:15. PL 366:18. RL 425:18. RSA 597:6. 1965, 86:2. 1988,
110:3. 1989, 386:4. 1992, 284:73, eff. July 1, 1992.

### Section 597:6-a

 **597:6-a Release or Detention of a Defendant Pending Trial. –**

                                             [Repealed 1989, 386:11, eff. June 5, 1989.
                                             ]

### Section 597:6-b

 **597:6-b Hearing Before a Justice. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988, 110:12,
III, eff. June 17, 1988.
                                             ]

### Section 597:6-c

 **597:6-c Petition to Superior Court to Review Bail. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1988, 110:12, IV, eff. June 17, 1988.
                                             ]

### Section 597:6-d

 **597:6-d Release or Detention of Material Witness. –** If it
appears from an affidavit filed by a party that the testimony of a
person is material in a criminal proceeding, and if it is shown that it
may become impracticable to secure the presence of the person by
subpoena, a justice of the court in which the defendant will be tried
may order the arrest of the person and treat the person in accordance
with the provisions of RSA 597:2. No material witness may be detained
because of inability to comply with any condition of release if the
trial testimony of such witness can adequately be secured by deposition,
and if further detention is not necessary to prevent a failure of
justice. Release of a material witness may be delayed for a reasonable
period of time until the trial deposition of the witness may be taken.

**Source.** 1988, 110:5. 1989, 386:5, eff. June 5, 1989.

### Section 597:6-e

 **597:6-e Review and Appeal of Release or Detention Order. –**
                                             
 I. If a person is ordered released by a bail commissioner, the
person, or the state, shall be entitled to a hearing, if requested, on
the conditions of bail before a justice within 48 hours, Sundays and
holidays excepted.
                                             
 II. The person or the state may file with the superior court a
motion for revocation of the order or amendment of the conditions of
release set by a municipal or district court, by a justice or by a bail
commissioner. The motion shall be determined promptly. However, no
action shall be taken on any such motion until the moving party has
provided to the superior court certified copies of the complaint,
affidavit, warrant, bail slip, and any other court orders relative to
each charge for which a release or detention order was issued by a
justice or a bail commissioner. In cases where a district court justice
has made a finding, pursuant to RSA 597:2, III-a that the person poses a
danger to another, the superior court shall, after notification to both
parties, the police department that brought the charges in district
court, and the victim, conduct a hearing and make written findings
supporting any modifications and reasons for new conditions or changes
from the district court order. The reviewing court shall take into
consideration the district court's written findings, orders, pleadings,
or transcript when making a modification.
                                             
 III. The person, or the state pursuant to RSA 606:10, V, may appeal
to the supreme court from a court's release or detention order, or from
a decision denying revocation or amendment of such an order. The appeal
shall be determined promptly.

**Source.** 1988, 110:5. 1989, 386:6. 1999, 229:2. 2000, 51:1, eff. Jan.
1, 2001.

### Section 597:7

 **597:7 Commitment in Default of Recognizance. –** If the order to
recognize for his appearance is not complied with in a reasonable time,
the court or justice, by warrant, shall cause the accused to be
committed to jail until he complies therewith.

**Source.** RS 222:6. CS 237:6. GS 240:7. GL 258:7. PS 252:16. PL
366:19. RL 425:19.

### Section 597:7-a

 **597:7-a Detention and Sanctions for Default or Breach of
Conditions. –**
                                             
 I. A peace officer may detain an accused until he can be brought
before a justice if he has a warrant issued by a justice for default of
recognizance or for breach of conditions of release or if he witnesses a
breach of conditions of release. The accused shall be brought before a
justice for a bail revocation hearing within 48 hours, Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays excepted.
                                             
 I-a. If a person violates a restraining order issued under RSA
458:16, III, or a protective order issued under RSA 633:3-a, or a
temporary or permanent protective order issued under RSA 173-B by
committing assault, criminal trespass, criminal mischief, or another
criminal act, a peace officer shall arrest the accused, detain the
accused pursuant to RSA 594:19-a, bring the accused before a justice
pursuant to RSA 594:20-a, and refer the accused for prosecution. Such
arrest may be made within 12 hours after a violation without a warrant
upon probable cause whether or not the violation is committed in the
presence of the peace officer.
                                             
 II. A person who has been released pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter and who has violated a condition of his release is subject
to a revocation of release, an order of detention, and a prosecution for
contempt of court.
                                             
 III. The state may initiate a proceeding for revocation of an order
of release by filing a motion with the court which ordered the release
and the order of which is alleged to have been violated. The court may
issue a warrant for the arrest of a person charged with violating a
condition of release, and the person shall be brought before the court
for a proceeding in accordance with this section. The court shall enter
an order of revocation and detention if, after a hearing, the court:
                                             
 (a) Finds that there is:
                                             
 (1) Probable cause to believe that the person has committed a
federal, state, or local crime while on release; or
                                             
 (2) Clear and convincing evidence that the person has violated
any other condition of release or has violated a temporary or permanent
protective order by conduct indicating a potential danger to another;
and
                                             
 (b) Finds that:
                                             
 (1) There is no condition or combination of conditions of
release that will assure that the person will not flee or that the
person will not pose a danger to the safety of himself or any other
person or the community; or
                                             
 (2) The person is unlikely to abide by any condition or
combination of conditions of release.
                                             
 If there is probable cause to believe that, while on release, the
person committed a federal or state felony, a rebuttable presumption
arises that no condition or combination of conditions will assure that
the person shall not pose a danger to the safety of any other person or
the community. If the court finds that there are conditions of release
that shall assure that the person will not flee or pose a danger to the
safety of himself or any other person or the community, and that the
person will abide by such conditions, he shall treat that person in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 597:2 and may amend the conditions
of release accordingly.
                                             
 IV. The state may commence a prosecution for contempt if the person
has violated a condition of his release.

**Source.** 1979, 377:6. 1988, 110:6. 1989, 386:7. 1993, 303:1. 1999,
229:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000. 2002, 79:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 597:7-b


                                             


                                             [RSA 597:7-b effective until January 1, 2017; see also RSA 597:7-b set
out below.
                                             ]

 **597:7-b Bail Agents and Recovery Agents; Certification and
Registration; Notification to Local Law Enforcement Required. –**
                                             
 I. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Bail agent'' means any person appointed by an insurer by
power of attorney to execute or countersign bail bonds for the insurer
in connection with judicial proceedings and who receives a premium.
                                             
 (b) "Recovery agent'' means a person who meets the requirements
of paragraph II of this section and who is offered or given any
compensation by a bail agent or surety in exchange for assisting the
bail agent or surety in apprehending or surrendering any defendant, or
keeping the defendant under necessary surveillance.
                                             
 II. Any person who operates as a recovery agent in this state,
excluding licensed private detectives, shall be trained and certified
through a program approved by the Professional Bail Agents of the United
States and shall register annually with the secretary of state. The
secretary of state shall issue to each registered recovery agent proof
of such registration. Effective July 1, 2000, each bail agency operating
in this state shall annually provide to the secretary of state proof of
liability insurance coverage in the amount of 
                                             $300,000 for bail
recovery activities of the agency's bail agents and bail recovery
agents. This proof of insurance coverage shall be provided before the
agency's bail agents are licensed or relicensed, and before the agency's
bail recovery agents are registered or reregistered. Bail recovery
agents acting as independent contractors shall provide proof of
liability insurance coverage in the amount of 
                                             $300,000 to the secretary
of state before registration or reregistration. Any person who operates
as a recovery agent in this state without meeting such certification,
insurance, and registration requirements shall be guilty of a class A
misdemeanor.
                                             
 III. A bail agent or recovery agent searching for a person who has
violated conditions of release shall notify a municipality's chief law
enforcement officer if the search is to be conducted in the
municipality's jurisdiction. A bail agent or recovery agent who violates
the provisions of this paragraph shall be guilty of a class A
misdemeanor.


                                             [RSA 597:7-b effective January 1, 2017; see also RSA 597:7-b set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**597:7-b Bail Agents and Recovery Agents; Licensure; Notification to
Local Law Enforcement Required.** --
                                             
 I. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Bail agent'' means any person appointed by an insurer by
power of attorney to execute or countersign bail bonds for the insurer
in connection with judicial proceedings and who receives a premium.
                                             
 (b) "Bail recovery agent'' means a person who meets the
requirements of paragraph II of this section and who is offered or given
any compensation for assisting a professional bondsman under RSA 598-A
or a surety in apprehending or surrendering any defendant, or keeping
the defendant under necessary surveillance.
                                             
 II. Any person who operates as a bail recovery agent in this state,
excluding licensed private detectives, shall be trained and certified
through a program approved by the Professional Bail Agents of the United
States or other training program approved by the commissioner of safety
and shall be licensed with the department of safety under RSA 106-F.
Licensees shall also meet proficiency requirements under RSA 106-F:8-a.
The department of safety shall issue to each licensed bail recovery
agent proof of such licensure. Each bail recovery agent operating in
this state shall provide to the department of safety proof of liability
insurance coverage in the amount of 
                                             $300,000 for bail recovery
activities. This proof of insurance coverage shall be provided before
the bail recovery agent is licensed or relicensed by the department of
safety. Licenses shall be valid for 2 years after the date of issuance
and shall be renewed every 2 years thereafter, upon application and
payment of the fee and submission of continuing proof of the required
liability insurance coverage. The application for renewal shall be
submitted at least 15 days before the expiration of the previously
granted license. Any person who operates as a bail recovery agent in
this state without meeting the licensure and relicensure requirements
shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor for the first offense and a
class A misdemeanor for a second offense within a 7-year period.
                                             
 III. A bail recovery agent searching for a person who has violated
conditions of release shall notify a municipality's chief law
enforcement officer if the search is to be conducted in the
municipality's jurisdiction. A bail recovery agent who violates the
provisions of this paragraph shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1995, 287:1. 1999, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2000. 2016, 196:12,
eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 597:8

 **597:8 Subsequent Bail. –** A prisoner committed to jail pursuant
to RSA 597:7 may at any time recognize agreeably to the order to
recognize for his appearance, before a justice, and thereupon the
justice shall issue his warrant for the discharge of the prisoner, and
he shall be discharged from custody.

**Source.** GS 240:8. GL 258:8. PS 252:17. PL 366:20. RL 425:20.

### Section 597:9

 **597:9 Copies, Subsequent Bail. –** The justice issuing an order
for the discharge of a prisoner shall file, in the office of the clerk
of the superior court for the county or judicial district thereof in
which the offense is alleged to have been committed, true and attested
copies of the application to the justice to take such recognizance, of
the order made by the justice on the application, of the recognizance
taken, and a note of the warrant of discharge issued by the justice.

**Source.** GS 240:10. GL 258:10. PS 252:19. PL 366:21. RL 425:21. RSA
597:9. 1992, 284:74, eff. July 1, 1992.

### Section 597:10

 **597:10 Copies, on Appeal. –** In case of appeal, the municipal and
district courts shall cause true and attested copies of the complaint,
other process, records and recognizances, together with any cash bail in
the case, to be filed with the clerk of the superior court within 10
days after the date of such order for recognizance.

**Source.** RS 222:4. CS 237:4. GS 240:9. GL 258:9. PS 252:18. 1911,
113:1. PL 366:22. 1937, 49:3. RL 425:22. RSA 597:10. 1957, 71:2. 1959,
19:1. 1965, 86:3, eff. July 10, 1965.

### Section 597:11


                                             


                                             [RSA 597:11 repealed by 2015, 249:16, X, effective January 1, 2016 and
as provided by 2015, 249:17.
                                             ]

 **597:11 Copies, Binding Over. –**
                                             
 In the case of an order to recognize for appearance before the
superior court, the district or municipal court shall cause true and
attested copies of the complaint, other process, records and
recognizances, together with any cash bail in the case, to be mailed or
delivered to the clerk of the superior court of the county or judicial
district thereof within 10 days after the date of such order for
recognizance. A true and attested copy of the complaint or other process
shall also be mailed or delivered to the county attorney and the state
probation office for the county within said 10 days.

**Source.** RS 222:4. CS 237:4. GS 240:9. GL 258:9. PS 252:18. 1911,
113:1. PL 366:23. RL 425:23. RSA 597:11. 1965, 86:4. 1992, 284:75, eff.
July 1, 1992.

### Section 597:12

 **597:12 Penalty. –** Whoever violates any provision of RSA 597:10
and 11 shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** RS 222:4. CS 237:4. GS 240:9. GL 258:9. PS 252:18. 1911,
113:1. PL 366:24. RL 425:24. RSA 597:12. 1973, 531:151, eff. at 11:59
P.M., Oct. 31, 1973.

### Section 597:13

 **597:13 Accepting Insufficient Bail, etc. –** If a justice
knowingly accepts insufficient bail or fails to make return of his
proceedings as required by law, he shall be liable to the same
punishment as for aiding an escape in a like case; provided, that this
section shall not apply to release on personal recognizance upon a
finding by the justice that such release is proper under the
circumstances of the case.

**Source.** GS 240:11. GL 258:11. PS 252:20. PL 366:25. RL 425:25. RSA
597:13. 1969, 78:6, eff. June 3, 1969.

### Section 597:14

 **597:14 Minors. –** Minors and their sureties shall be bound by
their recognizance in the same manner as if their principals were of
full age.

**Source.** GS 241:5. GL 259:5. PS 252:21. PL 366:26. RL 425:26. RSA
597:14. 1988, 110:7, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 597:14-a

 **597:14-a Failure to Appear; Punishment. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988,
110:12, V, eff. June 17, 1988.
                                             ]

### Section 597:14-b

 **597:14-b Penalty for Offense Committed While on Release. –**
                                             
 I. A person convicted of an offense while released pursuant to this
chapter shall be sentenced, in addition to the sentence prescribed for
the offense to:
                                             
 (a) A maximum term of imprisonment of not more than 7 years if
the offense is a felony; or
                                             
 (b) A maximum term of imprisonment of not more than one year if
the offense is a misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. A term of imprisonment imposed pursuant to this section shall be
consecutive to any other sentence of imprisonment. Neither the penalty
provided by this section or any prosecution under this section shall
interfere with or prevent the forfeiture of any bail or the exercise by
the court of its power to punish for contempt.

**Source.** 1988, 110:8. 1989, 386:8, eff. June 5, 1989.

Bail Commissioners
------------------

### Section 597:15

 **597:15 Superior Court. –** The superior court may appoint justices
of the peace and quorum as commissioners authorized to fix and receive
bail in criminal or civil cases as hereinafter provided. The superior
court shall not appoint as a bail commissioner anyone whose appointment
would present a conflict of interest or an appearance of bias in the
carrying out of his or her duties as a bail commissioner.

**Source.** 1895, 37:1. PL 366:27. RL 425:27. RSA 597:15. 1967, 302:1,
eff. Aug. 29, 1967. 2007, 189:1, eff. June 18, 2007. 2013, 59:1, eff.
June 6, 2013.

### Section 597:15-a

 **597:15-a Circuit Court. –** The circuit court may appoint justices
of the peace and quorum as commissioners authorized to fix and receive
bail and other fines and fees as authorized by law in criminal or civil
cases as hereinafter provided. The circuit court shall not appoint as a
bail commissioner anyone whose appointment would present a conflict of
interest or an appearance of bias in the carrying out of his or her
duties as a bail commissioner.

**Source.** 1963, 331:9. 1985, 341:9. 1998, 288:5, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.
2008, 105:1, eff. May 28, 2008. 2013, 59:2, eff. June 6, 2013.

### Section 597:15-b

 **597:15-b Judicial Branch Family Division. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2013,
59:4, I, eff. June 6, 2013.
                                             ]

### Section 597:16

 **597:16 Municipal Courts. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2013, 59:4, II, eff. June
6, 2013.
                                             ]

### Section 597:17

 **597:17 Term. –** Bail commissioners shall be commissioned for 5
years and continue in office until their successors shall have
qualified.

**Source.** 1895, 37:2. PL 366:28. RL 425:28.

### Section 597:18

 **597:18 Powers. –** On application of a person who is arrested for
a bailable offense, at any time before his arraignment therefor, any
commissioner may fix the amount of and receive bail in the same manner
as the court might do, except in cases provided for by RSA 597:4.

**Source.** 1895, 37:3. PL 366:29. RL 425:29.

### Section 597:18-a

 **597:18-a Educational Requirements for Bail Commissioners. –**
                                             
 I. During September or October of each year beginning in 1995, a
justice of each district or municipal court, under the direction of the
administrative judge of the district and municipal courts, shall hold a
meeting with all bail commissioners under the jurisdiction of such
court. This meeting shall be for the purpose of educating bail
commissioners on the laws concerning their powers and duties.
                                             
 II. A copy of all laws concerning bail commissioners and a copy of
the latest edition of the Bail Commissioner's Handbook shall be provided
to each bail commissioner at this annual meeting.

**Source.** 1995, 61:2, eff. July 8, 1995.

### Section 597:19

 **597:19 Returns. –** Every recognizance taken by a commissioner
shall be certified and returned to the clerk of the court before which
the party is bound to appear, on or before the day of the sitting
thereof.

**Source.** 1895, 37:4. PL 366:30. RL 425:30.

### Section 597:20

 **597:20 Fees. –** The bail commissioners in such cases shall be
entitled to a fee of 
                                             $40. However, clerks of court or members of their
staffs who are bail commissioners shall be entitled to collect such fee
only when called while not on active duty. In jurisdictions where the
bail commissioner is a full-time salaried police officer, constable,
sheriff, deputy sheriff, state police employee, or anyone else
authorized to execute police powers, such person shall not receive the
fee established in this section, but instead such amount shall be
remitted to the town or city in which the district court is situated.

**Source.** 1895, 37:5. 1905, 9:1. 1921, 83:1. PL 366:31. RL 425:31.
1949, 135:1. RSA 597:20. 1965, 195:1. 1969, 215:1. 1971, 112:1. 1981,
139:1. 1989, 150:1. 1995, 61:1, eff. July 1, 1995. 2001, 154:1, eff.
Aug. 28, 2001. 2008, 117:1, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 597:21

 **597:21 Bail on Sunday. –** Persons arrested on Sunday, or on the
evening or afternoon preceding, may be admitted to bail on that day when
in the opinion of the commissioner an application for that purpose
appears to be proper.

**Source.** 1895, 37:6. PL 366:32. RL 425:32.

Recognizances of Witnesses
--------------------------

### Section 597:22

 **597:22 Recognizances After Arrest. –** Any police officer may
detain any person who he deems to be a necessary witness to a crime;
provided, however, within 24 hours, including Sundays and holidays, he
shall be brought before a justice of the superior court who may, upon
the showing that the testimony of said person is necessary in any court,
release the person on personal recognizance or take the recognizance of
the witness in such sum as the justice may deem reasonable for his
appearance before the court.

**Source.** RS 222:5. CS 237:5. GS 240:16. GL 258:16. PS 252:22. PL
366:33. RL 425:33. RSA 597:22. 1959, 159:1. 1965, 86:5. 1969, 78:7.
1975, 407:1, eff. Aug. 15, 1975.

### Section 597:23

 **597:23 Commitment in Default of Recognizance. –** Whenever a
witness, upon being ordered by a superior court justice to recognize,
neglects or refuses to do so, the justice may issue a warrant and cause
such witness to be committed to jail until he complies with the order.

**Source.** RS 222:6. CS 237:6. GS 240:17. GL 258:17. PS 252:23. PL
366:34. RL 425:34. RSA 597:23. 1959, 159:2. 1965, 86:6. 1975, 407:2,
eff. Aug. 15, 1975.

Form of Recognizance
--------------------

### Section 597:24

 **597:24 To the State; Sureties. –** Recognizance shall be taken in
the name of the state, and with sufficient sureties, unless, in proper
cases, the recognizance of the party shall be deemed by the superior
court to be sufficient.

**Source.** RS 211:17. CS 224:17. GS 241:2. GL 259:2. PS 252:24. PL
366:35. RL 425:35.

### Section 597:25

 **597:25 Condition. –** Recognizances may be taken with condition to
attend the court or before the justice at the next term, from term to
term, at a fixed day to which the case may be continued, or from day to
day, there to wait and abide the order of the court, and not to depart
without leave until discharged by order of court.

**Source.** GS 241:3. GL 259:3. PS 252:25. PL 366:36. RL 425:36.

### Section 597:26

 **597:26 Variations. –** Recognizances may be taken in any other
form which the court, considering the circumstances of the case, may
direct or allow.

**Source.** GS 241:4. GL 259:4. PS 252:26. PL 366:37. RL 425:37. RSA
597:26. 1967, 132:38, eff. July 18, 1967.

Discharge of Bail
-----------------

### Section 597:27

 **597:27 Surrender, in Court. –** A surety for the appearance of a
party or witness may be discharged by order of the superior court from
further liability upon surrendering the party in open court, during the
pendency of the original cause and before trial, on payment of the costs
of any proceeding against them, and the principal shall be committed
unless again recognized.

**Source.** RS 201:6. CS 214:6. GS 241:6. GL 259:6. PS 252:27. PL
366:38. RL 425:38. RSA 597:27. 1969, 78:8, eff. June 3, 1969.

### Section 597:28

 **597:28 Surrender, to Jailer. –** Sureties may be discharged before
forfeiture of the recognizance by committing the principal to the jail
of the county, by leaving with the jailer a certified copy of the order
to recognize and of the names of the bail, and a certificate of the bail
thereon that they have committed the principal in discharge of their
liability as bail, and by giving written notice thereof to the attorney
general or county attorney.

**Source.** RS 201:4. CS 214:4. GS 241:7. GL 259:7. PS 252:28. PL
366:39. RL 425:39. RSA 597:28. 1967, 132:39, eff. July 18, 1967.

### Section 597:29

 **597:29 Jailer's Authority; New Bail. –** The copies and
certificates provided for in RSA 597:28 shall be sufficient authority
for the keeper of the jail to detain the party committed until he shall
be discharged by due order of law; and the accused may be again
recognized with sureties, agreeably to the original order of the court
requiring such recognizance.

**Source.** GS 241:8. GL 259:8. PS 252:29. PL 366:40. RL 425:40. RSA
597:29. 1967, 132:40, eff. July 18, 1967.

### Section 597:30

 **597:30 Excusing Surrender. –** When the sureties in a
recognizance, without their fault, are prevented from surrendering their
principal by an act of God or of the government of the state or of the
United States, or by sentence of law, the superior court, on petition
and notice thereof to the county commissioners and state's counsel, may
discharge them on such terms as may be deemed just.

**Source.** GS 241:12. GL 259:12. PS 252:30. PL 366:41. RL 425:41.

Forfeitures of Recognizances and Actions Thereon
------------------------------------------------

### Section 597:31

 **597:31 Declaration of Forfeiture. –** If any party recognized to
appear makes default, the recognizance shall be declared forfeited, and
the state may cause proceedings to be had immediately for the recovery
of such forfeiture.

**Source.** 1865, 4077:3, 4. GS 241:9. GL 259:9. 1889, 27:1. PS 252:31.
PL 366:42. RL 425:42. RSA 597:31. 1959, 12:1. 1988, 110:9. 1989, 386:9,
eff. June 5, 1989.

### Section 597:32

 **597:32 Striking Off Default. –** Any court, for good cause, may
strike off a default upon a recognizance or order it to be struck off at
a future day, upon a substantial compliance with the condition.

**Source.** GS 241:10. GL 259:10. 1889, 27:2. PS 252:32. PL 366:43. RL
425:43.

### Section 597:33

 **597:33 Judgment. –** The superior court may render judgment for
the whole amount of any forfeited recognizance and interest and costs,
or for such part thereof as, after hearing counsel, the court may think
proper, according to any special circumstances in evidence affecting the
case or the party liable.

**Source.** 1865, 4075:2. GS 241:11. GL 259:11. PS 252:33. PL 366:44. RL
425:44. RSA 597:33. 1983, 383:61, eff. July 1, 1984.

### Section 597:34

 **597:34 Venue. –** Actions upon recognizances may be brought and
tried in the county or judicial district thereof in which they were
taken, unless the court shall order the venue to be changed.

**Source.** RS 211:17. CS 224:17. GS 241:14. GL 259:14. PS 252:34. PL
366:45. RL 425:45. RSA 597:34. 1992, 284:76, eff. July 1, 1992.

### Section 597:35

 **597:35 Defective Records, etc. –** No action on a recognizance
shall be defeated, nor judgment thereon be arrested, for any omission to
record a default at the proper term, nor for any defect in the form of
recognizance or of the scire facias, but the court may order the record
of process to be amended to conform to the facts, without costs.

**Source.** GS 241:15. GL 259:15. PS 252:35. PL 366:46. RL 425:46.

### Section 597:36

 **597:36 Declaration. –** In actions brought upon recognizances
taken in criminal prosecutions, it shall be sufficient to set forth in
the writ the substance of the recognizance and the time and place at
which the same was declared forfeited, without setting forth the
complaint or indictment or any subsequent proceedings thereon.

**Source.** 1865, 4075:1. GS 241:17. GL 259:17. PS 252:36. PL 366:47. RL
425:47.

### Section 597:37

 **597:37 Bench Warrants. –** Any court may issue a warrant for the
arrest of a person under recognizance to appear before the court who
fails to appear according to the condition thereof or of any person who,
being party to a criminal proceeding, is, by escape or otherwise,
improperly at large.

**Source.** GS 241:16. GL 259:16. PS 252:37. PL 366:48. RL 425:48. RSA
597:37. 1967, 132:41, eff. July 18, 1967.

### Section 597:38

 **597:38 Forfeit of Recognizance. –** If a recognizance is forfeited
and paid in any case in which, if the recognizor had been convicted, any
sum might have been due and payable to the complainant or to any other
person, the superior court may ascertain the amount and may order it to
be paid from the state treasury.

**Source.** RS 211:16. CS 224:16. GS 245:3. GL 263:3. PS 261:3. PL
375:3. RL 435:3. RSA 597:38. 1983, 383:62, eff. July 1, 1984.

### Section 597:38-a

 **597:38-a Default Fees. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever a party recognized to appear for any offense defaults,
the court may impose an administrative processing fee in the amount of

                                             $50 in addition to any other fine or penalty assessment.
                                             
 II. The administrative processing fee provided for in paragraph I
shall be retained by the court.

**Source.** 1991, 347:7, eff. July 1, 1991.

### Section 597:38-b

 **597:38-b Collection of Forfeitures; Motor Vehicles. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever a party recognized to appear for any offense involving
driving makes default and the recognizance is declared forfeited, the
court shall send a notice of default to the division of motor vehicles.
The division shall send a notice to the person owing the recognizance,
demanding payment within 30 days and stating that failure to make
payment within the 30-day period shall result in suspension of such
person's driver's license or driving privilege until such time as the
person provides proof to the department of safety that he has paid the
amount of the forfeited recognizance to the court.
                                             
 II. Payments of the forfeited recognizance under paragraph I shall
be sent to the department of safety and deposited into a special fund,
known as the default bench warrant fund, established in RSA 263:56-d to
pay the costs of state, county and local law enforcement officials who
make arrests pursuant to bench warrants issued for persons improperly at
large for driving-related offenses and to pay the cost of breath
analyzer machines.

**Source.** 1991, 366:1. 1998, 288:10, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

Discharge of Prisoner Unable to Procure Bail
--------------------------------------------

### Section 597:39

 **597:39 Procedure. –** The court, upon petition and notice to the
county attorney, prosecutor or party interested, may order the discharge
of any person imprisoned for inability to find sureties in a
recognizance, upon such terms as may be deemed just.

**Source.** 1858, 2118:1. GS 241:13. GL 259:13. PS 252:38. PL 366:49. RL
425:49. RSA 597:39. 1967, 132:42, eff. July 18, 1967.

Recognizances Upon Arrest for Offense Committed in Another County
-----------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 597:40

 **597:40 Recognizance for Appearance in Superior Court. –** If a
person is arrested in one county on a warrant for an offense alleged to
have been committed in another county exceeding the jurisdiction of a
justice to determine, the officer, on the arrestee's request, shall take
the arrestee before a justice for the county or judicial district
thereof in which the arrest was made, and, upon the arrestee's waiving
examination, such justice may take the arrestee's personal recognizance
or recognizance with sufficient sureties upon the terms and conditions
prescribed by this chapter for the arrestee's appearance at the next
term of the superior court for the county or judicial district thereof
in which the offense is alleged to have been committed, and the arrestee
shall return to said court certified copies of the warrant and
recognizance.

**Source.** RS 222:16. CS 237:16. GS 236:12. GL 254:12. PS 250:12. PL
364:15. RL 423:15. RSA 597:40. 1969, 78:9. 1992, 284:77, eff. July 1,
1992.

### Section 597:41

 **597:41 Recognizance for Appearance Before Court or Justice Named
in Warrant. –** A justice before whom a party is taken pursuant to RSA
597:40 may, upon good cause shown, take the recognizance of the party to
appear before the court or justice as directed in the warrant on a day
and hour named, within 10 days following. He shall certify the fact upon
the warrant and deliver it, with the recognizance, to the officer.

**Source.** GS 236:13. GL 254:13. PS 250:13. PL 364:16. RL 423:16.

### Section 597:42

 **597:42 Return of Recognizance, etc. –** The officer shall
forthwith deliver the warrant and recognizance to the justice or court
before whom the warrant is returnable, who may thereupon summon before
him and order to recognize any witness that he may deem necessary to
appear at the same time and place.

**Source.** GS 236:14. GL 254:14. PS 250:14. PL 364:17. RL 423:17.
