---
title: 'CHAPTER 598-A PROFESSIONAL BONDSMEN'
---

TITLE LIX
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN CRIMINAL CASES
=============================

CHAPTER 598-A
                                             
PROFESSIONAL BONDSMEN
---------------------

### Section 598-A:1

 **598-A:1 Approval and Registration. –** No person proposing to
become bail or surety in a criminal case for hire or reward, either
received or to be received, shall be accepted as such unless he shall
have been approved and registered as a professional bondsman by the
secretary of state or his designee; provided, however, no person
proposing to become bail or surety in a criminal case in any calendar
year after having become bail or surety in criminal cases on 5 separate
occasions in said year shall be accepted thereafter during that year as
bail or surety unless he shall have been approved and registered as a
professional bondsman as provided in this section.

**Source.** 1967, 156:1. 1977, 386:1. 1989, 8:1. 1992, 288:55, eff. July
1, 1992.

### Section 598-A:1-a

 **598-A:1-a Fees. –**
                                             
 I. A person proposing to become bail or surety and registered as a
professional bondsman shall pay to the secretary of state or his
designee an initial application fee of 
                                             $400; the fee shall be deposited
in the general fund by the state treasurer as unrestricted revenue.
                                             
 II. Thereafter, an annual renewal fee of 
                                             $100 for the registration
in each county of the state where a professional bondsman seeks to post
bail shall be due and payable to the secretary of state or his designee
on December 30 for the ensuing year. The fee shall be deposited in the
general fund by the state treasurer as unrestricted revenue.

**Source.** 1977, 386:2. 1989, 8:2. 1992, 288:55, eff. July 1, 1992.

### Section 598-A:2

 **598-A:2 Revocation. –** A person who has been accepted as bail or
surety, contrary to the provisions of this chapter, shall nevertheless
be liable on his obligation as such bail or surety. Approval and
registration under this chapter may be revoked at any time by the
secretary of state or his designee and shall be revoked in case such a
bondsman fails for 30 days after demand to satisfy in full a judgment
recovered under RSA 597:33. The county attorney or prosecuting officer
obtaining any such judgment which is not satisfied in full within 30
days after demand shall immediately notify the secretary of state or his
designee in writing.

**Source.** 1967, 156:1. 1977, 386:3. 1989, 8:3. 1992, 288:55, eff. July
1, 1992.

### Section 598-A:3

 **598-A:3 List of Professional Bondsmen. –** The secretary of state
or designee shall furnish all superior court clerks, all district courts
having authority to accept bail, all jails, and all police stations with
a list of the names of all persons registered as professional bondsmen
and shall notify such clerks, courts, jails, and police stations of any
change in a bondsman's status. The secretary of state shall update the
list as necessary, but not less than once per year. The list shall
include the following statement in bold type: "You are encouraged to
contact more than one bail bondsman because not all bail bondsmen charge
the same fees or provide the same services.'' The unaltered list shall
be displayed prominently and visibly to defendants in all courts, jails,
and police stations. No other list shall be displayed, furnished, or
provided.

**Source.** 1967, 156:1. 1977, 386:4. 1989, 8:4. 1992, 288:55, eff. July
1, 1992. 2008, 35:1, eff. July 11, 2008. 2011, 236:1, eff. Sept. 3,
2011.

### Section 598-A:4

 **598-A:4 Rules of Secretary of State or His Designee. –** All
professional bondsmen shall be governed by rules which shall be adopted
under RSA 541-A by the secretary of state or his designee.

**Source.** 1967, 156:1. 1977, 386:5. 1989, 8:5. 1992, 288:55, eff. July
1, 1992.

### Section 598-A:5

 **598-A:5 Penalty. –** Any unregistered person receiving hire or
reward for his services as bail or surety in any criminal case, any
unregistered person becoming bail or surety in any criminal case in any
calendar year after having become bail or surety in criminal cases on 5
separate occasions in said year, and any professional bondsman violating
any provision of the rules established hereunder for such bondsmen
shall, if a natural person, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, if another
person, a felony.

**Source.** 1967, 156:1. 1973, 370:19, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 598-A:6

 **598-A:6 Exceptions. –** The provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to a fidelity, guaranty or surety company duly authorized to
transact business in New Hampshire nor any duly authorized agent
thereof. A person shall be deemed to have become bail or surety on a
separate occasion within the meaning of this chapter if he becomes such:
(1) for a person in respect to a single offense; or (2) for a person in
respect to 2 or more offenses committed at the same time or arising out
of the same transaction or course of conduct wherefor he at different
times offers bail or surety; or (3) for 2 or more persons at the same
time offering bail or surety in respect to offenses committed jointly or
in a common course of conduct. Becoming bail or surety for the same
person or persons in subsequent proceedings in connection with
prosecution for the same offense or offenses shall not be deemed an
additional occasion or occasions.

**Source.** 1967, 156:1, eff. Aug. 1, 1967.
