---
title: 'CHAPTER 600-A MULTICOUNTY GRAND JURIES'
---

TITLE LIX
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN CRIMINAL CASES
=============================

CHAPTER 600-A
                                             
MULTICOUNTY GRAND JURIES
------------------------

### Section 600-A:1

 **600-A:1 Application for Multicounty Grand Jury. –** Application
for a multicounty grand jury may be made by the attorney general to the
supreme court. In such application the attorney general shall state
that, in his or her judgment, the convening of a multicounty grand jury
is necessary because of an alleged crime or crimes involving more than
one county or judicial district thereof of the state and that, in his or
her judgment, the grand jury functions cannot be effectively performed
by a county grand jury. The application shall specify for which counties
or judicial districts thereof the multicounty grand jury is to be
convened.

**Source.** 1985, 133:1. 1992, 284:79, eff. July 1, 1992.

### Section 600-A:2

 **600-A:2 Contents of Order Convening Multicounty Grand Jury. –**
                                             
 I. An order issued upon an application made pursuant to RSA 600-A:1
shall:
                                             
 (a) Convene a multicounty grand jury having statewide
jurisdiction, or jurisdiction over all counties and judicial districts
thereof requested in the application by the attorney general;
                                             
 (b) Designate a judge of a superior court to be supervising judge
over such multicounty grand jury and provide that such judge shall, with
respect to all proper activities of said multicounty grand jury, have
jurisdiction over all counties or judicial districts thereof in the
jurisdiction of said multicounty grand jury;
                                             
 (c) Designate the counties or judicial districts thereof which
shall supply jurors and in what ratios;
                                             
 (d) Designate a location or locations for the multicounty grand
jury proceeding; and
                                             
 (e) Provide for such other incidental arrangements as may be
necessary.
                                             
 II. All matters to be included in such order shall be determined by
the justice issuing the order in any manner which he deems appropriate,
except that the supreme court may adopt general rules, consistent with
the provisions of this chapter, establishing standard procedures for the
convening of multicounty grand juries.

**Source.** 1985, 133:1. 1992, 284:80, eff. July 1, 1992.

### Section 600-A:3

 **600-A:3 Term. –** The regular term of the multicounty grand jury
shall be 6 months. The terms may be shortened by the supervising judge
at the request of the attorney general. The term may be extended by the
supervising judge for a specified time period upon a written petition by
the attorney general stating that an extension is needed to conclude a
multicounty grand jury begun prior to the expiration of its term.

**Source.** 1985, 133:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 600-A:4

 **600-A:4 Applicable Law. –** The law applicable to county grand
juries, including their powers, duties and functions, shall apply to
multicounty grand juries except insofar as it is in conflict with this
chapter.

**Source.** 1985, 133:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 600-A:5

 **600-A:5 Presentation of Evidence to Multicounty Grand Jury. –**
Evidence shall be presented a multicounty grand jury by the attorney
general or his designee.

**Source.** 1985, 133:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 600-A:6

 **600-A:6 Indictment; Designation of Venue; Consolidation. –** Any
indictment by any multicounty grand jury shall be returned to the
supervising judge and shall include a finding as to the county, judicial
district thereof, or counties in which the alleged offense was
committed. Thereupon, the supervising judge shall, by order, designate
the county of venue for the purpose of trial. The supervising judge may,
by order, direct the consolidation of an indictment returned by a county
grand jury with an indictment returned by a multicounty grand jury and
fix venue for trial.

**Source.** 1985, 133:1. 1992, 284:81, eff. July 1, 1992.

### Section 600-A:7

 **600-A:7 Prosecution of Indictments. –** The attorney general or
his designee shall prosecute all indictments returned by a multicounty
grand jury.

**Source.** 1985, 133:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 600-A:8

 **600-A:8 Costs and Expenses. –** The costs and expenses incurred by
impaneling a multicounty grand jury and in the performance of its
functions and duties shall be paid by the state.

**Source.** 1985, 133:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.
