---
title: 'CHAPTER 604-B PUBLIC DEFENDER PROGRAM'
---

TITLE LIX
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN CRIMINAL CASES
=============================

CHAPTER 604-B
                                             
PUBLIC DEFENDER PROGRAM
-----------------------

### Section 604-B:1

 **604-B:1 Declaration of Purpose. –** It is hereby declared to be
the policy of the state to continue a public defender program for
representation of indigent criminal defendants in Belknap, Merrimack,
Hillsborough and Rockingham counties and to extend that program to the
remaining 6 counties in the state.

**Source.** 1977, 296:1. 1981, 568:19, eff. July 1, 1981.

### Section 604-B:2

 **604-B:2 Representation of Indigent Defendants. –** Notwithstanding
any other provisions of law to the contrary, when the appointment of
counsel is required:
                                             
 I. For indigent defendants in criminal cases, or
                                             
 II. For juveniles charged as delinquents under RSA 169-B, the
district, municipal, superior and supreme courts shall appoint the
public defender program or a qualified attorney assigned by the court.
The public defender program shall also provide such other representation
of indigents as is necessary and consistent with normal criminal defense
as required by the New Hampshire and United States Constitutions.

**Source.** 1977, 296:1. 1981, 568:19, eff. July 1, 1981.

### Section 604-B:3

 **604-B:3 Limitation of Representation. –** The public defender
program shall not represent more than one person where a conflict of
interest exists under the code of professional responsibility.

**Source.** 1977, 296:1. 1981, 568:19, eff. July 1, 1981.

### Section 604-B:4

 **604-B:4 Contract. –** The state of New Hampshire, by the judicial
council and with the approval of governor and council, shall contract
with any organization or groups of lawyers approved by the board of
governors of the New Hampshire Bar Association to operate the public
defender program and provide public defender representation as provided
in RSA 604-B:2 and 3. The contract shall fix the number of defender
attorneys providing representation in each county and shall permit the
public defender program to subcontract for attorney services, including
appellate services, as may be necessary to provide such representation.
No such contract shall be effective for longer than 2 years. The
compensation for operation of the public defender program shall be such
sums as may be fixed by the contract, subject to the appropriations made
therefor.

**Source.** 1977, 296:1. 1981, 568:19, eff. July 1, 1981.

### Section 604-B:5

 **604-B:5 Supervision. –** The public defender program shall be
under the general supervision of the judicial council for such matters
pertaining to, but not limited to, allocation of cases between the
public defender program and assigned counsel, performance, professional
competence, and fiscal and budgetary matters. The supreme court shall
recommend a fee schedule for assigned counsel which shall be graduated
to reflect years of legal experience of such counsel.

**Source.** 1977, 296:1. 1981, 568:19, eff. July 1, 1981.

### Section 604-B:6

 **604-B:6 Allocation of Cases. –** The allocation of cases between
the public defender program and assigned counsel shall be in accordance
with a plan adopted by the public defender program and approved by the
judicial council. The plan shall establish caseload limits for defender
attorneys in accordance with professional standards under the code of
professional responsibility and shall provide for appointment of
assigned counsel only where maximum caseloads have been reached or
public defender attorneys are otherwise unavailable.

**Source.** 1977, 296:1. 1981, 568:19, eff. July 1, 1981.

### Section 604-B:7

 **604-B:7 Public Defenders. –** Public defenders shall serve in
accordance with the terms of a contract entered into pursuant to RSA
604-B:4. Public defender responsibilities shall be exclusively concerned
with rights of indigent criminal defendants.

**Source.** 1977, 269:1. 1978, 52:4. 1981, 568:19, eff. July 1, 1981.

### Section 604-B:8

 **604-B:8 Alternate Public Defender Program. –** The state of New
Hampshire by the judicial council and with the approval of the governor
and council may, in addition to the contract for the public defender
program referred to in RSA 604-B:4, contract for an alternate public
defender program to represent indigent defendants in circumstances
where, because of conflict of interest or otherwise, the public defender
program is unable to provide representation to a defendant. The
alternate public defender program and the contract between it and the
state shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1988, 225:1, eff. April 30, 1988.
