---
title: 'CHAPTER 607-A UNIFORM ACT ON STATUS OF CONVICTED PERSONS'
---

TITLE LIX
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN CRIMINAL CASES
=============================

CHAPTER 607-A
                                             
UNIFORM ACT ON STATUS OF CONVICTED PERSONS
------------------------------------------

### Section 607-A:1

 **607-A:1 Definition. –** In this chapter, "felony'' means:
                                             
 I. A crime committed against the laws of this state or of the
federal government for which a sentence of death or imprisonment in the
state prison or a federal prison or penitentiary; or
                                             
 II. A crime committed against the laws of another state for which a
sentence of death or imprisonment in a prison or penitentiary is
imposed, if the act would permit a sentence of death or imprisonment in
the state prison in this state had it been committed in this state.

**Source.** 1967, 289:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1967.

### Section 607-A:2

 **607-A:2 Rights Lost. –**
                                             
 I. A person sentenced for a felony, from the time of his or her
sentence until his or her final discharge, may not:
                                             
 (a) Vote in an election, but if execution of sentence is
suspended with or without the defendant being placed on probation or he
or she is paroled after commitment to imprisonment, he or she may vote
during the period of the suspension or parole; or
                                             
 (b) Seek the nomination of a political party or become a
candidate for or hold public office.
                                             
 II. A public office held at the time of sentence is forfeited as of
the date of the sentence if the sentence is in this state or, if the
sentence is in another state or in a federal court, as of the date a
certification of the sentence from the sentencing court is filed in the
office of secretary of state, who shall receive and file it as a public
document. An appeal or other proceeding taken to set aside or otherwise
nullify the conviction or sentence does not affect the application of
this section, but if the conviction is reversed the defendant shall be
restored to any public office forfeited under this chapter from the time
of the reversal and shall be entitled to the emoluments thereof from the
time of the forfeiture.

**Source.** 1967, 289:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1967. 2015, 99:1, eff. Aug. 4,
2015.

### Section 607-A:3

 **607-A:3 Rights Retained by Convicted Person. –** Except as
otherwise provided by this chapter or by the constitution of this state,
a person convicted of a crime does not suffer civil death or corruption
of blood or sustain loss of civil rights or forfeiture of estate or
property, but retains all of his rights, political, personal, civil, and
otherwise, including the right to hold public office or employment, to
vote, to hold, receive, and transfer property, to enter into contracts,
to sue and be sued, and to hold offices of private trust in accordance
with law.

**Source.** 1967, 289:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1967.

### Section 607-A:4

 **607-A:4 Savings Provisions. –**
                                             
 I. This chapter does not affect the power of a court, otherwise
given by law, to impose sentence, to suspend imposition or execution of
sentence on any conditions, or to impose conditions of probation, or the
power of the adult parole board to impose conditions of parole.
                                             
 II. This chapter does not deprive or restrict the authority and
powers of officials of a penal institution or other penal facility,
otherwise provided by law, for the administration of the institution or
facility or for the control of the conduct and conditions of confinement
of a convicted person in their custody.
                                             
 III. This chapter does not affect the qualifications or
disqualifications otherwise required or imposed by law for a designated
office, public or private, for service as a juror, for voting, or for
any designated profession, trust, or position or any designated license
or privilege conferred by public authority.
                                             
 IV. This chapter does not affect the rights of others arising out of
the conviction or out of the conduct on which the conviction is based
and not dependent upon the doctrines of civil death, the loss of civil
rights, the forfeiture of estate, or corruption of blood.
                                             
 V. This chapter does not affect laws governing rights of inheritance
of a murderer from his victim.

**Source.** 1967, 289:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1967.

### Section 607-A:5

 **607-A:5 Certificate of Discharge. –**
                                             
 I. If the sentence was imposed in this state, the order,
certificate, or other instrument of discharge given to a person
sentenced for a felony upon his discharge after completion of service of
his sentence or after service under probation or parole shall state that
the defendant's rights to vote and to hold any future public office, of
which he was deprived by this chapter, are thereby restored and that he
suffers no other disability by virtue of his conviction and sentence
except as otherwise provided by this chapter. A copy of the order or
other instrument of discharge shall be filed with the clerk of the court
of conviction.
                                             
 II. If the sentence was imposed in another state or in a federal
court and the convicted person has similarly been discharged by the
appropriate authorities, the governor of this state, upon application
and proof of the discharge in such form as the governor may require,
shall issue a certificate stating that the rights enumerated in
paragraph I have been restored to the defendant under the laws of this
state.
                                             
 III. If another state having a similar act issues its certificate of
discharge to a convicted person stating that the defendant's rights have
been restored, the rights of which he was deprived in this state under
this chapter are restored to him in this state.

**Source.** 1967, 289:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1967.

### Section 607-A:6

 **607-A:6 Uniformity of Interpretation. –** This chapter shall be so
construed as to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform the law
of those states which enact it.

**Source.** 1967, 289:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1967.

### Section 607-A:7

 **607-A:7 Short Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the Uniform
Act on Status of Convicted Persons.

**Source.** 1967, 289:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1967.

### Section 607-A:8

 **607-A:8 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application and to this end the provisions of the chapter are severable.

**Source.** 1967, 289:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1967.
