---
title: |
    CHAPTER 613-A UNIFORM RENDITION OF PRISONERS AS WITNESSES IN CRIMINAL
    PROCEEDINGS ACT
---

TITLE LIX
                                             
PROCEEDINGS IN CRIMINAL CASES
=============================

CHAPTER 613-A
                                             
UNIFORM RENDITION OF PRISONERS AS WITNESSES IN CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS ACT
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 613-A:1

 **613-A:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Witness'' means a person who is confined in a penal institution
in any state and whose testimony is desired in another state in any
criminal proceeding or investigation by a grand jury or in any criminal
action before a court.
                                             
 II. "Penal institutions'' includes a jail, prison, penitentiary,
house of correction, or other place of penal detention.
                                             
 III. "State'' includes any state of the United States, the District
of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and any territory of the
United States.

**Source.** 1959, 83:1, eff. July 5, 1959.

### Section 613-A:2

 **613-A:2 Summoning Witness in This State to Testify in Another
State. –** A judge of a state court of record in another state which by
its laws has made provision for commanding persons confined in penal
institutions within that state to attend and testify in this state may
certify (1) that there is a criminal proceeding or investigation by a
grand jury or a criminal action pending in the court, (2) that a person
who is confined in a penal institution in this state may be a material
witness in the proceeding, investigation, or action, and (3) that his
presence will be required during a specified time. Upon presentation of
the certificate to any judge having jurisdiction over the person
confined, and upon notice to the attorney general, the judge in this
state shall fix a time and place for a hearing and shall make an order
directed to the person having custody of the prisoner requiring that the
prisoner be produced before him at the hearing.

**Source.** 1959, 83:1, eff. July 5, 1959.

### Section 613-A:3

 **613-A:3 Court Order. –** If at the hearing provided for in RSA
613-A:2 the judge determines (1) that the witness may be material and
necessary, (2) that his attending and testifying are not adverse to the
interests of this state or to the health or legal rights of the witness,
(3) that the laws of the state in which he is requested to testify will
give him protection from arrest and the service of civil and criminal
process because of any act committed prior to his arrival in the state
under the order, and (4) that as a practical matter the possibility is
negligible that the witness may be subject to arrest or to the service
of civil or criminal process in any state through which he will be
required to pass, the judge shall issue an order, with a copy of the
certificate attached, (a) directing the witness to attend and testify,
(b) directing the person having custody of the witness to produce him in
the court where the criminal action is pending or where the grand jury
investigation is pending, at a time and place specified in the order,
and (c) prescribing such conditions as the judge shall determine.

**Source.** 1959, 83:1, eff. July 5, 1959.

### Section 613-A:4

 **613-A:4 Terms and Conditions. –** The order to the witness and to
the person having custody of the witness issued pursuant to RSA 613-A:3
shall provide for the return of the witness at the conclusion of his
testimony, proper safeguards on his custody, and proper financial
reimbursement or prepayment by the requesting jurisdiction for all
expenses incurred in the production and return of the witness, and may
prescribe such other conditions as the judge thinks proper or necessary.
The order shall not become effective until the judge of the state
requesting the witness enters an order directing compliance with the
conditions prescribed.

**Source.** 1959, 83:1, eff. July 5, 1959.

### Section 613-A:5

 **613-A:5 Exceptions. –** This chapter does not apply to any person
in this state confined as insane or mentally ill or as a defective
delinquent or under sentence of death.

**Source.** 1959, 83:1, eff. July 5, 1959.

### Section 613-A:6

 **613-A:6 Prisoner from Another State Summoned to Testify in This
State. –** If a person confined in a penal institution in any other
state may be a material witness in a criminal action pending in a court
of record or in a grand jury investigation in this state, a judge of the
court may certify (1) that there is a criminal proceeding or
investigation by a grand jury or a criminal action pending in the court,
(2) that a person who is confined in a penal institution in the other
state may be a material witness in the proceeding, investigation, or
action, and (3) that his presence will be required during a specified
time. The certificate shall be presented to a judge of a court of record
in the other state having jurisdiction over the prisoner confined, and a
notice shall be given to the attorney general of the state in which the
prisoner is confined.

**Source.** 1959, 83:1, eff. July 5, 1959.

### Section 613-A:7

 **613-A:7 Compliance. –** The judge of the court in this state may
enter an order directing compliance with the terms and conditions
prescribed by the judge of the state in which the witness is confined.

**Source.** 1959, 83:1, eff. July 5, 1959.

### Section 613-A:8

 **613-A:8 Exemption from Arrest and Service of Process. –** If a
witness from another state comes into or passes through this state under
an order directing him to attend and testify in this or another state,
he shall not while in this state pursuant to the order be subject to
arrest or the service of process, civil or criminal, because of any act
committed prior to his arrival in this state under the order.

**Source.** 1959, 83:1, eff. July 5, 1959.

### Section 613-A:9

 **613-A:9 Uniformity of Interpretation. –** This chapter shall be so
construed as to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform the law
of those states which enact it.

**Source.** 1959, 83:1, eff. July 5, 1959.

### Section 613-A:10

 **613-A:10 Short Title. –** This act may be cited as the Uniform
Rendition of Prisoners as Witnesses in Criminal Proceedings Act.

**Source.** 1959, 83:1, eff. July 5, 1959.

### Section 613-A:11

 **613-A:11 Severability Clause. –** If any provision of this chapter
or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held
invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or
applications of the chapter which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
chapter are severable.

**Source.** 1959, 83:1, eff. July 5, 1959.
