---
title: 'CHAPTER 12-A DEPARTMENT OF RESOURCES AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 12-A
                                             
DEPARTMENT OF RESOURCES AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
------------------------------------------------

### Section 12-A:1

 **12-A:1 Establishment. –** There shall be a department of resources
and economic development under the executive direction of a commissioner
of resources and economic development, consisting of a division of
forests and lands, a division of economic development which shall
include but not be limited to subdivisions of development and promotion,
a division of travel and tourism development, and a division of parks
and recreation. Its purpose shall be to ensure the efficient coordinated
function of the 4 divisions, whereby the interests of economic
development, protection and responsible management of natural resources,
public enjoyment of state parks and forests, and promotion of travel and
tourism development are each held to be of integral importance in the
overall functioning of the department.

**Source.** 1909, 128:1. 1925, 113:1. PL 19:33; 191:1. 1931, 92:1. 1935,
6:1; 126:1. RL 27:40; 233:1. 1943, 39:3, 147:1. 1950, 5, part 12:1,
pars. 1, 2, 4. 1951, 47:1, 2. RSA 12:1, 2; 162:1, 2, 4; 216:1. 1957,
241:1, 3, 4. 1959, 172:1, 2. 1961, 223:3. 1970, 53:3. 1975, 146:1. 1999,
317:2. 2001, 28:1, eff. July 14, 2001.

### Section 12-A:1-a

 **12-A:1-a Declaration of Purpose. –** The purpose of this act is to
improve the administration of state government by providing unified
direction of policies, programs and personnel in the field of resources
and economic development making possible increased efficiency and
economies from integrated administration and operation of these related
functions of the state government.

**Source.** 1961, 223:1.

### Section 12-A:1-b

 **12-A:1-b General Provisions. –**
                                             
 I. Upon the recommendation of the commissioner of resources and
economic development after consultation with division directors
concerned and the advisory commission established by this chapter, the
governor and council are authorized to approve revisions in internal
administrative departmental organization as the governor and council
find from time to time may improve or make more economical the
administration of the department; provided, however, no such change
shall eliminate any then existing position within the classified service
unless such position shall then be vacant, or, if filled, its incumbent
has been transferred to an equivalent or higher paid position of like
tenure.
                                             
 II. With the approval of the governor and council and of the
director of personnel the commissioner of resources and economic
development after consultation with directors of divisions concerned and
the advisory commission is authorized to transfer classified personnel,
appropriations or portions thereof relating thereto as well as necessary
equipment, within any division or between divisions of the department;
provided, however, that no such transfer shall eliminate classified
positions so transferred. Vacancies in classified positions occurring
after July 1, 1961, in any department functions to be transferred to the
new department of resources and economic development shall not be filled
without the approval of the governor and council, provided that after
written notification of vacancies to be filled are received by the
governor and council from department directors, and if no action is
taken on these requests within thirty days, the director of the division
concerned may fill such vacancy or vacancies forthwith. No permanent
classified employee in the state service upon the effective date of this
act shall be required to take an examination to remain in his position.
The authority of the governor and council to approve the filling of
vacancies in the classified service after July 1, 1961 as hereinabove
provided, shall terminate as of June 30, 1963.

**Source.** 1961, 223:2. 1986, 12:4, I, eff. Mar. 27, 1986.

### Section 12-A:1-c

 **12-A:1-c Powers and Duties of Department of Resources and Economic
Development. –** In addition to any other powers and duties set forth in
this chapter or as otherwise provided by statute, the department of
resources and economic development shall have the power and duty to plan
and conduct a program of information and publicity to attract tourists,
visitors, industrial concerns and other interested persons from outside
the state to the state of New Hampshire, and to encourage, coordinate,
and participate in the efforts of other public and private organizations
or groups of citizens in order to publicize the facilities, industrial
advantages and other attractions of the state for the same purposes. The
department of resources and economic development shall also have the
power and duty to plan and conduct inspections at least semi-annually
and to plan and conduct necessary maintenance, monitoring and consulting
work to ensure the preservation of the "Old Man of the Mountain.'' The
commissioner shall assign, with the approval of the advisory commission,
such duties and functions to the 3 divisions of the department, as in
his discretion will best effectuate the purposes, powers and duties set
forth in this section and as otherwise provided by statute, provided,
however, that the commissioner shall assign such duties and functions
relating to the preservation of the "Old Man of the Mountain'' to the
division of parks and recreation and to the officially designated
caretaker for the "Old Man of the Mountain.''

**Source.** 1967, 166:1. 1991, 359:1, eff. July 1, 1991.

### Section 12-A:1-d

 **12-A:1-d Police Powers. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development, the director of the division of parks and recreation, and
the director of the division of forests and lands shall have authority
as peace officers as provided in RSA 594 and may confer said authority
upon certain individuals within the department of resources and economic
development, the division of parks and recreation, and the division of
forests and lands. Said police powers shall be limited to the
enforcement of state laws and rules of the department of resources and
economic development on lands or property owned by, leased to, or
otherwise under the control of the department of resources and economic
development. Nothing herein shall limit the police powers of employees
of the department of resources and economic development as provided for
in RSA 227-G:7, RSA 215-C:32, and RSA 215-A:16 and 17.
                                             
 II. By written agreement executed by the commissioner of the
department of resources and economic development, any authorized
municipal official may utilize the summons procedures under RSA 31:39-d
to cite individuals for violations of state park administrative rules or
forests and lands administrative rules, or both. Authorized
municipalities acting under this paragraph shall retain 100 percent of
any fine collected in accordance with the schedule of administrative
fines of the department of resources and economic development.

**Source.** 1979, 204:1. 1981, 538:6, 13. 1995, 299:4. 2005, 210:3.
2010, 230:1, eff. June 28, 2010. 2013, 166:2, eff. June 27, 2013.

### Section 12-A:1-e

 **12-A:1-e Joint Promotional Program. –** A joint promotional
advertising program is hereby established to carry out the duties of the
department of resources and economic development as set forth in RSA
12-A:1-c to publicize the advantages of the state of New Hampshire for
tourism and to encourage continuous partnership with private industry in
this promotion in order to maintain a viable and strong economic base in
the state.
                                             
 I. The department of resources and economic development shall
administer a joint promotional advertising program in cooperation with a
joint promotional program screening committee. The funds appropriated
for this program shall be expended for grants for advertising programs
entered into with independent groups or organizations which are designed
to promote travel and tourism in the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. The screening committee shall consist of the director of the
division of travel and tourism development and 8 other members appointed
as follows:
                                             
 (a) One member appointed by the governor and council upon
nomination by the commissioner of resources and economic development;
                                             
 (b) Seven members appointed by the governor and council upon
nomination by the New Hampshire travel council. The members nominated by
the travel council shall include at least one representative of each of
the following: a chamber of commerce, regional association, ski area,
attraction, campground, and lodging;
                                             
 (c) Members, other than the director of the division of travel
and tourism development, shall serve for a term of 3 years and until
their successors are appointed and qualified.
                                             
 III. The screening committee shall elect its own chairman. Members
may designate an alternate with the approval of the chairman. A majority
of the members of the committee or their alternates shall constitute a
quorum.
                                             
 IV. Members of the screening committee shall not be compensated;
however, the commissioner of resources and economic development may set
aside up to one percent of the funds appropriated for the joint
promotional program in any fiscal year to reimburse committee members
for their direct expenses associated with the program. The commissioner
shall review and approve all requests for reimbursement.
                                             
 V. Funds appropriated to the joint promotional program shall only be
made available to regional associations, state-wide tourist groups,
chambers of commerce or other promotional organizations as may be
certified by the screening committee with the approval of the
commissioner of the department of resources and economic development.
Such grants shall only be given to those organizations which have been
in existence for at least 3 years prior to the date of the grant
application.
                                             
 VI. Grant awards shall require 50 percent matching funds from
private sources. Grants shall not be used for the administrative
salaries or overhead expenses of any applicant selected for a grant.
                                             
 VII. Grant applications shall be reviewed by the screening committee
which shall recommend approval or disapproval of applications to the
commissioner of resources and economic development. A recommendation for
disapproval by the screening committee or the commissioner shall be in
writing with the reasons for disapproval stated.
                                             
 VIII. Funds appropriated for the joint promotional program for the
first fiscal year of any biennium shall not lapse and shall be available
for expenditure during the second fiscal year of the biennium. All funds
which have not been expended by the end of the second fiscal year of a
biennium shall lapse to the general fund.
                                             
 IX. The commissioner of resources and economic development shall,
with the advice of the screening committee, adopt rules under RSA 541-A
after public hearing governing the joint promotional program. These
rules shall include:
                                             
 (a) A description of the joint promotional program, stating the
general course and method of its operations and the methods by which the
public may obtain information or make submissions or requests;
                                             
 (b) The procedures and criteria used to certify groups or
organizations eligible for matching grants;
                                             
 (c) The application process, including the information required
of applicants;
                                             
 (d) The procedures and criteria used to evaluate grant
applications;
                                             
 (e) Procedures for the administration of grants by recipients
including reporting requirements.
                                             
 X. Three percent of the funds appropriated to the joint promotional
program shall be allocated for a grant or grants to organizations that
do not qualify under paragraph V of this section. Such grants shall
require 10 percent matching funds from private sources, provided that
the organization:
                                             
 (a) Has a demonstrated program of cooperation for promotion;
                                             
 (b) Has a demonstrated need for promotion;
                                             
 (c) Has demonstrated a case of regional depression or financial
hardship;
                                             
 (d) Agrees that this unmatched grant shall not be awarded for
more than 2 successive years; and
                                             
 (e) Further agrees that the affected area shall not be eligible
for any unmatched grant for a period of 5 years after the second year
following the award of the first of any unmatched grant.

**Source.** 1983, 422:20. 1985, 270:6. 1986, 165:4. 1999, 317:8, eff.
July 1, 1999.

### Section 12-A:2

 **12-A:2 Commissioner of Resources and Economic Development. –**
There shall be a commissioner of resources and economic development who
shall be appointed by the governor and council for a term of 4 years
from the date of appointment. A vacancy shall be filled for the
unexpired term. It shall be the responsibility of the commissioner to
organize and direct the work of the department. The commissioner of
resources and economic development shall appoint one member of his or
her staff who shall act in the commissioner's stead when said
commissioner is absent from the state and at such other times as
directed by the commissioner. When acting for the commissioner said
person shall have all the power, duties and authority of the
commissioner. Directors of departmental divisions shall be subject to
the supervisory authority of the commissioner, which authority shall
include power to establish department and divisional policy as well as
to control the actual operations of the department and all divisions
therein. The commissioner shall consult with the advisory commission
prior to the establishment of general and divisional departmental
policy.

**Source.** 1925, 113:1. PL 19:33. 1931, 91:2. 1935, 6:1. RL 27:40.
1943, 39:3. 1945, 184:1. 1950, 5, part 12:1, par. 2. 1953, 265:1. RSA
12:1, 2; 162:2; 218:1, 3. 1961, 223:3. 2007, 156:2, eff. Aug. 17, 2007.

### Section 12-A:2-a

 **12-A:2-a Print Shop Operation. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 422:3, I, eff.
June 24, 1983.
                                             ]

### Section 12-A:2-b

 **12-A:2-b Harbor Masters, Mooring Permits and Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1978, 22:1, eff. June 22, 1978.
                                             ]

### Section 12-A:2-c

 **12-A:2-c Rulemaking; Administrative Fines. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A governing use
by the public of state forests, parks, or any other land or buildings
operated by the department of resources and economic development. This
shall include, but not be limited to, the commissioner's
responsibilities under RSA 216 and 227-H.
                                             
 II. Such rules shall include, but not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) Conduct of persons using the property, including prohibitions
or restrictions on use or transportation of any substances, articles, or
other matter.
                                             
 (b) Use of vehicles, including, but not limited to, restrictions
on parking and speed.
                                             
 (c)-(e) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (f) Imposition of administrative fines under paragraph IV.
                                             
 III. If so specified in any rule, persons violating that rule may be
evicted from the property and shall be guilty of either a violation or a
misdemeanor as stated in the specific rule.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner, after notice and hearing pursuant to RSA
541-A, may impose an administrative fine not to exceed 
                                             $250 for each
offense upon any person who violates any provision of the department's
administrative rules. Rehearings and appeals from a decision of the
commissioner under this paragraph shall be in accordance with RSA 541.
Any administrative fine imposed under this section shall not preclude
the imposition of further penalties under RSA 227-J. The commissioner
shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (a) A schedule of administrative fines which may be imposed under
this paragraph for violation of the department's administrative rules.
                                             
 (b) Procedures for notice and hearing prior to the imposition of
an administrative fine.
                                             
 V. The proceeds of administrative fines levied pursuant to paragraph
IV shall be deposited by the commissioner into the forest management and
protection fund established under RSA 227-G:5, I for violations of
forest management and protection rules, or into the state park fund
established under RSA 216-A:3-i for violations of parks and recreation
rules.

**Source.** 1983, 422:13. 1985, 270:7; 389:7. 1991, 355:63. 1993,
358:23. 1995, 299:5; 308:1, 127, I, II. 2010, 230:2-5, eff. June 28,
2010.

### Section 12-A:2-d

 **12-A:2-d Reports and Publications. –** The commissioner of
resources and economic development is authorized to prepare, publish and
distribute reports, charts, surveys or other documents consistent with
the responsibilities of the department. The commissioner may charge
reasonable fees for such documents. Fees for documents distributed by
the department shall be adopted as rules under RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1985, 270:10, eff. June 10, 1985.

### Section 12-A:2-e

 **12-A:2-e New Hampshire Economic Development Fund. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established the New Hampshire economic
development fund which shall be administered by the commissioner of the
department of resources and economic development. Said fund shall be for
the purpose of providing funds for grants, loans and other economic
development initiatives which shall be generally considered to be
beneficial to the state's overall economy as provided for in paragraph
II.
                                             
 II. Said fund shall be distributed or expended by the commissioner
with the advice and prior approval of the committee established in RSA
12-A:2-f and the approval of the governor and council for any of the
following purposes:
                                             
 (a) Business financing and expansion initiatives.
                                             
 (b) Job retention and creation.
                                             
 (c) International trade.
                                             
 (d) Research and development activities.
                                             
 (e) Other projects or programs recognized as being beneficial to
business activity in New Hampshire.
                                             
 III. To maximize the economic impact of expenditures from this fund,
and to leverage additional funding from other sources, the commissioner
may contract with such organizations as, but not limited to, the
following:
                                             
 (a) New Hampshire Business Development Corporation.
                                             
 (b) Small Business Investment Corporation.
                                             
 (c) Innovation Research Center.
                                             
 (d) Small Business Development Center.
                                             
 IV. All moneys returned to the department as a result of contracts
between the commissioner and any other party as authorized shall be
redeposited into the New Hampshire economic development fund. In
addition, the department may accept gifts, grants, donations or other
moneys for the purposes of this section. Said moneys shall be deposited
into the New Hampshire economic development fund.

**Source.** 1991, 4:21. 2007, 251:6, eff. Aug. 27, 2007.

### Section 12-A:2-f

 **12-A:2-f Review Committee. –** There is established a committee to
review the distribution and expenditure of funds in accordance with RSA
12-A:2-e. The committee shall be composed of the following:
                                             
 I. The speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 II. Two members of the house finance committee, appointed by the
speaker of the house.
                                             
 III. The president of the senate.
                                             
 IV. Two members of the senate finance committee, appointed by the
senate president.
                                             
 V. The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development, or designee.

**Source.** 1991, 4:21. 1995, 9:4, eff. June 11, 1995.

### Section 12-A:2-g

 **12-A:2-g New Hampshire-Canadian Trade Council. –** The
commissioner of resources and economic development and the secretary of
state shall have the authority to establish a New Hampshire trade
council to meet with one or more trade councils established by the
Canadian provinces, either separately or collectively. The members of
the council shall include 2 senators appointed by the president of the
senate, 2 house members appointed by the speaker of the house, the
commissioner or assignee, the secretary of state or assignee, and such
other members as the commissioner and secretary of state may appoint.

**Source.** 1991, 153:1. 1995, 10:1, eff. April 12, 1995.

### Section 12-A:2-h

 **12-A:2-h International Trade Promotion. –** The commissioner of
resources and economic development shall plan, develop, and administer
programs for international trade promotion and inward investment
promotion in cooperation with the Pease development authority, division
of ports and harbors and the Small Business Development Center and other
private organizations. The commissioner shall take a proactive role in
targeting foreign trade shows and foreign trade missions and shall
assist New Hampshire businesses desiring to participate in these shows
and missions. In planning, developing, and administering programs under
this section, the commissioner shall be assisted by the advisory
committee on international trade established in RSA 12-A:30 and may draw
on the revolving fund created under RSA 12-A:31.

**Source.** 1991, 260:2. 2001, 290:3, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 12-A:2-i

 **12-A:2-i Multiple Use Management of White Mountain National Forest
Land. –** The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development, or designee, shall have the authority and responsibility to
consult and work with the United States Department of Agriculture Forest
Service in order to promote and maintain continued multiple use
management of White Mountain National Forest land.

**Source.** 1999, 142:6, eff. June 25, 1999.

### Section 12-A:2-j

 **12-A:2-j Workforce Development. –** The commissioner of the
department of resources and economic development shall plan, develop,
and administer workforce investment activities, programs, and grants
under the federal Workforce Investment Act of 1998, 29 U.S.C. section
2801 et seq., as such may be amended, reauthorized, and in effect from
time to time, and shall discharge the day-to-day operational
responsibilities and obligations of the New Hampshire Workforce
Opportunity Council established under RSA 12-A:60. The commissioner
shall coordinate with the New Hampshire Workforce Opportunity Council to
promote state and local investment systems that increase the employment,
retention, and earnings of participants, and increase occupational skill
attainment by participants, and, as a result, improve the quality of the
workforce, reduce welfare dependency, and enhance the productivity and
competitiveness of the nation.

**Source.** 2009, 144:89, eff. Oct. 1, 2009.

### Section 12-A:3

 **12-A:3 Directors of Divisions. –** The commissioner shall nominate
for appointment by the governor and council a director of forests and
lands, a director of economic development, a director of travel and
tourism development, and a director of parks and recreation, each of
whom shall serve, subject to the provisions of RSA 4:1, for a term of 4
years from the date of appointment and until a successor is appointed
and qualified. Any vacancy in such office shall be filled for the
unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. Directors
of divisions shall be responsible for the administration and operation
of their respective divisions subject to the supervisory authority of
the commissioner as set forth in RSA 12-A:2.

**Source.** 1945, 184:1. 1953, 265:11. RSA 218:1, 3. 1961, 223:3. 1975,
146:2. 1999, 317:3, eff. July 1, 1999.

### Section 12-A:4

 **12-A:4 Salaries. –** The annual salaries of the commissioner of
resources and economic development, and of the directors of the
divisions, shall be as provided in RSA 94 as hereinafter amended.

**Source.** 1909, 128:1. 1925, 113:1. PL 19:33; 191:2. 1931, 91:2. 1935,
6:1. RL 27:40; 233:2. 1943, 39:3. 1950, 5, part 12:1, par. 1. 1951,
47:1. 1953, 265:1. RSA 12:1, 12; 162:1; 216:2; 218:2, 4. 1957, 241:1.
1959, 172:1. 1961, 223:3.

### Section 12-A:4-a,-4-b

 **12-A:4-a, 12-A:4-b Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 308:127, III,
eff. July 1, 1995.
                                             ]

### Section 12-A:4-c

 **12-A:4-c Assistant to the Commissioner; Position Established. –**

                                             [Repealed 2001, 158:109, I, eff. Dec. 28, 2001.
                                             ]

### Section 12-A:4-d

 **12-A:4-d Financial Counselor; Position Established. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1995, 308:127, IV, eff. July 1, 1995.
                                             ]

### Section 12-A:5

 **12-A:5 Advisory Commission Established. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a commission advisory to the commissioner of
resources and economic development which shall consist of the following
8 members:
                                             
 (a) Seven, who shall be appointed by the governor and council for
a term of 5 years and until his successor is appointed and qualified;
and
                                             
 (b) One who shall be the commissioner of transportation or his
designated representative whose appointment shall be coterminous with
the commissioner's tenure of office.
                                             
 II. In the event of a vacancy in membership of a member appointed
hereunder, appointment shall be made in the same manner but for the
unexpired term only.
                                             
 III. Members of the commission shall be residents of the state of
New Hampshire, at least one of whom shall be qualified, experienced and
representative of each of the following:
                                             
 (a) Manufacturing;
                                             
 (b) Agriculture;
                                             
 (c) Recreation;
                                             
 (d) Forestry;
                                             
 (e) The general public;
                                             
 (f) Commerce; and
                                             
 (g) Public relations.
                                             
 IV. The governor shall annually designate a chairman from among the
membership. No member shall be eligible to serve as chairman more than 3
years, whether or not his service as such has been consecutive or
interrupted.
                                             
 V. No more than 4 members of the commission, exclusive of the
commissioner of transportation, shall be of the same political party.
                                             
 VI. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation but
shall be entitled to receive mileage and expenses when in performance of
the duties required hereunder.

**Source.** 1935, 6:2. RL 27:41. 1950, 5, part 12:1, par. 1. 1951, 47:1.
RSA 12:3; 162:1. 1957, 241:1. 1959, 172:1. 1961, 223:3. 1971, 33:1.
2004, 257:33, eff. June 15, 2004.

### Section 12-A:5-a

 **12-A:5-a Limitations on Membership of Resources and Development
Advisory Commission. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 33:3, eff. May 31, 1971.
                                             ]

### Section 12-A:6

 **12-A:6 Advisory Commission; Duties. –** The commission shall
consult with and advise the commissioner of resources and economic
development with respect to the policy, programs, and operations of the
department upon a continuing basis and for said purposes shall meet with
the commissioner not less frequently than annually at the call of the
chairman or 3 commission members. A vacancy on the commission shall be
filled in accordance with the requirements of RSA 12-A:5. It shall be
the duty of the chairman to convene the commission not later than 10
days following his receipt of written request therefor from any 3 or
more members thereof. The commissioner shall attend any meeting of the
commission upon request of a majority of its membership. The advisory
commission shall submit to the governor and council biennially a written
report of the activities of the department covering the previous 2
calendar years, which report shall be a public document. A nonpublic
session of the advisory commission may be called at any time for any of
the reasons specified in RSA 91-A:3, II upon majority vote and shall
consist solely of the members thereof.

**Source.** 1935, 6:2. RL 27:41. 1950, 5, part 12:1, par. 4. RSA 12:3;
162:3. 1957, 241:2. 1961, 223:3. 1973, 140:5. 1975, 146:8. 1991, 217:1,
eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 12-A:7

 **12-A:7 Planning and Development Commission Abolished; Transfer of
Functions and Powers, Tenure. –** The state planning and development
commission, established pursuant to RSA 12, as amended, is hereby
abolished. All of its powers, duties, functions, personnel, records and
property are hereby transferred to the department of resources and
economic development. Wherever reference is made to the planning and
development commission in the statutes, it shall henceforth be construed
to mean the department of resources and economic development. The tenure
of members of the planning and development commission shall terminate
upon the appointment and qualification of the commissioner of resources
and economic development and directors of the divisions of resources and
economic development. The commissioner shall assign, with the approval
of the advisory commission, such duties, functions, personnel, records
and property transferred to the department by this section to the
division of resources and to the division of economic development as in
his discretion he deems necessary and advisable.

**Source.** 1961, 223:3.

### Section 12-A:7-a

 **12-A:7-a Bureau of Marine Services. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2004, 2:7, eff.
Mar. 5, 2004.
                                             ]

### Section 12-A:8

 **12-A:8 Forestry and Recreation Commission Abolished; Transfer of
Functions and Powers, Tenure. –** The forestry and recreation
commission, established pursuant to RSA 216, as amended, is hereby
abolished. All of its powers, duties, functions, personnel, records and
property are hereby transferred to the department of resources and
economic development. The commissioner of resources and economic
development, with the approval of the advisory commission shall assign
such thereof to the division of resources development and such to the
division of parks as is found necessary and advisable. Wherever
reference is made to the forestry and recreation commission in the
statutes, it shall henceforth be construed to mean the department of
resources and economic development. The tenure of members of the
forestry and recreation commission shall terminate upon the appointment
and qualification of the directors of the division of resources
development and of parks.

**Source.** 1961, 223:3.

### Section 12-A:8-a

 **12-A:8-a Division of Resources Development; Transfer of Functions,
Powers, Duties. –** All of the functions, powers, duties, personnel,
records and property of the division of resources development are hereby
transferred to the division of forests and lands of the department of
resources and economic development. Whenever reference is made to the
division of resources development in the statutes, it shall henceforth
be construed to mean the division of forests and lands. Whenever
reference is made to the director, division of forests and lands, he
shall also be known as the state forester.

**Source.** 1975, 146:3, eff. July 25, 1975.

### Section 12-A:9

 **12-A:9 Director of Resources Development; Initial Appointment and
Tenure. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988, 143:2, eff. June 20, 1988.
                                             ]

### Section 12-A:9-a

 **12-A:9-a Director of Forests and Lands, State Forester; Initial
Appointment and Tenure. –**
                                             
 I. The director of the division of resources development in office
on the effective date of this section shall continue in office as
director of the division of forests and lands subject to the provisions
of this chapter. His tenure and salary shall be as has been established
for the director of the division of resources development. All of the
powers, duties and functions heretofore performed by the director of the
division of resources development pursuant to any provisions of the
statutes shall henceforth be performed by the director of the division
of forests and lands subject to the provisions of this chapter. Wherever
reference is made to the director of the division of resources
development, it shall henceforth be construed to mean the director,
division of forests and lands, department of resources and economic
development.
                                             
 II. In addition to the title of director, division of forests and
lands, said director shall also be entitled the state forester.

**Source.** 1975, 146:4, eff. July 25, 1975.

### Section 12-A:9-b

 **12-A:9-b Connecticut Lakes Headwaters Citizens Committee. –**
                                             
 I. There is established the Connecticut Lakes headwaters citizens
committee. Committee membership shall be as follows and shall include a
minimum of 7 members who are residents of any community in the Great
North Woods region association, as established by the state in February
1998:
                                             
 (a) Two residents of the town of Pittsburg, appointed by the
selectmen.
                                             
 (b) One resident of the town of Clarksville, appointed by the
selectmen.
                                             
 (c) One resident of the town of Stewartstown, appointed by the
selectmen.
                                             
 (d) One person who shall have expertise in forestry and timber
harvesting, appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (e) One person who shall have expertise in monitoring
conservation easements, appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives.
                                             
 (f) One person who shall have expertise in outdoor recreation and
tourism, appointed by the president of the senate.
                                             
 (g) One person who shall have expertise in forest ecology and
management of natural areas, appointed by the president of the senate.
                                             
 (h) Two persons appointed by the governor with the consent of the
council.
                                             
 (i) A Coos county commissioner, or designee.
                                             
 (j) The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development, or designee.
                                             
 (k) The executive director of the fish and game department, or
designee.
                                             
 (l) A representative of the largest private landowner within the
borders of the Connecticut Lakes headwaters tract, appointed by the
landowner, who shall serve as an ex-officio, non-voting member.
                                             
 (m) The commissioner of the department of environmental services,
or designee.
                                             
 (n) One leaseholder in any community in the Great North Woods
region association, appointed by leaseholders. Leaseholders shall meet
to choose the member, who shall be a resident of the state of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 II. Each member shall serve a 3-year term. Vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired term of office in the same manner as the original
appointment. Members may serve successive terms.
                                             
 III. The members shall elect a chairperson from among the public
members. Preference shall be given to a resident of the Great North
Woods region if a member from that area is willing to serve as chairman,
otherwise another public member shall be elected.
                                             
 IV. The committee shall meet at least annually and at such other
times as the chairperson deems necessary. At least once annually, the
committee shall meet to review the management plan of the state-owned
properties as prepared by the managing state agencies. The committee's
meetings shall be open to the public, in accordance with RSA 91-A.
Interested members of the public shall be allowed to speak before the
committee or to submit statements. Records, reports, and working papers
generated or used by the committee, or both, shall be made available to
the public for inspection or copying. The committee shall not be
responsible to the public for the costs of copying its documents.
                                             
 V. The duties of the committee shall include and be limited to:
                                             
 (a) Providing advice to the monitoring entity for monitoring
compliance with the terms and conditions of the working forest
conservation easement covering approximately 146,400 acres of the
Connecticut Lakes headwaters tract.
                                             
 (b) Providing advice to the department of resources and economic
development and the fish and game department on the management of public
recreational use of the Connecticut Lakes headwaters tract, including
the siting and approval of the first 10 new leases, the seasonal use of
the road system, snowmobile trails and their use, and the terms for
access and use of the tract by motorized vehicles. Such advice shall be
offered in cooperation with the private landowner.
                                             
 (c) Providing advice on the management of state park and natural
areas within the tract owned in fee by the state.
                                             
 (d) Providing advice to the department of resources and economic
development and the fish and game department on any proposed revision to
the stewardship or management plans required by the conservation
easements on the 146,400 acres or the natural areas and, should
amendments to these easements ever be contemplated, on the proposed
amendments.
                                             
 (e) Exercising authority to decide if 15 leases in addition to
those in subparagraph (b) should be allowed and where such leases should
be located, if the private owner or any future private owner requests
this action.
                                             
 (f) Exercising authority to decide if the private buyer, or any
future private owner, should be allowed to exercise its rights under the
conservation easement for commercial recreational activities for which
the private owner may charge fees.
                                             
 (g) Exercising authority to decide if the state can build
structures for visitor support facilities as described in the
conservation easement for the 146,400 acres.
                                             
 (h) Providing advice to the department of environmental services
on the management of Lake Francis and approximately 2,676 upland acres
of state-owned land known as the Lake Francis impoundment property,
including the lease program for the property established under RSA
481:3-a and administered by the department of environmental services.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development shall designate a state employee from the department as the
administrative officer of the committee. The administrative officer
shall attend each meeting of the committee and provide recordkeeping and
related administrative and clerical assistance to the committee.
                                             
 VII. The terms and provisions of the conservation easements shall at
all times provide the legal basis for the committee's advice and
authority, and any legal opinion of the easement's terms shall be
rendered by the attorney general.

**Source.** 2002, 148:3. 2009, 112:2, 3. 2011, 5:1, eff. April 25, 2011.

### Section 12-A:9-c

 **12-A:9-c Nash Stream Forest Citizens Committee. –**
                                             
 I. There is established the Nash Stream forest citizens committee.
Committee membership shall be as follows and shall include a minimum of
7 members who are residents of any community in the Great North Woods
region:
                                             
 (a) One resident of the town of Stark, appointed by the
selectmen.
                                             
 (b) One resident of the town of Stratford, appointed by the
selectmen.
                                             
 (c) One resident of the town of Columbia, appointed by the
selectmen.
                                             
 (d) One person who shall have expertise in forestry and timber
harvesting, appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (e) One person who shall have expertise in monitoring
conservation easements, appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives.
                                             
 (f) One person who shall have expertise in outdoor recreation and
tourism, appointed by the president of the senate.
                                             
 (g) One person who shall have expertise in forest ecology and
management of natural areas, appointed by the president of the senate.
                                             
 (h) Two persons appointed by the governor with the consent of the
council, one of whom shall be a representative of a New Hampshire
snowmobile club, and one of whom shall be a representative of a New
Hampshire environmental organization.
                                             
 (i) A Coos county commissioner, or designee.
                                             
 (j) The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development, or a citizen appointed by the commissioner as designee.
                                             
 (k) The executive director of the fish and game department, or a
citizen appointed by the executive director as designee.
                                             
 (l) One person who is a member of the Nash Stream Campowners
Association, appointed by the commissioner of the department of
resources and economic development.
                                             
 II. Each member shall serve a 3-year term. Vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired term of office in the same manner as the original
appointment. Members may serve successive terms. Persons serving on the
Connecticut Lakes headwaters citizens committee shall not be eligible to
serve as appointed members of the Nash Stream forest citizens
committee.
                                             
 III. The members shall elect a chairperson from among the public
members. Preference shall be given to a resident of the Great North
Woods region if a member from that area is willing to serve as chairman,
otherwise another public member shall be elected.
                                             
 IV. The committee shall meet at least annually and at such other
times as the chairperson deems necessary. At least once annually, the
committee shall meet to review the management plan of the state-owned
properties as prepared by the managing state agencies. The committee's
meetings shall be open to the public, in accordance with RSA 91-A.
Interested members of the public shall be allowed to speak before the
committee or to submit statements. Records, reports, and working papers
generated or used by the committee, or both, shall be made available to
the public for inspection or copying. The committee shall not be
responsible to the public for the costs of copying its documents.
                                             
 V. The duties of the committee shall include and be limited to:
                                             
 (a) Providing advice to the monitoring entity for monitoring
compliance with the terms and conditions of the working forest
conservation easement covering approximately 39,601 acres of the Nash
Stream forest tract.
                                             
 (b) Providing advice to the department of resources and economic
development and the fish and game department on the management of public
recreational use of the Nash Stream forest tract, including the seasonal
use of the road system, snowmobile trails and their use, and the terms
for access and use of the tract by motorized vehicles.
                                             
 (c) Providing advice on the management of natural areas within
the tract.
                                             
 (d) Providing advice to the department of resources and economic
development and the fish and game department on any proposed revision to
the stewardship or management plans required by the conservation
easements on the 39,601 acres or the natural areas and, should
amendments to these easements ever be contemplated, on the proposed
amendments.
                                             
 (e) Any and all duties of the "Citizen Advisory Committee'' as
outlined in the Nash Stream Management Plan of 1995 and revisions of
2002.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development shall designate a state employee from the department as the
administrative officer of the committee. The administrative officer
shall attend each meeting of the committee and provide recordkeeping and
related administrative and clerical assistance to the committee.
                                             
 VII. The terms and provisions of the conservation easements shall at
all times provide the legal basis for the committee's advice and
authority, and any legal opinion of the easement's terms shall be
rendered by the attorney general.

**Source.** 2004, 45:1, eff. July 2, 2004.

### Section 12-A:10

 **12-A:10 Director of Parks; Initial Appointment and Tenure. –** The
director of recreation in office on the effective date of this act shall
continue in office as director of the division of parks subject to the
provisions of this act. His tenure and salary shall be as herein
established for the director of the division of parks. All of the
powers, duties and functions heretofore performed by the director of
recreation pursuant to any provision of the statutes shall henceforth be
performed by the director of parks subject to the provisions of this
act. Wherever reference is made to the director of recreation in any
provision of the statutes it shall henceforth be construed to mean the
director, division of parks, within the department of resources and
economic development.

**Source.** 1961, 223:3.

### Section 12-A:10-a

 **12-A:10-a Division of Parks; Transfer of Functions, Powers,
Duties. –** All of the functions, powers, duties, personnel, records and
property of the division of parks are hereby transferred to the division
of parks and recreation of the department of resources and economic
development. Whenever reference is made to the division of parks in the
statutes, it shall henceforth be construed to mean the division of parks
and recreation.

**Source.** 1975, 146:5, eff. July 25, 1975.

### Section 12-A:10-b

 **12-A:10-b Director of Parks and Recreation; Initial Appointment
and Tenure. –** The director of the division of parks in office on the
effective date of this section shall continue in office as director of
the division of parks and recreation subject to the provisions of this
chapter. His tenure and salary shall be as has been established for the
director of the division of parks. All of the powers, duties and
functions heretofore performed by the director of the division of parks
pursuant to any provisions of the statutes shall henceforth be performed
by the director of the division of parks and recreation subject to the
provisions of this chapter. Wherever reference is made to the director
of the division of parks, it shall henceforth be construed to mean the
director, division of parks and recreation, department of resources and
economic development.

**Source.** 1975, 146:5, eff. July 25, 1975.

### Section 12-A:10-c

 **12-A:10-c Rewards. –** The director of the division of parks and
recreation may offer rewards for information leading to the recovery of
stolen division property, or for information leading to the arrest and
conviction of any person committing an act of vandalism or theft upon
division property. All rewards offered under this section shall be
subject to approval of the governor and council.

**Source.** 1992, 247:1, eff. July 12, 1992.

### Section 12-A:10-d

 **12-A:10-d Bureau of Historic Sites Established. –** There is
established a bureau of historic sites in the division of parks and
recreation of the department of resources and economic development. The
chief supervisor of the bureau shall report directly to the director of
the division of parks and recreation.

**Source.** 2007, 359:1, eff. Sept. 15, 2007.

### Section 12-A:10-e

 **12-A:10-e Duties of the Bureau of Historic Sites. –** The bureau
shall:
                                             
 I. Define missions and goals for the state's historic sites and
ensure accountability in the ongoing stewardship responsibilities for
such sites.
                                             
 II. Create a comprehensive and coordinated interpretive approach for
the network of state historic sites.
                                             
 III. Develop operating and management plans and policies specific to
the state's historic sites.
                                             
 IV. Enter into partnerships and provide effective management of
partnerships with other agencies and "friends'' groups connected to the
state's historic sites.
                                             
 V. Address the deferred maintenance of existing sites and develop a
long-term maintenance plan for all state-owned historic sites.
                                             
 VI. Develop sustainable funding mechanisms that include state funds,
earned income, and foundation and private support.
                                             
 VII. Build an operations team with cultural resource expertise and
administrative, interpretive, and preservation experience.
                                             
 VIII. Work collaboratively with the division of historical resources
in the department of cultural resources, in the management of the state
historic sites and the development of interpretive and visitor programs
for students and the general public that will build ongoing recognition
and appreciation for the state's historic sites.

**Source.** 2007, 359:1, eff. Sept. 15, 2007.

### Section 12-A:10-f

 **12-A:10-f State Historic Sites Fund Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established in the office of the state treasurer
a fund to be known as the state historic sites fund which shall be kept
separate and distinct from all other funds. Such fund shall be the
depository of all fees, rentals, revenue from operations and retail
sales, net profit from concession operations, donations, gifts, and
grants received from the bureau of historic sites pursuant to RSA
12-A:10-e. All moneys in such fund shall be nonlapsing and continually
appropriated to the bureau of historic sites for the purposes set forth
in RSA 12-A:10-e, including the principal and interest on any bonds
which may be issued in the name of the state for the purpose of capital
improvements to the state historic sites properties under the
administration of the department of resources and economic development.
                                             
 II. The bureau may institute a promotional program to solicit and
receive any gifts, grants, or donations pursuant to its duties under RSA
12-A:10-e, and to deposit such gifts, grants, or donations in the state
historic sites fund.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 21-I:17-a, I, the
director of the division of parks and recreation may make purchases
using field purchase orders for expenditures of up to 
                                             $2,000 for the
bureau of historic sites operations and facilities using field purchase
orders.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development may transfer funds between and among the appropriations for
the operation of the bureau of historic sites. The commissioner shall
report annually 60 days after the close of each fiscal year to the
fiscal committee of the general court and the governor and council all
transfers accomplished under the provisions of this section. RSA 9:17-a
and RSA 9:17-c shall not apply to this section.

**Source.** 2009, 242:2. 2010, 374:5. 2012, 247:5, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 12-A:11

 **12-A:11 Water Resources Board; Transfer as an Entity. –**

                                             [Repealed 1986, 202:29, I, eff. Jan. 2, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 12-A:12

 **12-A:12 New Hampshire State Port Authority; Transfer as an Entity.
–** 
                                             [Repealed 1963, 181:3, eff. Aug. 23, 1963.
                                             ]

### Section 12-A:13

 **12-A:13 Northern County Area Industrial Agent. –** A special
position shall be provided, in the office of industrial development of
the division of economic development of the department of resources and
economic development, to be known as area industrial agent for the
counties of Coos, Grafton, and Carroll. The commissioner of the
department of resources and economic development shall, subject to the
personnel laws of the state, employ such area industrial agent for said
counties, who shall be fully qualified by specific training and
experience and who shall work under the supervision of the director of
the industrial development office. He shall maintain his residence in
one of said 3 counties and his duties shall be primarily concerned with,
but not limited to, assisting the political subdivisions of the state,
regional development organizations or groups, and individuals to
maintain and expand existing industries and to encourage, assist, and
aid new industries to establish operations in said Coos, Grafton and
Carroll counties, and his efforts shall be directed to the economic
development of said 3 counties.

**Source.** 1963, 291:1. 1967, 392:1. 1973, 140:10. 1975, 208:1, eff.
Aug. 1, 1975.

### Section 12-A:14

 **12-A:14 Industrial Agent for Areas of Unemployment. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1967, 392:3, eff. July 1, 1967.
                                             ]

Recreational Package Plans
--------------------------

### Section 12-A:15

 **12-A:15 Package Plan Programs. –**
                                             
 I. As used in this subdivision the following words and terms shall
have the following meanings:
                                             
 (a) "Voluntary corporation,'' a corporation organized under RSA
292, dedicated by its articles of agreement and bylaws to serve and
promote the recreational interests of the state of New Hampshire or a
section thereof and which may number among its members certain
corporations actively engaged in developing and promoting recreational
facilities in the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (b) "Package plan program,'' a method of selling tickets by which
the department of resources and economic development, in conjunction
with a voluntary corporation, offers for sale to the general public
interchangeable or reciprocal tickets for services and accommodations,
or both, in connection with recreational facilities of both the state
and the voluntary corporation or any of its members. The charges for
services and accommodations when sold in this manner may be less than
when sold individually.
                                             
 II. The department of resources and economic development may
participate in package plan programs with voluntary corporations as
defined in this section, and businesses within the tourism industry.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, this participation may
include entering into such agreements with voluntary corporations and
businesses within the tourism industry as are in the best interests of
the state, which agreements may relate to the development, promotion,
administration, and sales of package plan programs. Such agreements
shall permit the department of resources and economic development to
provide to the voluntary corporation and businesses within the tourism
industry a mutually agreed upon number of tickets or vouchers for
tickets at a mutually agreed upon discounted rate in order to
participate in the package plan program for promotional purposes or in
lieu of dues to the voluntary corporation. Any revenue derived by
participation in package plan programs payable to the department of
resources and economic development in accordance with such agreements
shall be deposited with the state treasurer in the same manner as
regular ticket sales. The commissioner of the department of resources
and economic development shall make annual reports on revenue derived
from participation in package plan programs to the senate president, the
speaker of the house, and governor and council by January 31 following
the close of each fiscal year.

**Source.** 1967, 359:1. 1993, 358:13. 2012, 247:6, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.
2016, 207:5, eff. June 6, 2016.

### Section 12-A:15-a

 **12-A:15-a Travel and Tourism Revolving Fund. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a nonlapsing revolving fund to be known as
the travel and tourism revolving fund in the department of resources and
economic development. The revolving fund shall be used for, but not be
limited to, cooperative efforts with the private sector, for the purpose
of bulk brochure distribution, familiarization tours, promotional
programs, trade shows and other projects generally recognized as
beneficial to promoting the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. All income received from participation in cooperative
promotional programs, familiarization tours, trade shows, brochure
distribution projects and other promotional opportunities which become
available, shall be deposited into the fund.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development shall submit a report detailing the activities of the
revolving fund annually to the governor and council and the fiscal
committee within 60 days of the close of each fiscal year.

**Source.** 1993, 358:29, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 12-A:16

 **12-A:16 Area Industrial Agents-at-Large. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995,
308:127, V, eff. July 1, 1995.
                                             ]

### Section 12-A:17

 **12-A:17 Park Land in Town of Rye. –** Notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary, the state shall not acquire, for the
purpose of expanding or establishing any state park, any land in the
town of Rye except land designated "tidal marsh'' by the national
cooperative soil survey unless a public hearing shall have been held in
the town of Rye.

**Source.** 1971, 500:1, eff. July 6, 1971.

Outdoor Recreation Planning Program
-----------------------------------

### Section 12-A:18

 **12-A:18 Coordination of Program. –** The personnel administering
the outdoor recreation planning program, under the direction of the
commissioner of the department of resources and economic development,
shall coordinate the planning program with federal, interstate, state,
regional, county and local government agencies, conservation commissions
and private organizations and individuals, including formal agreements
and contracts as necessary, and, when possible, utilize data from these
agencies, commissions, organizations and individuals for the purpose of
providing supportive information in application for federal funds.

**Source.** 1976, 54:4, eff. July 1, 1976.

Therapeutic Recreation Specialist
---------------------------------

### Section 12-A:19

 **12-A:19 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Therapeutic recreation'' means those activities and resources
which aid in promoting worthy use of leisure time, pursuit of happiness,
and fullness of life. Therapeutic recreation includes the instruction
necessary for the development of social and living skills, physical and
mental health, and cultural development.
                                             
 II. "Populations with special needs'' means individuals with
physical, mental, emotional and/or sensory disabilities that impair or
cause a loss of recreational opportunities.

**Source.** 1979, 253:2, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 12-A:20

 **12-A:20 Therapeutic Recreation Specialist. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995,
308:127, VI, eff. July 1, 1995.
                                             ]

### Section 12-A:21

 **12-A:21 Duties. –** The commissioner of resources and economic
development is hereby authorized to establish a therapeutic recreation
services program to serve the following purposes:
                                             
 I. To investigate and identify the therapeutic recreational needs of
populations with special needs throughout the state;
                                             
 II. To collect, prepare and distribute therapeutic recreation
resource material to populations with special needs;
                                             
 III. To furnish advice and consultation to all citizens and groups,
etc. on specific problems or activities concerning therapeutic
recreation for populations with special needs;
                                             
 IV. To advertise and promote therapeutic recreational opportunities
for populations with special needs throughout the state and to support
all local communities which provide recreation for citizens of
populations with special needs;
                                             
 V. To provide professional guidance to local communities and groups
with special needs, in establishing, promoting, conducting and financing
therapeutic recreation programs and facilities for populations with
special needs;
                                             
 VI. To provide information to all citizens and groups advocating the
concept that individuals with special needs can live a meaningful life
and utilize their skills and talents for the benefit of the community
and themselves;
                                             
 VII. To recruit and train local leaders in communities throughout
the state in procedures necessary for therapeutic recreation programs;
                                             
 VIII. To enhance and enrich the lives of individuals with special
needs through organized recreation activities and promoting therapeutic
recreation programs and opportunities for populations with special
needs;
                                             
 IX. To work with other state, federal, and local agencies and all
private and public organizations and other recreation interests in the
promotion and development and financing of therapeutic recreation
programs and opportunities for populations with special needs; and
                                             
 X. To coordinate efforts between county agencies, and local
recreational departments within the same county to avoid duplication of
services and to reinforce all therapeutic recreation efforts.

**Source.** 1979, 253:2. 1983, 422:10, eff. June 24, 1983.

Director of Economic Development
--------------------------------

### Section 12-A:22

 **12-A:22 Director of Economic Development; Duties. –** The director
of economic development, under the supervision of the commissioner of
resources and economic development shall:
                                             
 I. Establish and maintain a data base on matters related to the
economy of the state and its economic development.
                                             
 II. Plan, develop and administer programs to assist in the
maintenance and expansion of existing industry and business in the
state.
                                             
 III. Plan, develop and administer programs to encourage and promote
the development of new industry and business in the state.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 V. Provide information and assistance to local and regional
officials on matters related to economic development and encourage the
establishment of local development plans and programs.
                                             
 VI. Research and analyze information on matters related to the
economic development of the state to support and evaluate the
effectiveness of promotional and assistance programs.
                                             
 VII. Prepare a written economic development operating plan and
process as required by RSA 12-A:62.
                                             
 VIII. Establish a small business innovation research support program
pursuant to RSA 12-A:36.
                                             
 IX. Develop and implement a telecommunications planning and
development initiative pursuant to RSA 12-A:45.
                                             
 X. Plan, develop, and administer programs to assist in the
implementation of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, 29 U.S.C.
section 2801 et seq., as such may be amended, reauthorized, and in
effect from time to time, implement the state plan established by the
governor and the Workforce Opportunity Council, and perform the
following additional functions:
                                             
 (a) Through the Youth Council, select youth providers of training
services in the local areas.
                                             
 (b) Identify eligible providers of training services in the local
area.
                                             
 (c) Identify eligible providers of intensive services, if not
otherwise provided by the One-Stop operator.
                                             
 (d) Develop a budget for carrying out the duties of the Workforce
Opportunity Council, subject to the approval of the commissioner.
                                             
 (e) Oversee local programs of youth activities, local employment,
and training service.
                                             
 (f) Establish, in conjunction with the commissioner, local
performance measures.
                                             
 (g) Assist the commissioner in developing statewide employment
statistics systems described in the Wagner-Peyser Act.
                                             
 (h) Coordinate workforce investment activities authorized and
implemented within the state with economic development strategies, and
develop the employer linkages with such activities.
                                             
 (i) Make available to the public, on a regular basis through open
meetings, information regarding Workforce Opportunity Council activities
including information regarding the state plan prior to its submission,
and information regarding membership, the designation and certification
of One-Stop operators and the award of grants or contracts to eligible
providers of youth activities and, as requested, minutes of formal
meetings of the Workforce Opportunity Council.
                                             
 (j) Review the operation of programs and the availability,
responsiveness, and adequacy of state services, and make recommendations
to the governor, appropriate chief elected officials, service providers,
the legislature, and general public with respect to steps to improve the
effectiveness of these services and programs.
                                             
 (k) Review plans of all state agencies providing employment
training, and related services, and provide comments and recommendations
to the governor, the legislature, the state agencies and appropriate
federal agencies on the relevancy and effectiveness of employment and
training and related services delivery system in the state.

**Source.** 1985, 270:3. 1986, 165:1. 1998, 26:1. 1999, 317:13. 2000,
298:2. 2009, 144:90, eff. Oct. 1, 2009. 2014, 275:5, eff. July 28, 2014.

### Section 12-A:22-a

 **12-A:22-a Economic Development Advisory Council. –**
                                             
 I. There is established an economic development advisory council to
assist the division of economic development in creating and sustaining a
continuing state economic development operating plan and process.
                                             
 II. The advisory council shall consist of the director of the
division of economic development, 3 at-large members who have an
interest in economic development, and a representative of each of the
following:
                                             
 (a) A chamber of commerce.
                                             
 (b) The manufacturing sector.
                                             
 (c) The field of higher education.
                                             
 (d) A venture capital formation expert or specialist.
                                             
 (e) A workforce development organization.
                                             
 (f) The biotechnology sector.
                                             
 (g) The information technology or software sector.
                                             
 (h) Commercial real estate or real estate development.
                                             
 (i) A regional or municipal development official.
                                             
 (j) The insurance, banking, or financial services sector.
                                             
 (k) The retail sector.
                                             
 (l) The travel and tourism sector.
                                             
 (m) The forest-based products sector.
                                             
 (n) An electric utility or energy-related interest.
                                             
 (o) An economist.
                                             
 (p) The telecommunications sector.
                                             
 (q) The governor's office.
                                             
 (r) A senator, appointed by the president of the senate.
                                             
 (s) A house member, appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives.
                                             
 (t) One representative of organized labor.
                                             
 (u) The residential building community.
                                             
 (v) A state or local housing agency.
                                             
 III. Members of the council, except for the legislative members,
shall be nominated by the commissioner of the department of resources
and economic development and appointed by the governor for a term of 3
years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. When
nominating and appointing individuals to the advisory council, the
commissioner and governor shall ensure that each New Hampshire county
has at least one representative on the council at any given time.
Initial appointments made by the governor shall be for staggered terms
of one, 2, or 3 years.
                                             
 IV. The council shall elect a chairperson from its members and shall
meet on a quarterly basis. Members of the council shall not be
compensated, except that legislative members of the council shall
receive mileage at the legislative rate when attending to the duties of
the council.

**Source.** 2008, 318:1, eff. July 2, 2008. 2014, 275:6, eff. July 28,
2014.

### Section 12-A:23

 **12-A:23 New Hampshire Tourism Policy. –** It is the intent of the
general court that all agencies and departments of state government and,
specifically, the director of travel and tourism development, under the
supervision of the commissioner of resources and economic development,
shall implement their statutory responsibilities in a manner consistent
with promoting and encouraging the orderly growth and development of
tourism within the state. This policy shall include efforts to:
                                             
 I. Foster awareness and appreciation of New Hampshire's natural,
historical, cultural, and scenic resources among its residents.
                                             
 II. Instill a better understanding among New Hampshire residents and
also state employees of the importance of tourism to the state economy.
                                             
 III. Establish and maintain a data base on matters concerning state
tourism research.
                                             
 IV. Encourage fairs, conventions, trade shows and other expositions
of hospitality and friendliness toward visitors.
                                             
 V. Protect and preserve wildlife, natural resources and geological,
archaeological, and cultural treasures within the state for the
enjoyment of residents and nonresidents.
                                             
 VI. Support tourism by developing an essential tourism
infrastructure, including, but not limited to, adequate highways and
public transportation networks and facilities for the traveling public.
                                             
 VII. Encourage, assist, and coordinate, when possible, the tourism
activities of local and regional promotional organizations.
                                             
 VIII. Encourage law enforcement personnel to assist, whenever
possible, the traveling public by providing them with a hospitable
reception and appropriate information.
                                             
 IX. Ensure, when feasible, equal access by visitors and residents to
public recreational resources.
                                             
 X. Ensure that the interest of tourism is fully considered by state
agencies and the general court in its deliberations.
                                             
 XI. Harmonize, to the maximum extent, all state activities in
support of tourism with the needs of the general public, the state and
its political subdivisions, and the tourism industry. Any conflicts
among the agencies and departments of the state in the implementation of
their responsibilities under this section shall be referred to the
council on resources and development established by RSA 162-C.

**Source.** 1986, 165:2. 1999, 317:4. 2011, 224:234, eff. July 1, 2011.

State Ski Operations
--------------------

### Section 12-A:24

 **12-A:24 State Ski Operations. –** The director of parks and
recreation shall be responsible for the management and operation of the
state ski area at Cannon Mountain, as provided in RSA 216-A:2.

**Source.** 1989, 231:2. 1996, 210:2. 1998, 134:3, eff. June 10, 1998.

### Section 12-A:25

 **12-A:25 Mountain Manager. –** The commissioner of resources and
economic development shall appoint a mountain manager for Cannon
Mountain, who shall serve at the pleasure of the commissioner. This
position shall be an unclassified position.

**Source.** 1989, 231:2. 1998, 134:3, eff. June 10, 1998. 2016, 207:1,
eff. June 6, 2016.

### Section 12-A:26

 **12-A:26 Duties. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1996, 210:11, eff. June 10, 1996.
                                             ]

### Section 12-A:27

 **12-A:27 Field Purchase Limits. –** Notwithstanding the provisions
of RSA 21-I:17-a, I, the director of parks and recreation may make
purchases by the use of field purchase orders for expenditures of up to

                                             $2,000 for the Cannon Mountain ski operations and facilities.

**Source.** 1989, 231:2. 1996, 210:3. 1998, 134:5, eff. June 10, 1998.

### Section 12-A:28

 **12-A:28 Transfers Authorized; Ski Areas. –** The commissioner of
the department of resources and economic development may transfer funds
for any specific purposes to funds for other purposes within and among
the appropriations for the operation of Cannon Mountain. The
commissioner shall report annually 60 days after the close of each
fiscal year to the fiscal committee of the general court and the
governor and council all transfers accomplished under the provisions of
this section. The provisions of this section shall not be subject to RSA
9:17-a and RSA 9:17-c.

**Source.** 1991, 40:1. 1995, 308:50. 1998, 134:5. 2012, 247:7, eff.
Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 12-A:29

 **12-A:29 Rate Differentials. –** The director, with the approval of
the commissioner, may provide for differentials in rates, fees, and
charges at state ski operations when the quality of a facility is poor
due to such natural causes as inadequate snow, ice conditions, cold,
rain, or other environmental or equipment problems or for the purpose of
cooperative marketing or market experimentation.

**Source.** 1991, 40:1, eff. April 26, 1991.

### Section 12-A:29-a

 **12-A:29-a Lease Agreement; Terms. –** The department of resources
and economic development shall develop a lease agreement which shall
include the following terms in the event that the state enters into an
agreement to lease Cannon Mountain or Mount Sunapee ski area, or both:
                                             
 I. The terms of the lease, including length, fee structure, methods
used to determine the fee structure and to measure the amount of fees to
be paid, and default conditions.
                                             
 II. The assets that would be included in the lease, i.e. what is
included in the lease and what is not, how these assets would be
transferred or sold to the lessee, determination of the value of the
assets, and requirements to regularly value the assets.
                                             
 III. Investment requirements upon the lessee. The lease shall
include provisions to ensure that the lessee shall prepare a master plan
that fulfills an obligation to maintain and upgrade the assets on state
land.
                                             
 IV. Environmental regulations and controls including:
                                             
 (a) Prototype regulations to preserve and protect state land
which shall include but not be limited to:
                                             
 (1) Soils;
                                             
 (2) Water quality;
                                             
 (3) Wetlands;
                                             
 (4) Wildlife habitat;
                                             
 (5) Scenic and aesthetic qualities; and
                                             
 (6) Multi-seasonal recreational opportunities.
                                             
 (b) Procedures to follow when the lessee requests a permit to
replace major equipment (such as a lift) or expand the ski area, cut new
trails, increase snowmaking, or alter master planning requirements.
                                             
 V. (a) The role of the state in the on-going lease of the ski areas,
including the state's regulatory authority and power.
                                             
 (b) The establishment of a prototype commission to oversee and
administer the lease.
                                             
 (c) The operational responsibilities remaining with the state and
how these responsibilities would interact with the lessee's
responsibilities.
                                             
 VI. The disposition of employees employed by the ski areas
including:
                                             
 (a) Transfers within the department or the state.
                                             
 (b) Offering employees the option of being bought out.

**Source.** 1996, 258:1, eff. June 10, 1996.

### Section 12-A:29-b

 **12-A:29-b Cannon Mountain Advisory Commission. –**
                                             
 I. There is established an advisory commission which shall recommend
capital improvements to the ski area and related state park facilities
at Cannon Mountain.
                                             
 II. The members of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) Three members appointed by the governor and council, each of
whom shall have demonstrated a knowledge and capability in the field of
ski area operations.
                                             
 (b) Three members appointed by the president of the senate; one
may be a member of the private sector and at least 2 shall be senators,
one of whom shall be the senator representing the district in which
Cannon Mountain is located.
                                             
 (c) Three members appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives; one shall be a representative from a district within
the White Mountain region, one shall be a member of the house resources,
recreation and development committee, and one may be a member of the
private sector.
                                             
 (d) The state treasurer, who shall serve as an ex officio
member.
                                             
 III. The commission shall elect a chairperson from its membership,
and any other officers it deems necessary. The terms of the elected
members of the commission shall be coterminous with their terms in
office; the terms of all other appointed members shall be 3 years. In
the event of a vacancy, a new member shall be appointed for the
unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment.
                                             
 IV. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation.
Members shall receive mileage at the legislative rate when attending to
the duties of the commission.
                                             
 V. The commission shall make recommendations for capital
improvements for the ski area and related state park facilities at
Cannon Mountain to the commissioner of resources and economic
development. The commission shall review the servicing of debt
obligations relating to the Cannon Mountain capital improvement fund
prior to making any such recommendations. Recommendations approved by
the commissioner shall be submitted by the commissioner to the capital
budget overview committee. Recommendations approved by the capital
budget overview committee shall be submitted to the governor and council
for final approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
recommendations may be implemented upon final approval, pursuant to
solicited requests for proposals. Funding for capital improvements shall
be from the Cannon Mountain capital improvement fund established by RSA
12-A:29-c.

**Source.** 1998, 134:11, eff. June 10, 1998.

### Section 12-A:29-c

 **12-A:29-c Cannon Mountain Capital Improvement Fund. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a nonlapsing revolving fund to be known as
the Cannon Mountain capital improvement fund in the department of
resources and economic development. The revolving fund shall be used for
capital improvements for the ski area and related state park facilities
at Cannon Mountain.
                                             
 II. All income from the lease of the state ski area at Mount Sunapee
shall be deposited into the fund and may not be diverted for any other
purpose.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of resources and economic development shall
submit a report detailing the activities of the revolving fund annually
to the governor and council and the fiscal committee by January 31
following the close of each fiscal year.

**Source.** 1998, 134:11, eff. June 10, 1998. 2016, 207:3, eff. June 6,
2016.

International Trade Promotion
-----------------------------

### Section 12-A:30

 **12-A:30 Advisory Committee on International Trade. –**
                                             
 I. There is established an advisory committee on international
trade. The advisory committee shall assist the commissioner of resources
and economic development in carrying out the duties assigned under RSA
12-A:2-h. The advisory committee shall:
                                             
 (a) Provide a mechanism for the private sector to advise the
public sector of its needs on an ongoing basis.
                                             
 (b) Disseminate information among public and private sector units
interested in fostering increased international trade activity in New
Hampshire.
                                             
 (c) Provide for ongoing measurement of progress of state agencies
involved in promoting international trade.
                                             
 (d) Provide coordination to maximize existing limited resources
available in New Hampshire for international trade.
                                             
 (e) Provide for ongoing measurement of, and report on, the effect
of international business on New Hampshire's economy.
                                             
 (f) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 I-a. The commissioner of resources and economic development shall
file an annual report by January 15 with the governor, the senate
president, and the speaker of the house of representatives. The report
shall detail the impact of the advisory committee's efforts on
international business trade under subparagraph I(e) and provide any
recommendations for further legislation regarding the promotion of
international trade.
                                             
 II. The advisory committee shall consist of the following members:
                                             
 (a) One member of the senate commerce committee, appointed by the
senate president.
                                             
 (b) One member of the house commerce and consumer affairs
committee, appointed by the speaker of the house.
                                             
 (c) The governor or his designee.
                                             
 (d) The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development or designee.
                                             
 (e) A representative of the U.S. Small Business Administration,
appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (f) A representative of the Business and Industry Association of
New Hampshire who has experience in the area of international trade,
appointed by that association.
                                             
 (g) The director of the Pease development authority, division of
ports and harbors or designee.
                                             
 (h) A representative of the New Hampshire Association of Commerce
and Industry who has experience in the area of international trade,
appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (i) A representative of the New Hampshire International Trade
Association with experience in the area of international trade,
appointed by that association.
                                             
 (j) A representative of the New Hampshire Bankers Association
with experience in the area of international trade, appointed by that
association.
                                             
 (k) The director of the Pease development authority or designee.
                                             
 (l) The director of the New Hampshire Small Business Development
Center or designee.
                                             
 (m) A representative of the U.S. Department of Commerce,
International Trade Administration, appointed by such department.
                                             
 (n) A representative of the academic community, appointed by the
governor and council.
                                             
 (o) A representative of organized labor, appointed by the
governor and council.
                                             
 (p) A representative of the New Hampshire High Technology Council
who has experience in the area of international trade, appointed by that
organization.
                                             
 (q) A representative of each member of the New Hampshire
congressional delegation.
                                             
 (r) The director of the Manchester airport or designee.
                                             
 (s) One or more representatives of the business community
selected by the advisory committee on international trade to represent
the interest of that community in the area of international business
development.
                                             
 III. Nonlegislative members of the committee shall serve a term of 2
years, commencing with the first meeting in odd-numbered years.
Legislative members shall serve terms coterminous with their terms in
office.
                                             
 IV. Meetings shall be held quarterly, at a posted time and place. A
majority of committee members shall constitute a quorum.

**Source.** 1991, 260:3. 2001, 151:1; 290:4. 2002, 34:1, eff. June 7,
2002. 2015, 7:1-5, eff. July 4, 2015.

### Section 12-A:31

 **12-A:31 International Trade Promotion Fund. –** There is hereby
established in the office of the state treasurer a fund to be known as
the international trade promotion fund. The commissioner of resources
and economic development is authorized to accept public sector and
private sector grants, gifts or donations of any kind for the purpose of
funding programs associated with the promotion of international trade.
Such grants, gifts and donations shall be deposited in the international
trade fund and may be expended by the commissioner of resources and
economic development to accomplish the purposes of RSA 12-A:2-h. The
moneys in this fund shall be nonlapsing and shall be continually
appropriated to the department of resources and economic development.

**Source.** 1991, 260:3, eff. Aug. 9, 1991.

Economic Development Matching Grants Program
--------------------------------------------

### Section 12-A:32

 **12-A:32 Economic Development Matching Grants Program. –** An
economic development matching grants program is established to assist
municipalities and counties in promoting themselves to prospective
businesses. For the purposes of this subdivision, "program'' means the
economic development matching grants program.
                                             
 I. The department of resources and economic development shall
administer an economic development matching grants program in
cooperation with a program screening committee. The funds appropriated
for this program shall be expended for grants for programs entered into
by municipalities, counties, and organizations which are designed to
promote the location of new businesses in the state of New Hampshire or
to encourage workforce recruitment efforts.
                                             
 II. (a) The screening committee shall consist of the director of the
division of economic development and 6 other members appointed as
follows:
                                             
 (1) One member appointed by the governor and council upon
nomination by the commissioner of resources and economic development.
                                             
 (2) One member appointed by the governor and council upon
nomination by the New Hampshire Municipal Association.
                                             
 (3) Two members appointed by the governor and council upon
nomination by the New Hampshire Economic Developers Association.
                                             
 (4) One member appointed by the governor and council upon
nomination by the Business and Industry Association of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (5) One member appointed by the governor and council upon
nomination by the New Hampshire Association of Counties.
                                             
 (b) Members, other than the director of the division of economic
development, shall serve for a term of 3 years and until their
successors are appointed and qualified.
                                             
 III. The screening committee shall elect its own chairman. Members
may designate an alternate with the approval of the chairman. A majority
of the members of the committee or their alternates shall constitute a
quorum.
                                             
 IV. Members of the screening committee shall not be compensated;
however, the commissioner of resources and economic development may set
aside up to one percent of the funds appropriated for the program in any
fiscal year to reimburse committee members for their direct expenses
associated with the program. The commissioner shall review and approve
all requests for reimbursement.
                                             
 V. Funds appropriated to the program shall only be made available to
municipalities, counties, and organizations as may be certified by the
screening committee with the approval of the commissioner of the
department of resources and economic development.
                                             
 VI. Grant awards shall require 50 percent matching funds from other
sources. Grants shall not be used for the administrative salaries or
overhead expenses of any applicant selected for a grant. Grants may be
used for workforce recruitment efforts and related travel costs.
                                             
 VII. Grant applications shall be reviewed by the screening committee
which shall recommend approval or disapproval of applications to the
commissioner of resources and economic development. A recommendation for
disapproval by the screening committee or the commissioner shall be in
writing with the reasons for disapproval stated.
                                             
 VIII. Funds appropriated for the program for the first fiscal year
of any biennium shall not lapse and shall be available for expenditure
during the second fiscal year of the biennium. All funds which have not
been expended by the end of the second fiscal year of a biennium shall
lapse to the general fund.
                                             
 IX. The commissioner of resources and economic development shall,
with the advice of the screening committee, adopt rules under RSA 541-A
after public hearing governing the program. These rules shall include:
                                             
 (a) A description of the program, stating the general course and
method of its operations and the methods by which the proposed grantee
may obtain proposes grantee information or make submissions or
requests.
                                             
 (b) The procedures and criteria used to certify municipalities,
counties, and organizations eligible for matching grants.
                                             
 (c) The application process, including the information required
of applicants.
                                             
 (d) The procedures and criteria used to evaluate grant
applications.
                                             
 (e) Procedures for the administration of grants by recipients
including reporting requirements.

**Source.** 1993, 328:2. 1995, 285:4-6. 2001, 125:1-4. 2007, 118:1, eff.
Aug. 10, 2007.

Reports on Economic Development Loans and Grants
------------------------------------------------

### Section 12-A:33

 **12-A:33 Reports on Economic Development Program Loans and Grants.
–**
                                             
 I. The department of resources and economic development shall
include, as part of its annual report or as a separate report published
and made available to the public annually on or before September 1,
beginning September 1, 1997, the following information regarding each
economic development program for which state grants and loans have been
awarded:
                                             
 (a) Information regarding the number of jobs to be created or
saved as a result of the award, and the related wages and benefits
levels.
                                             
 (b) The growth potential of the program.
                                             
 (c) The environmental impact of the program.
                                             
 (d) The amount of the loan, grant, loan guarantee, bond
guarantee, or tax incentives awarded.
                                             
 II. The annual report shall also include information regarding the
criteria for the awarding of economic development assistance and the
means by which the department tracks the progress which each awardee
makes in meeting the job, wage, and benefit projections included in its
application for assistance.

**Source.** 1996, 189:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 12-A:34

 **12-A:34 Review of Reports Required. –** For the purpose of
ensuring comparability of impact reports on economic development
programs issued under RSA 12-A:33, and RSA 162-A:23-a, the department of
resources and economic development, in consultation with the legislative
budget assistant, shall periodically review such reports at least once
every 5 years and make recommendations to be utilized by the agencies
making such reports for an improved and consistent methodology for
assessing the quantity and quality of jobs created and saved and the
growth potential and environmental impacts of such programs. This
section shall not apply to promotional literature.

**Source.** 1996, 189:2. 2001, 290:5. 2008, 356:10. 2011, 224:116, eff.
July 1, 2011.

### Section 12-A:35

 **12-A:35 Limitation. –** This subdivision shall not apply to state
loans or state loan guarantees of less than 
                                             $250,000, or to state
grants of less than 
                                             $50,000.

**Source.** 1996, 189:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

Small Business Innovation Research Support
------------------------------------------

### Section 12-A:36

 **12-A:36 Small Business Innovation Research Support. –** The
director of economic development, under the supervision of the
commissioner of resources and economic development and pursuant to the
director's duties under RSA 12-A:22, shall establish a small business
innovation research support program.

**Source.** 1998, 26:2, eff. June 20, 1998.

### Section 12-A:37

 **12-A:37 Recognition of Federal Grant Recipients. –** The director
may issue a suitable plaque to New Hampshire residents that receive
federal small business innovation research grants recognizing their
achievement. The director shall also recommend that the governor issue a
letter of commendation to all such recipients.

**Source.** 1998, 26:2, eff. June 20, 1998.

### Section 12-A:38

 **12-A:38 Matching Grants. –** The director may recommend to the
review committee established in RSA 12-A:2-f that first-time federal
grant recipients recognized under RSA 12-A:37 receive a grant from the
New Hampshire economic development fund of up to 
                                             $50,000 to match the
federal support received.

**Source.** 1998, 26:2, eff. June 20, 1998.

### Section 12-A:39

 **12-A:39 Seminars. –** The director may organize an annual seminar
to promote and explain the small business innovation research program to
members of the public. Participants in the seminar shall include
previous grant recipients and representatives of relevant state agencies
as determined by the director.

**Source.** 1998, 26:2, eff. June 20, 1998.

### Section 12-A:40

 **12-A:40 Grant Information. –** The director shall compile
information relative to applying for federal small business innovation
research grants, including the names of appropriate federal officials.
The director shall make the information available on an Internet site
created for such purpose.

**Source.** 1998, 26:2, eff. June 20, 1998.

New Hampshire Film and Television Commission
--------------------------------------------

### Section 12-A:41

 **12-A:41 Commission Established; Members; Duties. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1998, 179:4, eff. June 1, 2001.
                                             ]

### Section 12-A:41-a

 **12-A:41-a Commission Established; Members; Duties. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2004, 257:39, eff. July 1, 2004.
                                             ]

### Section 12-A:42

 **12-A:42 Rulemaking. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988, 179:4, eff. June 1,
2001.
                                             ]

Travel and Tourism
------------------

### Section 12-A:43

 **12-A:43 Director of Travel and Tourism Development; Duties. –**
The director of travel and tourism development, under the supervision of
the commissioner of resources and economic development and consistent
with the New Hampshire tourism policy under RSA 12-A:23, shall:
                                             
 I. Promote New Hampshire as a domestic and international travel
destination in order to increase visitation and travel expenditures,
business activity, and employment throughout the state.
                                             
 II. Develop and administer programs to encourage and promote the
development of the tourism industry in the state.
                                             
 III. Provide information and assistance to local and regional
officials on matters related to travel and tourism and encourage the
development of locally coordinated programs.
                                             
 IV. Encourage partnerships among the tourism industry, business and
industry, and state and local officials to expand the state's travel
promotion strategy.
                                             
 V. Raise the perception of travel and tourism in the minds of New
Hampshire residents, businesses, and government.
                                             
 VI. Conduct research to measure the effectiveness of promotional
programs.
                                             
 VII. Ensure that New Hampshire maintains a high quality tourism
experience for the visitor by working with the travel industry on ways
to utilize natural, historical, cultural, and recreational attractions
and facilitating statewide activities which can be used as resources by
the travel industry.

**Source.** 1999, 317:6, eff. July 1, 1999.

### Section 12-A:43-a

 **12-A:43-a Travel and Tourism Development Fund. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established in the office of the state treasurer
a fund to be known as the travel and tourism development fund. Any
appropriations received shall be deposited in the fund. Moneys in the
fund and any interest earned on the fund shall be used for the purpose
of promoting and developing appropriate travel and tourism initiatives
through the division of travel and tourism development and shall not be
used for any other purpose. The director of travel and tourism
development shall oversee expenditures from the fund. The moneys in the
fund shall be non-lapsing and shall be continually appropriated to the
department of resources and economic development.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of resources and economic development shall
prepare an annual report to be presented no later than December 1 of
each year to the governor and council, the fiscal committee of the
general court, the president of the senate, and the speaker of the house
of representatives. The report shall detail the specific activities
supported by, and expenditures from, the fund during the past year and
shall additionally detail the activities of the travel and tourism
revolving fund established in RSA 12-A:15-a.

**Source.** 2001, 158:3, eff. July 1, 2001. 2015, 259:32, eff. July 1,
2015.

### Section 12-A:43-b

 **12-A:43-b Rest Areas and Welcome Centers. –**
                                             
 I. The department of resources and economic development shall be
responsible for the staffing of rest areas and welcome centers along the
state's highways. There is established in the department a bureau of
visitor service to administer this function. The commissioner may
consult with the local chambers of commerce relative to said function,
and shall have the authority to enter into contracts with private or
public entities for said function as the commissioner deems
appropriate.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding paragraph I, the department of transportation
and the liquor commission may undertake and/or participate in the
development of new welcome centers in Hooksett on the northbound and
southbound lanes of Interstate Route 93 as authorized by the
legislature.

**Source.** 2011, 224:193, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 12-A:44

 **12-A:44 Advisory Committee on Travel and Tourism. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2010, 368:1(1), eff. Dec. 31, 2010.
                                             ]

Telecommunications Planning and Development
-------------------------------------------

### Section 12-A:45

 **12-A:45 Telecommunications Planning and Development Initiative.
–**
                                             
 I. (a) The director of economic development, under the supervision
of the commissioner of resources and economic development and pursuant
to the director's duties under RSA 12-A:22, shall develop and implement
a telecommunications planning and development initiative which will
result in a telecommunications development plan to be adopted and
revised regularly by the telecommunications planning and development
advisory committee.
                                             
 (b) As primary duties of this initiative, the director shall:
                                             
 (1) Identify existing telecommunications infrastructure by
establishing and maintaining a database of telecommunications service
providers, services, and infrastructure that exist throughout the
state.
                                             
 (2) Publicize the state's telecommunications infrastructure,
as an integral part of the state's economic development efforts, by
planning, developing, administering, and implementing programs to assist
in the distribution of information about available telecommunications
services, infrastructure, and technologies throughout all parts of the
state.
                                             
 (c) As secondary duties of this initiative, the director shall:
                                             
 (1) Identify shortcomings in the deployment of
telecommunications infrastructure throughout all parts of the state.
                                             
 (2) Work with providers of telecommunications services,
educators, and municipal, county, state, and other government officials
to assist efforts to enhance the deployment of telecommunications
services.
                                             
 II. The director may delegate any of the duties established in
paragraph I to appropriate designees within the division of economic
development.
                                             
 III. The budget for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2001 for the
duties of this subdivision shall not exceed 
                                             $150,000. The budget for
subsequent fiscal years shall be considered in the division of economic
development's operating budget.

**Source.** 2000, 298:3, eff. July 1, 2000.

### Section 12-A:45-a

 **12-A:45-a Telecommunications Planning and Development Fund. –**
There is hereby established in the office of the state treasurer a fund
to be known as the telecommunications planning and development fund. The
commissioner of resources and economic development is authorized to
accept public sector and private sector grants, gifts, or donations of
any kind for the purpose of funding initiatives associated with the
purpose of this subdivision. Such grants, gifts, and donations shall be
deposited in the telecommunications planning and development fund and
may only be expended by the commissioner of resources and economic
development to accomplish the purposes of this subdivision. The state
treasurer may invest moneys in the fund as provided by law, with
interest received on such investment credited to the fund. The moneys in
this fund shall be nonlapsing and shall be continually appropriated to
the department of resources and economic development.

**Source.** 2004, 185:2, eff. June 1, 2004.

### Section 12-A:46

 **12-A:46 Telecommunications Planning and Development Advisory
Committee. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a telecommunications planning and
development advisory committee to advise and assist the director of
economic development in performing the duties established in RSA
12-A:45. The committee shall meet at least quarterly. Nine members of
the committee shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 II. The members of the committee shall be:
                                             
 (a) The governor, or designee;
                                             
 (b) The commissioner of resources and economic development, or
designee;
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of safety, or designee;
                                             
 (d) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee;
                                             
 (e) The commissioner of the department of education, or
designee;
                                             
 (f) The state librarian, or designee;
                                             
 (g) The chairman of the public utilities commission, or
designee;
                                             
 (h) One member of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives;
                                             
 (i) One member of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate;
                                             
 (j) The chief information officer, or designee;
                                             
 (k) The following persons nominated by the commissioner of
resources and economic development and appointed by the governor and
council, unless otherwise specified:
                                             
 (1) Two members representing residential telecommunications
customers;
                                             
 (2) One member representing large business telecommunications
customers, appointed by the senate president;
                                             
 (3) One member representing small business telecommunications
customers, appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives;
                                             
 (4) One member representing educational technology;
                                             
 (5) One member representing municipal government;
                                             
 (6) One member representing county government;
                                             
 (7) One member representing a regional economic development
organization or a regional planning commission;
                                             
 (8) One member representing healthcare technology; and
                                             
 (9) Up to 7 members representing several of the following
sectors of the telecommunications industry: wireless, paging, incumbent
local exchange carriers, competitive local exchange carriers, Internet
service providers, cable, long distance providers, and broadcast
television. A member representing one sector may also represent one or
more other sectors, as deemed appropriate by the commissioner; and
                                             
 (l) The director of broadband technology planning and development
in the division of economic development.
                                             
 III. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Broadband'' means the transmission, between or among points
specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, with or
without change in the form or content of the information as sent and
received, at rates of transmission equal or greater than that defined by
the Federal Communications Commission as "broadband''
                                             
 (b) "Broadband infrastructure'' means any and all equipment and
facilities, including any and all changes, modifications, and expansions
to existing facilities, as well as the customer premises equipment used
to provide broadband, and any and all software integral to or related to
the operations, support, facilitation, or interconnection of such
equipment, including upgrades, and any and all installation, operations,
and support, maintenance and other functions as may be required to
support the delivery of broadband.
                                             
 IV. The telecommunications planning and development advisory
committee shall assist the director in promoting access to affordable
and reliable broadband service to all state citizens and businesses by:
                                             
 (a) Identifying and maintaining an inventory of the state's
broadband availability.
                                             
 (b) Continually assessing the availability of and need for
broadband infrastructure in unserved and underserved areas within the
state.
                                             
 (c) Disseminating information and data concerning communication
services and broadband infrastructure within the state.
                                             
 (d) Creating and facilitating public awareness and educational
programs to encourage the use of broadband infrastructure.
                                             
 (e) Continually assessing and making recommendations to improve
services provided to citizens by state agencies via broadband and
internet technologies as a mean of improving service and reducing
costs.
                                             
 (f) Identifying funding sources for broadband infrastructure
deployment or education.
                                             
 (g) Identifying barriers to investment of private capital in
broadband infrastructure.
                                             
 (h) Identifying opportunities for coordination among providers,
consumers, and state and local governmental entities, including:
                                             
 (1) Coordination with the statewide emergency radio networks.
                                             
 (2) Use of telecommunications to facilitate delivery of
Medicare and or Medicaid services and other related medical assistance,
including but not limited to telehealth, telemedicine, and broadband
access.
                                             
 (3) Collaboration among public education initiatives to
utilize and improve broadband to enhance educational opportunities
between public, private, and special education institutions.
                                             
 (4) Coordination of information resources using technology and
support methods to improve collaboration between public, academic, and
special libraries, organizations, and government departments, agencies,
and their subdivisions.
                                             
 (i) Identifying barriers to enrollment in the Lifeline Telephone
Assistance program and supporting collaboration and outreach methods
that increase enrollment in the program.
                                             
 (j) Advising and assisting the department of health and human
services in the implementation of Medicaid coverage of telehealth
services as required under RSA 167:4-d. This shall include, but not be
limited to, assisting in the development of a detailed work plan for
implementation of Medicaid coverage of telehealth services and
identifying funding or other tangible resources for consultative
services drawing on the expertise in the telehealth community and/or
academic institutions.
                                             
 V. The legislative members of the committee shall serve for the
duration of their legislative term, and shall receive mileage at the
legislative rate when attending to the duties of the committee.
                                             
 VI. Other appointed members of the committee shall serve for 3 years
and until a successor is appointed.
                                             
 VII. The committee shall elect a chairperson from among the
members.
                                             
 VIII. The committee shall report its findings and recommendations to
the director in the form of a status report on or before July 31
annually**.**

**Source.** 2000, 298:3. 2003, 223:23. 2007, 315:1. 2009, 197:1. 2010,
367:4, eff. July 1, 2010. 2013, 29:2, eff. May 16, 2013. 2015, 189:1, 2;
206:2, eff. July 6, 2015.

### Section 12-A:47

 **12-A:47 Telecommunications; Statutory Construction. –** For
purposes of this subdivision, "telecommunications'' shall be construed
broadly, and shall include, but not be limited to, traditional dial tone
services, the transmission of voice, data, or video through cable and
wireless media, and any other similar services to be offered in the
future.

**Source.** 2000, 298:3, eff. July 1, 2000.

### Section 12-A:48

 **12-A:48 Authority of Director to Acquire Information. –** The
director of economic development is authorized to request from
telecommunications service providers such information as the director
requires to perform the duties established in RSA 12-A:45.

**Source.** 2000, 298:3, eff. July 1, 2000.

### Section 12-A:49

 **12-A:49 Confidentiality. –** Information provided to the director
pursuant to a request made under RSA 12-A:48 shall, if properly
demonstrated by the provider of the information, be deemed confidential,
commercial, or financial information and exempt from public disclosure
under RSA 91-A:5, IV. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
director from disclosing information provided pursuant to a request made
under RSA 12-A:48 in a manner that does not specifically identify the
provider.

**Source.** 2000, 298:3, eff. July 1, 2000.

### Section 12-A:50

 **12-A:50 Reporting Requirement. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2003, 7:3, eff.
Sept. 1, 2008.
                                             ]

Job Training Program for Economic Growth
----------------------------------------

### Section 12-A:51

 **12-A:51 Program Established. –** There is hereby established a
program to provide job training which is designed to attract new
business, assist in the expansion of business, and retain existing
business in the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 2007, 204:2, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 12-A:52

 **12-A:52 Purpose. –** The purpose of this program is to:
                                             
 I. Enhance the state's economic growth and vitality by offering
assistance to privately owned businesses and industries in training a
new workforce and retraining existing employees to implement new
technologies, in creating new jobs, and in retaining and upgrading
existing jobs.
                                             
 II. Provide technical education and training as a component of the
state's economic development efforts.
                                             
 III. Be flexible and responsive to the training needs of business
and industry in New Hampshire.

**Source.** 2007, 204:2, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 12-A:53

 **12-A:53 Training Programs. –** Training programs may include, but
shall not be limited to:
                                             
 I. Structured, on-site laboratory or classroom training.
                                             
 II. Basic skills.
                                             
 III. Technical skills.
                                             
 IV. Quality improvement.
                                             
 V. Safety.
                                             
 VI. Management and supervision.
                                             
 VII. English as a second language.

**Source.** 2007, 204:2, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 12-A:54

 **12-A:54 Administration; Review Committee. –**
                                             
 I. The department of resources and economic development, or an
entity with which the department of resources and economic development
has contracted, shall administer this program.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development shall:
                                             
 (a) Adopt rules under RSA 541-A, relative to the administration
of this subdivision.
                                             
 (b) Establish a grant review committee consisting of the
following:
                                             
 (1) The commissioner of the department of resources and
economic development, or designee.
                                             
 (2) The commissioner of the department of employment security,
or designee.
                                             
 (3) The chancellor of the community college system of New
Hampshire, or designee.
                                             
 (4) One member representing labor, appointed by the
commissioner of the department of resources and economic development.
                                             
 (5) Three members representing business and industry,
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (6) One senator, appointed by the senate president.
                                             
 (7) One representative, appointed by the speaker of the house
of representatives.
                                             
 (8) The president of the Workforce Opportunity Council, Inc.
                                             
 III. The committee shall make recommendations to the commissioner of
the department of resources and economic development concerning the
award of training grants to businesses.

**Source.** 2007, 204:2, eff. July 1, 2007; 361:38, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 12-A:55

 **12-A:55 Eligibility for Training Grants. –**
                                             
 I. In this subdivision, "grant recipient'' means the business entity
that receives funds from the department and which provides funds to the
training provider.
                                             
 II. Only those businesses that are physically located or intend to
be physically located within the state may receive funds under this
subdivision.
                                             
 III. Only those employees who are residents of New Hampshire, or who
work for a business that is located or intends to locate within the
state, or are unemployed residents of New Hampshire, shall receive
training from grants under this subdivision.
                                             
 IV. Grant recipients shall match no less than one dollar for each
dollar provided through the grant award. The match funds shall include
only those costs extraordinary to the regular employee expenses incurred
by the business and shall be directly related to training.
                                             
 V. Priority shall be given for grants to small businesses for the
implementation of technological innovations.
                                             
 VI. Intent by a business to locate within the state shall be
established to the satisfaction of the grant review committee. A minimum
requirement for intent to be established shall be:
                                             
 (a) Proof of substantial investment or a binding contractual
obligation consistent with such intent;
                                             
 (b) The lease or purchase of real estate or equipment within the
state necessary for the planned move; or
                                             
 (c) Such other requirement as may be established under rules
adopted by the commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development.
                                             
 VII. Submission of documents to substantiate proof of intent by a
business to locate within the state shall be in accordance with rules
adopted by the commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development.
                                             
 VIII. No grant shall be made to the state, including the state
university system.
                                             
 IX. No grant shall be made to any county, city, town, or other
political subdivision which has not currently elected to pay
contributions pursuant to RSA 282-A:71, II.
                                             
 X. No grant shall be made to any organization or group of
organizations, described in section 501(c)(3) and exempt under section
501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, which has not currently elected to
pay contributions pursuant to RSA 282-A:69, II.

**Source.** 2007, 204:2. 2010, 28:2, eff. May 11, 2010.

### Section 12-A:56

 **12-A:56 Eligible Costs. –**
                                             
 I. To be eligible under this subdivision, a cost must be necessary
and reasonable for the proper and efficient delivery of training to the
employees of the grant recipient.
                                             
 II. The following costs are not eligible:
                                             
 (a) Costs resulting from violations of or failure to comply with
federal, state, or local laws and regulations.
                                             
 (b) Entertainment costs.
                                             
 (c) Administrative costs.
                                             
 (d) Salaries and wages of employees in training.
                                             
 III. Funds for training grants shall supplement, and not replace,
funds available through existing programs conducted by the business
entity, or other public or private training programs.
                                             
 IV. The department may use no more than 10 percent, or 
                                             $200,000, of
any moneys received from the training fund established at RSA
282-A:138-a, whichever is less, to administer this program.

**Source.** 2007, 204:2. 2010, 28:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 12-A:57

 **12-A:57 Training Facilities. –**
                                             
 I. So long as it is feasible, training shall be provided by the
community college system of New Hampshire, which may charge full market
value for the training provided.
                                             
 II. When the community college system of New Hampshire cannot
provide desired training, the training grant recipient will be free to
contract with some other training entity approved by the community
college system of New Hampshire.
                                             
 III. The provider shall be specified in the grant award.

**Source.** 2007, 204:2, eff. July 1, 2007; 361:39, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 12-A:58

 **12-A:58 Performance; Report. –**
                                             
 I. No later than April 1, 2008, the commissioner, in consultation
with the grant review committee, shall establish performance criteria.
The committee shall submit annually 60 days after the close of each
fiscal year, to the commissioner of the department of resources and
economic development, the commissioner of the department of employment
security, the governor, the senate president, the speaker of the house
of representatives, and the fiscal committee of the general court, a
report indicating the level of performance achieved through the
program.
                                             
 II. The department shall evaluate the performance level for each
training grant program provided to a business.
                                             
 III. The grant recipient shall file the information required under
paragraphs I and II, as requested by the commissioner.

**Source.** 2007, 204:2. 2012, 247:8, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

Technology Development and Telecommunications Planning
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 12-A:59

 **12-A:59 Technology Development and Telecommunications Planning.
–** There is established within the division of economic development, a
technology development and telecommunication planning function, which is
intended to promote technology development and telecommunication
planning in the state. Under the supervision of the director of the
division of economic development, the division shall:
                                             
 I. Coordinate state telecommunications policy planning initiatives
by providing support for the telecommunications planning and development
advisory committee established in RSA 12-A:46, maintaining a state
telecommunications resource website, and working with regional partners
from the private and public sector to coordinate efforts to provide
increased interoperable advanced telecommunications systems throughout
the state with the goal of providing affordable and accessible broadband
to residents of this state.
                                             
 II. Encourage and facilitate collaboration between public and
private research and development efforts in New Hampshire relative to
technology development and telecommunications planning.
                                             
 III. With the assistance of the University of New Hampshire and
other partners, seek resources such as grants from government and
nonprofit entities to develop a state technology development and
telecommunications plan.

**Source.** 2007, 263:104, eff. July 1, 2007.

Broadband Technology Planning and Development
---------------------------------------------

### Section 12-A:59-a

 **12-A:59-a Director of Broadband Technology Planning and
Development. –** There is established within the division of economic
development the position of director of broadband technology planning
and development, which shall be an administrator II position, classified
at labor grade 29. The director shall:
                                             
 I. Coordinate state telecommunications policy planning initiatives
by serving as a member of the telecommunications planning and
development advisory committee established in RSA 12-A:46, maintaining a
state telecommunications resource website, and working with regional
partners from the private and public sector to coordinate efforts to
provide increased interoperable advanced telecommunications systems
throughout the state with the goal of providing affordable and
accessible broadband to residents of this state.
                                             
 II. Encourage and facilitate collaboration between public and
private research and development efforts in New Hampshire relative to
broadband technology planning and development.
                                             
 III. Develop a comprehensive broadband plan for the state and
coordinate with partners throughout the state to implement and regularly
update the plan.
                                             
 IV. Act as an agent in recruiting and retaining high technology
companies in New Hampshire.
                                             
 V. Serve as a resource for state policy makers to develop policies
geared towards increasing and expanding high technology jobs and
promoting development of a high technology workforce.
                                             
 VI. Seek resources such as grants from government and nonprofit
entities to promote the state's broadband technology planning and
development initiatives.

**Source.** 2009, 197:2, eff. July 13, 2009.

New Hampshire Workforce Opportunity Council
-------------------------------------------

### Section 12-A:60

 **12-A:60 New Hampshire Workforce Opportunity Council. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a New Hampshire Workforce Opportunity
Council.
                                             
 II. Membership of the council shall be as set forth in section
111(b) of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, Public Law 105-220,
codified at 29 U.S.C. section 2801 et seq., as such may be amended,
reauthorized, and in effect from time to time. Members of the council
shall be appointed by the governor and shall serve at the pleasure of
the governor. The governor shall select a chairperson for the council
from among the members of the council, in accordance with 29 U.S.C.
section 2821(c).
                                             
 III. The council shall meet no less frequently than semi-annually,
shall have the powers and responsibilities of the state workforce
investment board under the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, and shall
assist the governor in:
                                             
 (a) Development of the state plan required under section 112 of
the Workforce Investment Act of 1998.
                                             
 (b) Development and continuous improvement of a statewide system
of activities that are funded under this subdivision or carried out
through a One-Stop delivery system described in section 134c of the
Workforce Investment Act of 1998, that receives funds under that act,
including:
                                             
 (1) Development of linkages in order to assure coordination
and non-duplication among the programs and activities described in
section 121(b) of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998; and
                                             
 (2) Review of local plans under the Workforce Investment Act
of 1998, if any.
                                             
 (c) Commenting at least once annually on the measures taken
pursuant to the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology
Education Act, 20 U.S.C. section 2323(b)(3).
                                             
 (d) Designation of local areas as required in section 116 of the
Workforce Investment Act of 1998.
                                             
 (e) Development of the allocation formulas for the distribution
of funds for adult employment and training activities and youth
activities to local areas as permitted under sections 128(b)(3)(B) and
133(b)(3)(B) of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998.
                                             
 (f) Development and continuous improvement of comprehensive state
performance measures including state adjusted levels of performance, to
assess the effectiveness of the workforce investment activities in the
state as required under section 136(b) of the Workforce Investment Act
of 1998.
                                             
 (g) Preparation of the annual report to the United States
Secretary of Labor described in section 136(d) of the Workforce
Investment Act of 1998.
                                             
 (h) Development of the statewide employment statistics system
described in section 15(e) of the Wagner-Peyser Act.
                                             
 (i) Development of an application for an incentive grant under 20
U.S.C. section 9273.

**Source.** 2009, 144:91, eff. Oct. 1, 2009.

### Section 12-A:61

 **12-A:61 New Hampshire Workforce Opportunity Fund. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established the New Hampshire workforce
opportunity fund which shall be nonlapsing, continually appropriated to,
and administered by the commissioner of the department of resources and
economic development. Said fund shall be for the purpose of receiving
financial assistance under the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 and
providing funds for grants and other workforce development initiatives.
                                             
 II. The fund shall be distributed or expended by the commissioner
after consultation with the New Hampshire Workforce Opportunity Council
established in RSA 12-A:60 and the approval of the governor and council
for any of the following purposes:
                                             
 (a) Workforce Investment Act Adult and Dislocated Worker
programs.
                                             
 (b) Workforce Investment Act Youth programs.
                                             
 (c) Workforce Investment Act Senior Community Service Employment
programs.
                                             
 (d) Workforce Investment Act Disability programs.
                                             
 (e) Workforce Investment Act Regional Innovation and National
Emergency grant programs.
                                             
 (f) Other projects, programs, or grants recognized as being
beneficial to workforce development initiatives and consistent with the
goals of the Workforce Investment Act.
                                             
 III. (a) The department may accept gifts, grants, donations, or
other moneys for the purposes of this section. Said moneys shall be
deposited into the New Hampshire workforce opportunity fund.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner may enter into contracts and agreements and
may take other actions that may be necessary or desirable to effect the
transfer to it of operations currently conducted by The Workforce
Opportunity Council, Inc. or the New Hampshire Workforce Opportunity
Council under the Workforce Investment Act, and to effect the transfer
of assets utilized by them in doing so; and, the commissioner may
assume, bear, and agree to perform those contracts of the Workforce
Opportunity Council, Inc. or the New Hampshire Workforce Opportunity
Council that may be necessary or desirable for carrying out the purposes
of this section.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development shall have the authority to enter into such agreements for
leasing real property, acquiring goods, and engaging services to perform
Rapid Response activities in accordance with this subdivision. The
commissioner shall provide the governor and council an information item
not less frequently than semi-annually describing all such agreements
and amounts expended pursuant thereto. Such agreements shall be made
pursuant to forms of agreement that shall be approved by governor and
council which forms of agreement have been reviewed by the attorney
general and the commissioner of the department of administrative
services.
                                             
 V. In accordance with RSA 12-A:51-58, the commissioner of resources
and economic development shall have the authority to make grants to New
Hampshire employers for the purpose of training employees in accordance
with this chapter, such grants not to exceed the amounts specified in
RSA 282-A:87, IV(a)(2), and not to exceed to any single employer in any
grant year the sum of 
                                             $70,000, unless first approved by governor and
council. The commissioner shall provide the governor and council an
information item not less frequently than semi-annually describing all
such grants expended pursuant thereto. Such grants shall be made
pursuant to a form of agreement that shall be approved by governor and
council after review by the attorney general and the commissioner of the
department of administrative services.

**Source.** 2009, 144:91, eff. Oct. 1, 2009.

Economic Development Strategy and Plan
--------------------------------------

### Section 12-A:62

 **12-A:62 Economic Development Strategy and Plan. –** The division
of economic development, with input and assistance from the economic
development advisory council established under RSA 12-A:22-a and other
public and private organizations with whom it chooses to work, shall
develop a rolling 2-year economic development strategy and operating
plan. The plan shall reflect the fact that there are local and regional
entities charged with economic development in the state and shall
identify and work to support those efforts.

**Source.** 2014, 275:3, eff. July 28, 2014.

### Section 12-A:63

 **12-A:63 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Plan'' means an on-going management operating document that
identifies strategies and activities, and the progress thereof, designed
to expand the state's economic base and strengthen the economic health
of New Hampshire, based on the needs of the state and of business and
industry. The plan shall identify specific actions, and the
responsibilities, rationales, timeframes, resources required, barriers
if any, and the tracking and reporting of outcomes associated with those
actions.
                                             
 II. "Strategy'' means an overall direction or course that identifies
how the division will convey the state's value to the business and
industry community, how it will leverage its strengths and assets, and
the broad themes it will emphasize that are attractive to retaining and
recruiting business and industry.

**Source.** 2014, 275:3, eff. July 28, 2014.

### Section 12-A:64

 **12-A:64 Goals and Objectives. –** The plan shall identify both
goals and objectives for the 2-year period and shall track measureable
results so as to be able to assess the plan. Goals and objectives may be
added, amended, or deleted as both existing and emerging economic
conditions and opportunities warrant. The plan shall also benchmark key
economic indicators.

**Source.** 2014, 275:3, eff. July 28, 2014.

### Section 12-A:65

 **12-A:65 Content of the Economic Development Strategy and Plan.
–**
                                             
 I. The following, as a minimum, shall be considered in constructing
the economic development strategy and plan:
                                             
 (a) Consideration of the entire state.
                                             
 (b) An analysis, led by the economic development advisory
council, relative to business and industry, of New Hampshire strengths
and advantages, and how they will be leveraged; analysis of weaknesses
and obstacles, and suggestions on how to remedy or mitigate them;
identification of opportunities and how to take advantage and benefit
from them; and identification of threats and how to meet and deter them.
The analysis, where appropriate, should suggest ownership of its various
elements.
                                             
 (c) A needs forecast, based on research from both existing and
targeted business and industry, that identifies issues and suggested
initiatives so as to strengthen New Hampshire as a business and industry
destination and to reinforce retention.
                                             
 (d) Identification of economic, demographic, and other trends
which may have both short-term and long-term influence on the economy of
the state.
                                             
 (e) The identification of business sectors that are of strategic
importance to the state's economy and to the state's global business
image, and development of specific strategies to promote the development
of such sectors; and an analysis of new industries that can be targeted
in New Hampshire and the rationale for their identification.
                                             
 (f) Identification of how economic development ideas, advice, and
information from relevant entities throughout the state will be
solicited to strengthen strategies and plans; and how potential partners
for the implementation of the strategies and plans, including, without
limitation, the United States Commerce Department, local governments,
regional planning commissions, regional economic development
corporations, chambers of commerce, business associations, investors and
other relevant entities will be integrated and engaged. Other states
should also be studied to build an understanding of best practices that
may be emulated.
                                             
 (g) Innovative programs to position and market the state to aid
business recruitment and retention.
                                             
 (h) Economic performance metrics, to include the previous 3
fiscal years and objectives for the 2 years covered by the plan. Such
metrics shall be contained in a state economic dashboard and updated
regularly.
                                             
 (i) Inter-department agreements with selected state agencies
recognizing their role in economic development strategies, plans, and
programs.
                                             
 (j) Identification of how the state will petition for and receive
moneys, such as grants, to be used for economic development activities.
                                             
 (k) Consideration of how workforce education and training in
cooperation with the university system, the community college system,
private colleges and universities, and other workforce training
organizations will be leveraged and enhanced.
                                             
 (l) Provisions for export growth and how relationships will be
fostered with New Hampshire's export-related service providers and with
the Commerce Department's International Trade Administration; and
provisions to improve the state's image as a destination for foreign
business investment and location with overseas entities.
                                             
 (m) Identification of a division liaison to communicate needs to
the general court for the benefit of economic development.
                                             
 (n) Provision to identify and carry out other economic
development activities that the governor or the commissioner of the
department of resources and economic development may request.
                                             
 II. The governor, the commissioner of the department of resources
and economic development, or the legislature may from time to time
establish a commission or committee, as an adjunct to the division of
economic development, to work on exceptionally problematic needs
associated with economic development.

**Source.** 2014, 275:3, eff. July 28, 2014.

### Section 12-A:66

 **12-A:66 Annual Report. –** The division of economic development
shall complete the economic development strategy and plan by December
31, 2015, and submit the plan to the governor, the senate president,
senate majority leader, senate minority leader, the speaker of the house
of representatives, house majority leader, and house minority leader. On
or before December 31 each year thereafter the division shall similarly
provide results and validation from the previous fiscal year and a
comprehensive update of the plan so that each annual report shall extend
the time frame of the plan by one year, thereby ensuring that a 2-year
plan is always in effect.

**Source.** 2014, 275:3, eff. July 28, 2014. 2015, 11:1, eff. July 4,
2015.

Division of Economic Development Fund
-------------------------------------

### Section 12-A:67

 **12-A:67 Division of Economic Development Fund. –** There is hereby
established in the office of the state treasurer a fund to be known as
the division of economic development fund. The commissioner of resources
and economic development is authorized to accept public sector and
private sector grants, gifts, or donations of any kind for the purpose
of funding initiatives associated with the purpose of this subdivision.
The purpose of this subdivision shall be defined as the activities set
forth in RSA 12-A:22. Such grants, gifts, and donations shall be
deposited in the division of economic development fund and may only be
expended by the commissioner of resources and economic development to
accomplish the purposes of this subdivision. Other than acknowledgement
for promotional purposes, donations shall not be used as fees for
services in a manner that primarily benefits the party providing the
funds. The state treasurer may invest moneys in the fund as provided by
law, with interest received on such investment credited to the fund. The
moneys in this fund shall be nonlapsing and shall be continually
appropriated to the department of resources and economic development.

**Source.** 2014, 316:1, eff. July 1, 2014.
