---
title: 'CHAPTER 12-B COMMUNITY RECREATION SERVICE'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 12-B
                                             
COMMUNITY RECREATION SERVICE
----------------------------

### Section 12-B:1

 **12-B:1 Purpose and Definition. –** The purpose of this chapter
shall be to provide, upon request, to the municipalities and other
political subdivisions of the state and to non-governmental
organizations, assistance in the development of wholesome and adequate
recreation, and recreation, for the purpose of this chapter, is defined
to mean those activities and interests which provide a diversification
of occupation and which aid in promoting worthy use of leisure time,
pursuit of happiness, satisfaction, recreative enjoyment, fullness of
life, relaxation, instruction and education, physical and mental health,
and cultural developments and experiences of a leisure-time nature.

**Source.** 1965, 259:1, eff. July 1, 1965.

### Section 12-B:2

 **12-B:2 Director of Community Recreation. –** There is hereby
established the position of director of community recreation in the
department of resources and economic development. The commissioner of
resources and economic development shall appoint a director of community
recreation who shall meet the minimum qualifications necessary to be
classified as a professional recreator under the voluntary registration
plan of the New Hampshire Recreation Society. This shall be a classified
position within the state classification system. The director shall
receive compensation commensurate with salaries paid to comparable
competitive positions in the other New England states as determined by
the department of personnel.

**Source.** 1965, 259:1, eff. July 1, 1965.

### Section 12-B:3

 **12-B:3 Duties. –** It shall be the duty of the director of
community recreation:
                                             
 I. To provide guidance to local communities, on request, in
establishing, organizing, promoting, conducting, and financing
recreation programs.
                                             
 II. To provide suggestions to local communities, on request, on
facility development, in-service training of employees, utilization of
local and state resource material and personnel.
                                             
 III. To co-operate with state and federal agencies, private
membership groups, and with commercial recreational interests, in the
promotion of recreational opportunities.
                                             
 IV. To make available suggestions whereby the various service and
civic groups in the state can provide recreation services and donations
to recreation projects on a sound and coordinated basis.
                                             
 V. To encourage local communities to provide for appropriate
recreation for the ill and disabled.
                                             
 VI. To provide suggestions whereby our senior citizens can live a
meaningful life and utilize their skills and talents for the benefit of
the community and themselves.
                                             
 VII. To study and appraise recreational needs of the state and to
assemble and disseminate information relative to recreation.
                                             
 VIII. To aid in recruiting, training, and placing recreation
workers, and promote recreation institutes and conferences.
                                             
 IX. To establish and promote recreational standards.
                                             
 X. To submit an annual report of his activities.

**Source.** 1965, 259:1. 1990, 140:2, X, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 12-B:4

 **12-B:4 Highway Bicycle Paths or Trails. –** The director of
community recreation is authorized to designate with the approval of the
commissioner of transportation and the commissioner of resources and
economic development certain class I, II, III and IV highways as
appropriate bicycle paths or trails as defined by RSA 230:74, IV. He
shall consult with the commissioner of transportation or his designee
and with such other state and local groups as he deems appropriate in
designating such highway bicycle paths or trails.

**Source.** 1973, 569:1. 1981, 337:7, eff. Aug. 16, 1981.

### Section 12-B:5

 **12-B:5 Path or Trail Map. –** The director of community recreation
shall prepare and print a map and other literature which will describe
the bicycle paths or trails designated pursuant to the provisions of RSA
12-B:4 and will provide other information of use to bicyclers.

**Source.** 1973, 569:1. 1981, 337:8, eff. Aug. 16, 1981.
