---
title: |
    CHAPTER 12-C MAINE-NEW HAMPSHIRE COMMISSION ON OCEANOGRAPHY
    
                                             [TERMINATED
                                             ]
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 12-C
                                             
MAINE-NEW HAMPSHIRE COMMISSION ON OCEANOGRAPHY 
                                             [TERMINATED
                                             ]
-------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 12-C:1

 **12-C:1 Compact Authorized. –** The Maine-New Hampshire Commission
on Oceanography is hereby enacted into law and entered into with the
State of Maine provided the State of Maine legally joins therein in the
form substantially as follows:

**Maine-New Hampshire Commission on Oceanography**

**Article I. Findings**


                                             
 Maine and New Hampshire are by virtue of geographic location and
other characteristics ocean oriented commercially; the population of
both states contributes substantially to the strength and security of
the United States on and under the ocean; one of the largest continental
shelf areas of the United States lies off the shores of Maine and New
Hampshire; the resources of the Gulf of Maine and the ocean can provide
a source of great economic growth; Maine and New Hampshire's
educational, industrial, commercial and scientific interests have been
mutually pursuing ocean oriented activity; and the increased use of
these facilities and resources requires coordination and planning
between the States of Maine and New Hampshire. To this end, it is the
intent of this compact to establish and provide for a bi-state
commission on oceanography and hydrospace.

**Article II. Purpose**


                                             
 It is the purpose of this compact to provide, in the States of Maine
and New Hampshire, improved facilities and procedures for the expansion,
coordination and implementation of the policies, programs, and
activities of interstate significance in the Maine-New Hampshire region
in the field of oceanography and hydrospace including, but not limited
to the physical, social, economic, educational and scientific aspects
related directly or indirectly thereto; to study, investigate and plan
appropriate activities with respect to the coordination, development,
expansion, and implementation of every phase of oceanography and
hydrospace; to provide means by which interstate conflicts may be
resolved; and to provide procedures for interstate coordination of the
interests of all public and private agencies, persons and entities in
the fields covered by this compact and to provide an organization to
carry out the purposes of this compact.

**Article III. Creation of Commission**


                                             
 There is hereby created the Maine-New Hampshire Commission on
Oceanography, hereinafter called the commission.

**Article IV. Membership**


                                             
 The commission shall consist of 6 members from each party state to
be appointed and to serve, in accordance with and subject to the laws of
the state which they represent. The members of the commission shall
consist of persons who are representative of the fields of industry,
education, commerce, and government.

**Article V. Functions**


                                             
 To carry out the purpose of this compact it shall be the
responsibility of the commission to prepare studies and plans, and to
recommend procedures and sponsor programs to implement, coordinate,
develop and expand all activities directly or indirectly related to the
fields of oceanography and hydrospace in all areas of Maine and New
Hampshire or areas that may affect these states; and these activities
may include but are not limited to the following:
                                             
 (1) Collection and interpretation of basic data.
                                             
 (2) Investigation, planning, and programming (including
scheduling) of projects of interstate or regional significance.
                                             
 (3) Planning and scheduling of governmental services and programs
which would be of assistance to the orderly growth and prosperity of the
region, and to the well-being of its population in the fields of
oceanography and hydrospace.
                                             
 (4) Encouraging of the referral of plans or proposals for
projects and programs of interstate or regional significance to the
commission.
                                             
 (5) Studying and recommending means for the most effective
utilization of such federal assistance as may be available on a regional
basis or as may have an interstate or regional impact.
                                             
 (6) Assisting the party states, or either of them, in cooperative
undertakings with the federal government or any agencies thereof.
                                             
 (7) Assisting and advising industry, governmental agencies and
schools in the development and expansion of programs related to or
associated with oceanography or hydrospace.
                                             
 To avoid duplication of effort and in the interests of economy, the
commission shall make use of existing studies, surveys, plans, data, and
other materials in the possession of the governmental agencies of the
party states and their respective subdivisions or in the possession of
other interstate agencies. Each such agency, within available
appropriations and if not expressly prevented or limited by law, is
hereby authorized to make such materials available to the commission and
to otherwise assist it in the performance of its functions. At the
request of the commission each such agency is further authorized to
provide the commission with information regarding plans and programs
affecting the Maine-New Hampshire region so that the commission may have
available to it current information with respect thereto.
                                             
 The commission shall use qualified public and private agencies to
make investigations and conduct research, but if it is unable to secure
the undertaking of such investigations or original research by a
qualified public or private agency, it shall have the power to make its
own investigations and to conduct its own research. The commission may
make contracts with any public or private agencies or private persons or
entities for the undertaking of such investigations or original research
within its purview.
                                             
 The officers and personnel or agencies of the party states, and of
any other government or agency whatever, or private citizens, or
representatives of private organizations, may serve at the request of
the commission upon such advisory committees as the commission may
determine to create; and such officers and personnel of any such
government or agency, may serve upon its committees without forfeiture
of office or employment and with no loss or diminution in the status,
rights and privileges which they otherwise enjoy.

**Article VI. Cooperation With the Federal Government and Other
Governmental Agencies**


                                             
 Each party state is hereby authorized to participate in cooperative
or joint undertakings with the federal government, any appropriate
agency or agencies thereof, or with any interstate agency or agencies.
Such participation shall be at the instance of the governor or in such
other manner as state laws may provide or authorize. The commission
shall facilitate the work of state representatives in any joint
interstate or cooperative federal-state undertaking authorized by this
Article, and each state shall keep the commission advised of its
activities in respect of such undertakings, to the extent that they have
interstate or regional significance.

**Article VII. Meetings and Voting**


                                             
 The commission shall meet at least once every 90 days. No action of
the commission shall be binding unless taken at a meeting at which a
majority of the commission members are present and a majority of the
total number of votes on the commission are cast in favor thereof;
provided that any action not binding by reason of failure to meet this
requirement may be ratified within 30 days by the concurrence in writing
of a majority of the commission members.
                                             
 Any member who does not attend at least one meeting in any 6 month
period shall forfeit his position on the commission.

**Article VIII. Finances**


                                             
 A. The commission shall submit to the governor or designated officer
of each party state a budget including a statement of all funds expected
to be available to the commission and their sources and, a request for
an appropriation to cover that state's share of expenditures for such
period as may be required by the laws of that jurisdiction for
presentation to the legislature thereof.
                                             
 B. With due regard for such monies and other assistance as may be
made available to it, the commission shall be provided with such funds
by each of the states participating therein to provide the means of
establishing a staff of personnel, and such activities as may be
necessary to fulfill the powers and duties imposed upon and entrusted to
the commission.
                                             
 With due allowance for monies otherwise available, each budget of
the commission shall be the responsibility of the party states, to be
apportioned equally between them.
                                             
 C. The commission shall not pledge the credit of either
jurisdiction. The commission may meet any of its obligations in whole or
in part with funds available to it under Article IX(E) of this compact,
provided that the commission takes specific action setting aside such
funds prior to the incurring of any obligation to be met in whole or in
part in such manner.
                                             
 D. The members of the commission shall be paid by the commission
their actual expenses incurred and incidental to the performance of
their duties, subject to the approval of the commission.
                                             
 E. The commission shall keep accurate accounts of all receipts and
disbursements. The receipts and disbursements of the commission shall be
subject to the audit and accounting procedures established under its
bylaws. However, all receipts and disbursements of funds handled by the
commission shall be audited by a qualified public accountant and the
report of the audit shall be included in and become a part of the annual
report of the commission.
                                             
 F. The accounts of the commission shall be open at any reasonable
time for inspection by such agency, representative or representatives of
the jurisdictions which appropriate funds to the commission.

**Article IX. Administration and Management**


                                             
 A. The commission may sue and be sued and shall have a seal.
                                             
 B. The commission shall elect annually, from among its members, a
chairman, vice-chairman and treasurer. The chairman and vice-chairman
shall not be from the same state. The commission shall appoint an
executive director who shall act as secretary, and together with the
treasurer, shall be bonded in such amounts as the commission may
require.
                                             
 C. The commission shall appoint and remove or discharge such
personnel as may be necessary for the performance of its functions
irrespective of any civil service laws or state personnel regulations
which might otherwise apply. The commission may establish and maintain,
independently by contract or agreement with either of the party states,
suitable retirement programs for its employees. Employees of the
commission shall be eligible for social security coverage in respect to
old age and survivors insurance provided that the commission takes such
steps as may be necessary pursuant to federal law to participate in such
program of insurance as a governmental agency or unit. The commission
may establish and maintain or participate in such additional programs of
employee benefits as may be appropriate to afford employees of the
commission terms and conditions of employment similar to those enjoyed
by employees of the party states generally.
                                             
 D. The commission may borrow, accept or contract for the services of
personnel from any state or the United States or any subdivision or
agency thereof, from any intergovernmental agency, or from any
institution, person, firm, or corporation.
                                             
 E. The commission may accept for any of its purposes and functions
under this compact any and all appropriations, donations, and grants or
money, equipment, supplies, materials and services, conditional or
otherwise, from any state or the United States or any subdivision or
agency thereof, or intergovernmental agency, or any institution, person,
firm or corporation, and may receive, utilize and dispose of the same.
                                             
 F. The commission may establish and maintain such facilities as may
be necessary for the transacting of its business. The commission may
acquire, hold and convey real and personal property and any interest
therein.
                                             
 G. The commission may adopt, amend and rescind bylaws, rules and
regulations for the conduct of its business.
                                             
 H. The commission shall make and transmit annually, to the
legislature and governor of each party state, a report covering the
activities of the commission for the preceding year, and embodying such
recommendations as may have been adopted by the commission. The
commission may issue such additional reports as it may deem desirable.

**Article X. Other Compacts and Activities**


                                             
 Nothing in this compact shall be construed to impair, or otherwise
affect the jurisdiction of any interstate agency in which either party
state participates nor to abridge, impair or otherwise affect the
provisions of any compact to which any one or more of the party states
may be a party, nor to supersede, diminish or otherwise affect any
obligation assumed under any such compact; nor shall anything in this
compact be construed to discourage additional interstate compacts by the
party states or the establishment of intergovernmental agencies in
sub-areas of the region. Nothing in this compact shall be construed to
limit the jurisdiction or activities of any participating government,
agency, or officer thereof, or any private person or agency.

**Article XI. Enactment**


                                             
 This compact shall become effective when entered into and enacted
into law by both the state of Maine and the state of New Hampshire.

**Article XII. Withdrawal**


                                             
 This compact shall continue in force and remain binding upon each
party state until renounced by it. Renunciation of this compact must be
preceded by sending 3 year's notice in writing of intention to withdraw
from the compact to the governor of the other state party hereto.

**Article XIII. Construction and Severability**


                                             
 The provisions of this compact shall be severable and if any phrase,
clause, sentence, or provision of this compact is declared to be
unconstitutional or the applicability thereof, to any state, agency,
person, or circumstance is held invalid, the constitutionality of the
remainder of this compact and the applicability thereof, to any other
state, agency, person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby. It
is the legislative intent that the provisions of this compact be
reasonably and liberally construed.

**Source.** 1967, 387:1, eff. July 1, 1967.

### Section 12-C:2

 **12-C:2 Members of Commission. –** The members of the Maine-New
Hampshire Commission on Oceanography who represent this state thereon
shall be appointed by the governor with the advice and consent of the
council. The term of office of each shall be for 6 years. For the first
appointments of the commission, 2 shall be appointed for 2 years; 2
shall be appointed for 4 years; and 2 shall be appointed for 6 years.

**Source.** 1967, 387:1, eff. July 1, 1967.

### Section 12-C:3

 **12-C:3 Retirement System. –** The Maine-New Hampshire Commission
on Oceanography may, by resolution legally adopted in form approved by
the board of trustees of the state employees' retirement system, elect
to have its New Hampshire officers and employees become eligible to
participate in the state employees' retirement system. After such
election, said commission shall be known as an employer for the purposes
of RSA 100. The board of trustees of the state employees' retirement
system shall set a date when the participation of the officers and
employees of the commission shall become effective, and then such
officers and employees may become members of the state employees'
retirement and participate therein.

**Source.** 1967, 387:1, eff. July 1, 1967.

### Section 12-C:4

 **12-C:4 Membership Retirements. –** Membership in the state
employees' retirement system shall be optional for the New Hampshire
officers and employees of said commission who are in its service on the
date when participation becomes effective and any such officer or
employee who elects to join said system shall be entitled to a prior
service certificate covering such periods of previous service rendered
to such commission or the state for which the commission is willing to
make accrued liability contributions. Membership shall be compulsory for
all New Hampshire employees entering the service of the commission after
the date participation becomes effective.

**Source.** 1967, 387:1, eff. July 1, 1967.

### Section 12-C:5

 **12-C:5 Reports. –** The chief fiscal officer of the commission
shall submit to the board of trustees such information and shall cause
to be performed, with respect to the New Hampshire employees of said
commission who are members of said retirement system, such duties as
shall be prescribed by the board of trustees in order to carry out the
provisions of the state employees' retirement system.

**Source.** 1967, 387:1, eff. July 1, 1967.

### Section 12-C:6

 **12-C:6 Repeal of Compact. –** Renunciation, within the meaning of
Article XII of the compact, shall be accomplished by act of the
legislature repealing the compact and by notice in accordance with said
article. In the event of such an act of repeal, the governor shall send
the necessary notice to the other party state.

**Source.** 1967, 387:1, eff. July 1, 1967.
