---
title: |
    CHAPTER 12-I NORTHERN NEW ENGLAND INTERSTATE COMMISSION ON ECONOMIC
    DEVELOPMENT
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 12-I
                                             
NORTHERN NEW ENGLAND INTERSTATE COMMISSION ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 12-I:1

 **12-I:1 Northern New England Interstate Commission on Economic
Development Established; Members. –** There is hereby established the
Northern New England Interstate Commission on Economic Development to
examine and promote economic development throughout New Hampshire,
Maine, and Vermont. The members of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 I. The governor of the state of New Hampshire, or designee.
                                             
 II. The governor of the state of Maine, or designee.
                                             
 III. The governor of the state of Vermont, or designee.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner of the New Hampshire department of resources
and economic development, or designee.
                                             
 V. The commissioner of the Maine department of resources and
economic development, or designee.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner of the Vermont department of resources and
economic development, or designee.
                                             
 VII. One public member from each state, appointed by the governor of
each respective state.

**Source.** 1997, 270:1.

### Section 12-I:2

 **12-I:2 Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall gather and review information regarding the
economic development of the northern New England states. The information
may be gathered from any source, including the governor's office and the
department of economic development of each state.
                                             
 II. The commission shall consider methods to:
                                             
 (a) Enhance travel access among the northern New England states.
                                             
 (b) Promote tourism.
                                             
 (c) Enhance economic development.
                                             
 (d) Develop legislation to be introduced in each state which
promotes economic development.

**Source.** 1997, 270:1.
