---
title: |
    CHAPTER 12-J GOVERNOR'S COMMISSION ON ALCOHOL AND DRUG ABUSE PREVENTION,
    TREATMENT, AND RECOVERY
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 12-J
                                             
GOVERNOR'S COMMISSION ON ALCOHOL AND DRUG ABUSE PREVENTION, TREATMENT, AND RECOVERY
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 12-J:1

 **12-J:1 Commission Established; Membership; Terms. –** There is
hereby established a commission which shall serve in an advisory
capacity to the governor and the general court regarding the delivery of
effective and coordinated alcohol and drug abuse prevention, treatment,
and recovery services throughout the state. The commission shall consist
of the following members:


                                             [Paragraph I effective until the date provided by 2016, 230:8; see also
paragraph I set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. Seven public members, appointed by the governor and council, 2 of
whom shall be professionals knowledgeable about alcohol and drug abuse
prevention; 2 of whom shall be professionals knowledgeable about alcohol
and drug abuse treatment; 2 of whom shall be public members who are not
professionals within the alcohol and drug addiction prevention and
treatment system; and a member in long-term recovery. The members
appointed pursuant to this paragraph shall serve 3-year terms; provided
that initially 2 members shall serve for one year, 2 members shall serve
for 2 years, and 2 members shall serve for 3 years.


                                             [Paragraph I effective as provided by 2016, 230:9; see also paragraph I
set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. Seven public members, 2 of whom shall be professionals
knowledgeable about alcohol and drug abuse prevention, one of whom shall
be appointed by the governor and one of whom shall be appointed by the
senate president; 2 of whom shall be professionals knowledgeable about
alcohol and drug abuse treatment, one of whom shall be appointed by the
governor and one of whom shall be appointed by the speaker of the house
of representatives; 2 of whom shall be public members who are not
professionals within the alcohol and drug addiction prevention and
treatment system, one of whom shall be appointed by the senate president
and one of whom shall be appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives; and one member in long-term recovery, appointed by the
governor.
                                             
 II. Two members of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives, and 2 members of the senate,
appointed by the president of the senate. The term of the legislative
members of the commission shall be for the biennium and shall be
coterminous with membership in the general court. Legislative members
shall receive mileage at the legislative rate when attending to the
duties of the commission.
                                             
 III. (a)(1) The attorney general, or designee.
                                             
 (2) The adjutant general, or designee.
                                             
 (3) The administrative judge of the circuit court, or
designee.
                                             
 (4) The chairperson of the liquor commission, or designee.
                                             
 (5) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (6) The director of juvenile justice services, department of
health and human services, or designee.
                                             
 (7) The commissioner of the department of education, or
designee.
                                             
 (8) The commissioner of the department of corrections, or
designee.
                                             
 (9) The commissioner of the department of safety, or
designee.
                                             
 (10) The director of the office of alcohol and drug policy,
department of health and human services, or designee.
                                             
 (11) The commissioner of the department of insurance, or
designee.
                                             
 (b) The members under this paragraph shall serve terms
coterminous with their terms in office.
                                             
 IV. (a)(1) A representative of the Business and Industry Association
of New Hampshire, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (2) A representative of the New Hampshire Medical Society,
appointed by the society.
                                             
 (3) The chancellor of the community college system of New
Hampshire, or designee.
                                             
 (4) The chairman of the New Hampshire Suicide Prevention
Council.
                                             
 (5) A representative of the New Hampshire Nurses' Association,
appointed by the association.
                                             
 (6) A representative of the New Hampshire Charitable
Foundation, appointed by the foundation.
                                             
 (b) The members under this paragraph shall serve 3-year terms.

**Source.** 2000, 204:2. 2001, 286:2. 2005, 77:3, eff. July 1, 2005 at
12:01 a.m. 2013, 84:1, 2, eff. Aug. 18, 2013. 2014, 18:2, eff. July 22,
2014. 2016, 330:1, eff. June 24, 2016; 330:2, eff. as provided by 2016,
330:9.

### Section 12-J:2

 **12-J:2 Organization of Commission; Task Forces; Staffing. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall elect one of its members to serve as
chairperson. The executive director of the commission shall be the
director of the appropriate division responsible for alcohol and drug
abuse prevention and recovery, who shall serve without additional
compensation. Twelve members of the commission shall constitute a
quorum.
                                             
 II. (a) To assist the commission in the performance of its duties,
the chairperson shall create task forces. The chairperson shall
initially create task forces to address the following issues:
                                             
 (1) Prevention.
                                             
 (2) Treatment.
                                             
 (3) Recovery.
                                             
 (4) Program monitoring and evaluation.
                                             
 (b) To assist the commission in the performance of its duties,
the chairperson may create additional task forces.
                                             
 (c) The commission chairperson shall appoint at least one
commission member to serve on each task force as chairperson.
                                             
 (d) Based upon recommendations from each task force, the
commission chairperson may appoint non-commission members to serve as
adjunct members of each task force for a term of one year. In appointing
adjunct members, the chairperson shall ensure that youth have the
opportunity to participate directly in the work of appropriate task
forces.
                                             
 (e) Each task force shall:
                                             
 (1) Develop a mission statement, including its goals and
objectives.
                                             
 (2) Report to the commission on a regular basis concerning
available programs, funding, and unmet needs.
                                             
 (3) Identify program areas where improved coordination is
needed.
                                             
 II-a. The chairperson shall create a budget task force comprised of
the individuals listed in RSA 12-J:1, III(a) to report biannually on
financial expenditures for substance abuse related work throughout state
government as detailed in RSA 12-J:4, III and recommend budget policy
priorities to the commission regarding the allocation of funding alcohol
and drug prevention, treatment, and recovery services across state
agencies and throughout the state.
                                             
 III. All executive branch departments shall provide administrative
support to the commission. The executive director of the commission
shall direct and coordinate the administrative support to the
commission.
                                             
 IV. All executive branch departments shall respond promptly to
written requests from the commission for information concerning the
alcohol and drug abuse prevention, treatment, and recovery programs and
services provided by them and the costs and funding sources for such
programs and services.

**Source.** 2000, 204:2. 2008, 312:2. 2010, 359:1, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.
2014, 18:2, eff. July 22, 2014. 2016, 330:3, 4, eff. June 24, 2016.

### Section 12-J:3

 **12-J:3 Duties. –** The duties of the commission shall be to:
                                             
 I. Develop and revise, as necessary, a statewide plan for the
effective prevention of alcohol and drug abuse, particularly among
youth, and a comprehensive system of treatment and recovery services for
individuals and families affected by alcohol and drug abuse. The
statewide plan shall:
                                             
 (a) Identify the causes, the nature and scope, and the impact of
alcohol and drug abuse in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (b) Identify and prioritize unmet needs for prevention,
treatment, and recovery services.
                                             
 (c) Recommend initiatives and policy considerations to the
general court to reduce the incidence of alcohol and drug abuse in New
Hampshire.
                                             
 (d) Identify and quantify public and private resources available
to support alcohol and drug abuse prevention, treatment, and recovery.
                                             
 (e) Specify additional resources necessary to address unmet needs
for prevention, treatment, and recovery.
                                             
 (f) Specify evaluation and monitoring methodology.
                                             
 II. Advise the governor and general court on and promote the
development of effective community-based alcohol and drug abuse
prevention strategies.
                                             
 III. Advise the governor and the general court on and promote the
development of treatment services to meet the needs of citizens addicted
to alcohol or other drugs.
                                             
 III-a. Advise the governor and the general court on and promote the
development of recovery services to meet the needs of citizens in
recovery from alcohol and other drug misuse.
                                             
 IV. Identify unmet needs and the resources required to reduce the
incidence of alcohol and drug abuse in New Hampshire and to make
recommendations to the governor and general court regarding legislation
and funding to address such needs.
                                             
 V. Authorize the disbursement of moneys from the alcohol abuse
prevention and treatment fund, pursuant to RSA 176-A:1, III.
                                             
 VI. Make presentations at least once each legislative session to the
house and senate finance committees, the senate health and human
services committee, the house health, human services and elderly affairs
committee, and the fiscal committee of the general court.

**Source.** 2000, 204:2; 328:4. 2010, Sp. Sess., 1:88, eff. June 10,
2010. 2014, 18:2, eff. July 22, 2014. 2016, 330:5, eff. June 24, 2016.

### Section 12-J:4

 **12-J:4 Meetings and Reports. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall meet at least 4 times each year and may
convene public hearings as necessary to promote the goals of the
commission.
                                             
 II. The commission shall submit an annual report to the governor,
speaker of the house of representatives, president of the senate,
chairpersons of the house and senate finance committees, chairperson of
the house health, human services and elderly affairs committee, the
chairperson of the senate health and human services committee, and the
chairperson of the fiscal committee of the general court by October 1 of
each year regarding the activities of the commission. The annual report
shall:
                                             
 (a) Identify alcohol and drug abuse prevention, treatment, and
recovery services and programs provided by state departments and
agencies or funded in whole or in part by state or federal funds;
                                             
 (b) Indicate the progress made during the prior year toward the
implementation of the statewide plan developed by the commission
pursuant to RSA 12-J:3, I;
                                             
 (c) Recommend any revisions to the statewide plan developed
pursuant to RSA 12-J:3, I;
                                             
 (d) Identify and prioritize unmet needs for prevention,
treatment, and recovery;
                                             
 (e) Indicate the progress, or lack thereof, in addressing the
unmet needs;
                                             
 (f) Recommend initiatives and/or policy considerations to the
governor and the general court to address the unmet needs;
                                             
 (g) Specify the resources and any legislation necessary to
support existing programs for prevention, treatment, and recovery and to
develop, implement, support, and evaluate the initiatives recommended by
the commission;
                                             
 (h) In even-numbered years the report may include specific
recommendations for funds to be included in the next state biennial
budget to support alcohol and drug abuse prevention, treatment, and
recovery services and programs; and
                                             
 (i) Incorporate the findings and recommendations of the report
required under paragraph II-a and make specific findings and
recommendations regarding public awareness, education, and legislation
to address the dangers of synthetic drugs.
                                             
 II-a. The commission shall prepare a report, including
recommendations for policies to be implemented for coordinating public
awareness of and education in the dangers of synthetic drugs and other
emerging or designer synthetic drug substances. The report shall include
substantive input from the commission's member agencies, including the
department of health and human services, bureau of drug and alcohol
services, the attorney general, the department of safety, and the
department of education. The commission shall submit its initial report,
including recommendations, to the senate president, the speaker of the
house of representatives, and the governor no later than 3 months after
the effective date of this paragraph. The commission shall submit
subsequent reports, including recommendations, to the senate president,
the speaker of the house of representatives, and the governor annually
thereafter.
                                             
 III. (a) To assist the commission in the timely completion of its
annual report, each commission member representing an executive branch
department or entity shall provide the information specified in
paragraph II for its department or entity to the commission on or before
August 1 of each year.
                                             
 (b) The commission shall submit a mid-year report to the
governor, speaker of the house of representatives, president of the
senate, chairpersons of the house and senate finance committees,
chairperson of the house health, human services and elderly affairs
committee, chairperson of the senate health and human services
committee, and chairperson of the fiscal committee of the general court
by March 1 of each year regarding the current state of drug abuse,
prevention, treatment, and recovery. The commission shall include a
dashboard of the following, both in the interim and the annual report as
required in RSA 12-J:4, II, that includes but is not limited to:
                                             
 (1) The number of known drug overdoses, broken out by drug
involved.
                                             
 (2) The number of deaths attributable to overdoses, as
reported by the chief medical examiner, broken out by drug involved.
                                             
 (3) The number of people known to be in treatment or recovery
programs supported by commission funding.
                                             
 (4) The accessibility and availability of treatment programs,
including waitlists.
                                             
 (5) The number of individuals in drug court programs, as
reported by the judicial branch.
                                             
 (6) The number of individuals in diversion programs, as
reported by the judicial branch.
                                             
 (7) The number of convictions for drug related offenses, as
reported by the judicial branch.
                                             
 (8) The number of persons incarcerated for drug related
offenses as reported by the department of corrections.
                                             
 (9) Funds expended and balances remaining, programs and
strategies created or sustained by the funds, and an estimate of the
number of individuals served by these funds.
                                             
 (10) Barriers to data access and availability, with proposed
strategies to develop or enhance data capacity.
                                             
 (11) Performance outcomes pursuant to National Outcomes
Measurement Standards (NOMS) as required with federal funding sources.
                                             
 (12) Any other information requested by the governor or
general court.
                                             
 (c) All data required in subparagraph (b) shall be presented in
the aggregate to protect the privacy of the individual. The commission
shall delete any data required in those paragraphs that enables the
personal identification of an individual.
                                             
 IV. In the reports submitted by the commission to the governor,
speaker of the house of representatives, president of the senate,
chairpersons of the house and senate finance committees, chairperson of
the house health, human services and elderly affairs committee,
chairperson of the senate health and human services committee, and
chairperson of the fiscal committee of the general court, the report
shall include outcome data and/or research citations about the efficacy
of funded programs based upon evidence of program results.

**Source.** 2000, 204:2. 2008, 312:3, eff. July 2, 2008. 2014, 18:2,
eff. July 22, 2014. 2015, 204:1, 2, eff. July 6, 2015. 2016, 330:6, 7,
eff. June 24, 2016.
