---
title: 'CHAPTER 12-K DEPLOYMENT OF PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 12-K
                                             
DEPLOYMENT OF PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES
--------------------------------------------------

### Section 12-K:1

 **12-K:1 Goals; Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. The federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 regulates the
deployment of wireless services in the United States. Its purpose is to
make these services available to the American people quickly and in a
very competitive manner. Nothing in this chapter is intended to preempt
the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
                                             
 II. The visual effects of tall antenna mounts or towers may go well
beyond the physical borders between municipalities, and should be
addressed so as to require that all affected parties have the
opportunity to be heard.
                                             
 III. Carriers wishing to build personal wireless service facilities
(PWSFs) in New Hampshire should consider commercially available
alternative PWSFs to tall cellular towers, which may include the use of
the following:
                                             
 (a) Lower antenna mounts which do not protrude as far above the
surrounding tree canopies.
                                             
 (b) Disguised PWSFs such as flagpoles, artificial tree poles,
light poles, and traffic lights, which blend in with their
surroundings.
                                             
 (c) Camouflaged PWSFs mounted on existing structures and
buildings.
                                             
 (d) Custom designed PWSFs to minimize the visual impact of a PWSF
on its surroundings.
                                             
 (e) Other available technology.
                                             
 IV. A PWSF map is necessary to allow for the orderly and efficient
deployment of wireless communication services in New Hampshire, and so
that local communities have adequate information with which to consider
appropriate siting and options to mitigate the visual effects of PWSFs.
                                             
 V. Municipalities will benefit from state guidance regarding
provisions to be considered in zoning ordinances relative to the
deployment of wireless communications facilities, including one or more
model ordinances.
                                             
 V-a. It is the policy of this state to facilitate the provision of
broadband and other advanced personal wireless services across the
state; and to promote access to broadband and advanced personal wireless
services for all residents, students, government agencies, and
businesses to ensure the availability of educational opportunities,
economic development, and public safety services throughout New
Hampshire. Deployment of personal wireless service facilities
infrastructure is also critical to ensuring that first responders can
provide for the health and safety of all residents of New Hampshire.
Consistent with the federal Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act
of 2012, Public Law 112-96, section 6409, which creates a national
wireless emergency communications network for use by first responders
that will be dependent on facilities placed on existing antenna mounts
or towers, it is the policy of this state to facilitate the collocation
of personal wireless services facilities on existing antenna mounts or
towers in all areas of New Hampshire, while also allowing for
expeditious modification of existing personal wireless service
facilities to keep pace with technological improvements.
                                             
 VI. Except as provided in RSA 12-K:10 and RSA 12-K:11, nothing in
this chapter shall be construed as altering any municipal zoning
ordinance, and this chapter itself shall not be construed as a zoning
ordinance.

**Source.** 2000, 240:1, eff. Aug. 7, 2000. 2013, 267:1, 2, eff. Sept.
22, 2013.

### Section 12-K:2

 **12-K:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Accessory equipment'' means any equipment serving or being used
in conjunction with a PWSF or mount. The term includes utility or
transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables,
equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds, shelters, or similar
structures.
                                             
 II. "Antenna'' means the equipment from which wireless radio signals
are sent and received by a PWSF.
                                             
 III. "Applicant'' means a carrier or any person engaged in the
business of providing the infrastructure required for a PWSF who submits
a collocation application or a modification application.
                                             
 IV. "Authority'' means each state, county, and each governing body,
board, agency, office, or commission of a municipality authorized by law
to make legislative, quasi judicial, or administrative decisions
relative to the construction, installation, modification, or siting of
PWSFs and mounts. The term shall not include state courts having
jurisdiction over land use, planning, or zoning decisions made by an
authority.
                                             
 V. "Average tree canopy height'' means the average height found by
inventorying the height above ground level of all trees over a specified
height within a specified radius.
                                             
 VI. "Base station'' means a station at the base of a mount or in the
area near the PWSF that is authorized to communicate with mobile
stations, generally consisting of radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial
cables, power supplies, and other associated electronics.
                                             
 VII. "Building permit'' means a permit issued pursuant to RSA 676 by
an authority prior to the collocation or modification of PWSFs, solely
to ensure that the work to be performed by the applicant satisfies the
applicable building code.
                                             
 VIII. "Camouflaged'' means for a personal wireless service facility
one that is disguised, hidden, part of an existing or proposed
structure, or placed within an existing or proposed structure.
                                             
 IX. "Carrier'' means a person that provides personal wireless
services.
                                             
 X. "Collocation'' means the placement or installation of new PWSFs
on existing towers or mounts, including electrical transmission towers
and water towers, as well as existing buildings and other structures
capable of structurally supporting the attachment of PWSFs in compliance
with applicable codes. "Collocation'' does not include a "substantial
modification.''
                                             
 XI. "Collocation application'' shall mean a request submitted by an
applicant to an authority for collocation on a tower or mount.
                                             
 XII. "Director'' means the director of the office of energy and
planning.
                                             
 XIII. "Disguised'' means, for a PWSF, designed to look like a
structure which may commonly be found in the area surrounding a proposed
PWSF such as, but not limited to, flagpoles, light poles, traffic
lights, or artificial tree poles.
                                             
 XIV. "Electrical transmission tower'' means an electrical
transmission structure used to support high voltage overhead power
lines. The term shall not include any utility pole.
                                             
 XV. "Equipment compound'' means an area surrounding or near the base
of a tower or mount supporting a PWSF, and encompassing all equipment
shelters, cabinets, generators, and appurtenances primarily associated
with the PWSF.
                                             
 XVI. "Equipment shelter'' means an enclosed structure, cabinet, shed
vault, or box near the base of a mount within which are housed equipment
for PWSFs, such as batteries and electrical equipment.
                                             
 XVII. "Height'' means the height above ground level from the natural
grade of a site to the highest point of a structure.
                                             
 XVIII. "Modification'' means the replacement or alteration of an
existing PWSF within a previously approved equipment compound or upon a
previously approved mount. Routine maintenance of an approved PWSF shall
not be considered a modification.
                                             
 XIX. "Modification application'' means a request submitted by an
applicant to an authority for modification of a PWSF.
                                             
 XX. "Mount'' means the structure or surface upon which antennas are
mounted and includes roof-mounted, side-mounted, ground-mounted, and
structure-mounted antennas on an existing building, as well as an
electrical transmission tower and water tower, and excluding utility
poles.
                                             
 XXI. "Municipality'' means any city, town, unincorporated town, or
unorganized place within the state.
                                             
 XXII. "Personal wireless service facility'' or "PWSF'' or
"facility'' means any "PWSF'' as defined in the federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. section 332(c)(7)(C)(ii),
including facilities used or to be used by a licensed provider of
personal wireless services. A PWSF includes the set of equipment and
network components, exclusive of the underlying tower or mount,
including, but not limited to, antennas, accessory equipment,
transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling, and
associated equipment necessary to provide personal wireless services.
                                             
 XXIII. "Radio frequency emissions'' means the emissions from
personal wireless service facilities, as described in the federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. section 332(c)(7)(B)(iv).
                                             
 XXIV. "Tower'' shall mean a freestanding or guyed structure, such as
a monopole, monopine, or lattice tower, designed to support PWSFs.
                                             
 XXV. "Substantial modification'' means the mounting of a proposed
PWSF on a tower or mount which, as a result of single or successive
modification applications:
                                             
 (a) Increases or results in the increase of the permitted
vertical height of a tower, or the existing vertical height of a mount,
by either more than 10 percent or the height of one additional antenna
array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20
feet, whichever is greater; or
                                             
 (b) Involves adding an appurtenance to the body of a tower or
mount that protrudes horizontally from the edge of the tower or mount
more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower or mount at the
level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater, except where necessary
to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the antenna
to the tower or mount via cable; or
                                             
 (c) Increases or results in the increase of the permitted square
footage of the existing equipment compound by more than 2,500 square
feet; or
                                             
 (d) Adds to or modifies a camouflaged PWSF in a way that would
defeat the effect of the camouflage.
                                             
 XXVI. "Utility pole'' means a structure owned and/or operated by a
public utility, municipality, electric membership corporation, or rural
electric cooperative that is designed specifically for and used to carry
lines, cables, or wires for telephony, cable television, or electricity,
or to provide lighting.
                                             
 XXVII. "Water tower'' means a water storage tank, or a standpipe or
an elevated tank situated on a support structure, originally constructed
for use as a reservoir or facility to store or deliver water.

**Source.** 2000, 240:1. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44, eff. July 1, 2004.
2013, 267:3, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 12-K:3

 **12-K:3 Wireless Carriers Doing Business in this State. –** Each
carrier or its appointed agent doing business, or seeking to do
business, in this state shall:
                                             
 I. Be allowed to construct new towers, provided that these towers
comply with municipal regulations for maximum height or maximum allowed
height above the average tree canopy height, subject to any exceptions,
waivers, or variances allowed or granted by the municipality.
                                             
 II. Comply with all applicable state and municipal land use
regulations laws.
                                             
 III. Comply with all federal, state, and municipal statutes, rules,
and regulations, including federal radio frequency radiation emission
regulations and the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, as
amended.
                                             
 IV. Provide information at the time of application to construct an
externally visible tower or to make a substantial modification to an
existing tower, mount, or PWSF, or prior to construction if no approval
is required, to the municipality in which the tower, mount, or PWSF is
to be constructed and to the office of energy and planning as follows:
                                             
 (a) A copy of its license from the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) demonstrating its authority to provide personal
wireless services in the geographical area where the PWSF is located, or
where a person is seeking to construct a new tower or make a substantial
modification to a tower, mount, or PWSF on behalf of a carrier, a signed
authorization from a representative of the carrier, and a copy of the
carrier's license.
                                             
 (b) Upon request, maps showing all of the carrier's current
externally visible tower and monopole PWSF locations in the state within
a 20-mile radius of the proposed externally visible new ground-mounted
PWSF, including permanent, temporary or to-be-decommissioned sites, if
any.
                                             
 (c) Upon request, a description of why less visually intrusive
alternatives for this tower or mount were not proposed.

**Source.** 2000, 240:1. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44, eff. July 1, 2004.
2013, 267:4, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 12-K:4

 **12-K:4 Payment of Costs. –** A wireless carrier seeking approval
to deploy a wireless communication facility may be required to pay
reasonable fees, including regional notification costs, imposed by the
municipality in accordance with RSA 676:4, I(g).

**Source.** 2000, 240:1, eff. Aug. 7, 2000.

### Section 12-K:5

 **12-K:5 Fall Zones. –** Zoning ordinances may include provisions
for fall zones for new towers and substantial modifications to the
extent necessary to protect public safety.

**Source.** 2000, 240:1, eff. Aug. 7, 2000. 2013, 267:5, eff. Sept. 22,
2013.

### Section 12-K:6

 **12-K:6 Personal Wireless Services Facilities Map. –** The director
of the office of energy and planning shall develop a personal wireless
service facilities map for the state. This map shall include all
externally visible tower and monopole PWSF locations in the state, both
active and inactive, for all carriers. This map shall also include for
each of the above locations a site description. Upon request of the
director, any wireless carrier or its appointed agent doing business in
this state shall provide a map of all of its existing externally visible
tower and monopole PWSF locations in the state and a site description of
each.

**Source.** 2000, 240:1. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44, eff. July 1, 2004.
2013, 267:6, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 12-K:7

 **12-K:7 Regional Notification. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Any municipality or other authority which receives an
application to construct a new tower or to complete a substantial
modification to an existing tower or mount which will be visible from
any other New Hampshire municipality within a 20-mile radius shall
provide written notification of such application and pending action to
such other municipality within the 20-mile radius.
                                             
 (b) This notification shall include sending a letter to the
governing body of the municipality within the 20-mile radius detailing
the pending action on the application and shall also include publishing
a notice in a newspaper customarily used for legal notices by such
municipality within the 20-mile radius, presenting a synopsis of the
application, providing relevant information concerning the applicable
permits required and the date of the next public hearing on the
application. Where a public hearing is scheduled by the local governing
body, such notice shall be published not less than 7 days nor more than
21 days prior to the public hearing date.
                                             
 II. (a) Any person, prior to constructing a new tower in any
location where no approval is required but which will be visible from
any other New Hampshire municipality within a 20-mile radius, shall
provide written notification of such planned construction to such other
municipality within the 20-mile radius.
                                             
 (b) This notification shall include sending a letter to the
governing body of the municipality within the 20-mile radius detailing
the planned construction and shall also include publishing a notice in a
newspaper customarily used for legal notices by such municipality within
a 20-mile radius, presenting a synopsis of the planned construction.
                                             
 III. Municipalities within the 20 mile radius described in
paragraphs I or II and their residents shall be allowed to comment at
any public hearing related to the application. Regional notification and
comments from other municipalities or their residents shall not be
construed to imply legal standing to challenge any decision.

**Source.** 2000, 240:1, eff. Aug. 7, 2000. 2013, 267:7, eff. Sept. 22,
2013.

### Section 12-K:8

 **12-K:8 Model Ordinances and Guidance. –** The director of the
office of energy and planning shall develop a set of model municipal
ordinances relative to the deployment of personal wireless
communications facilities. Prior to development, the director shall hold
one or more public hearings and solicit comments from interested
parties. The office of energy and planning shall provide a copy of the
set of model ordinances to any New Hampshire municipality that requests
it.

**Source.** 2000, 240:1. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 12-K:9

 **12-K:9 Rulemaking. –** The director of the office of energy and
planning, after holding a public hearing, shall adopt rules under RSA
541-A to provide sufficient information to municipalities, other state
agencies, wireless companies doing business or seeking to do business in
this state, and the public.

**Source.** 2000, 240:1. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44. 2012, 171:3, eff.
Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 12-K:10

 **12-K:10 Application Review. –** Notwithstanding any ordinance,
bylaw, or regulation to the contrary, in order to ensure uniformity
across New Hampshire with respect to the process for reviewing a
collocation application and a modification application, each authority
shall follow the following process:
                                             
 I. Collocation applications and modification applications shall be
reviewed for conformance with applicable building permit requirements
but shall not otherwise be subject to zoning or land use requirements,
including design or placement requirements, or public hearing review.
                                             
 II. The authority, within 45 calendar days of receiving a
collocation application or modification application, shall:
                                             
 (a) Review the collocation application or modification
application in light of its conformity with applicable building permit
requirements and consistency with this chapter. A collocation
application or modification application is deemed to be complete unless
the authority notifies the applicant in writing, within 15 calendar days
of submission of the specific deficiencies in the collocation
application or modification application which, if cured, would make the
collocation application or modification application complete. Upon
receipt of a timely written notice that a collocation application or
modification application is deficient, an applicant shall have 15
calendar days from receiving such notice to cure the specific
deficiencies. If the applicant cures the deficiencies within 15 calendar
days, the collocation application or modification application shall be
reviewed and processed within 45 calendar days from the initial date
received by the authority. If the applicant requires more than 15
calendar days to cure the specific deficiencies, the 45 calendar days
deadline for review shall be extended by the same period of time;
                                             
 (b) Make its final decision to approve or disapprove the
collocation application or modification application; and
                                             
 (c) Advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.
                                             
 III. If the authority fails to act on a collocation application or
modification application within the 45 calendar days review period, the
collocation application or modification application shall be deemed
approved.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, an
authority may not mandate, require or regulate the installation,
location, or use of PWSFs on utility poles.
                                             
 V. A party aggrieved by the final action of an authority, either by
an affirmative denial of a collocation application or modification
application under paragraph II or by its inaction, may bring an action
for review in superior court for the county in which the PWSF is
situated.

**Source.** 2013, 267:8, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 12-K:11

 **12-K:11 Limitations on Applications. –**
                                             
 I. In order to ensure uniformity across New Hampshire with respect
to the consideration of every collocation application and modification
application, no authority may:
                                             
 (a) Require an applicant to submit information about, or evaluate
an applicant's business decisions with respect to, its designed service,
customer demand for service, or quality of its service to or from a
particular area or site.
                                             
 (b) Evaluate a collocation application or modification
application based on the availability of other potential locations for
the placement of towers, mounts, or PWSFs.
                                             
 (c) Decide which type of personal wireless services,
infrastructure, or technology shall be used by the applicant.
                                             
 (d) Require the removal of existing mounts, towers, or PWSFs,
wherever located, as a condition to approval of a collocation
application or modification application.
                                             
 (e) Impose environmental testing, sampling, or monitoring
requirements or other compliance measures for radio frequency emissions
on PWSFs that are categorically excluded under the FCC's rules for radio
frequency emissions pursuant to 47 C.F.R. section 1.1307(b)(1).
                                             
 (f) Establish or enforce regulations or procedures for radio
frequency signal strength or the adequacy of service quality.
                                             
 (g) In conformance with 47 U.S.C. section 332(c)(7)(B)(iv),
reject a collocation application or modification application, in whole
or in part, based on perceived or alleged environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions.
                                             
 (h) Impose any restrictions with respect to objects in navigable
airspace that are greater than or in conflict with the restrictions
imposed by the Federal Aviation Administration.
                                             
 (i) Prohibit the placement of emergency power systems that comply
with federal and New Hampshire environmental requirements.
                                             
 (j) Charge an application fee, consulting fee or other fee
associated with the submission, review, processing, and approval of a
collocation application or modification application that is not required
for similar types of commercial development within the authority's
jurisdiction. Fees imposed by an authority or by a third-party entity
providing review or technical consultation to the authority must be
based on actual, direct, and reasonable administrative costs incurred
for the review, processing, and approval of a collocation application or
modification application. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event
shall an authority or any third-party entity include within its charges
any travel expenses incurred in a third-party's review of a collocation
application or modification application, and in no event shall an
applicant be required to pay or reimburse an authority for consultant or
other third-party fees based on a contingency or result-based
arrangement.
                                             
 (k) Impose surety requirements, including bonds, escrow deposits,
letters of credit, or any other type of financial surety, to ensure that
abandoned or unused facilities can be removed unless the authority
imposes similar requirements on other permits for other types of
commercial development or land uses. If surety requirements are imposed,
they shall be competitively neutral, non-discriminatory, reasonable in
amount, and commensurate with the historical record for local facilities
and structures that are abandoned.
                                             
 (l) Condition the approval of a collocation application or
modification application on the applicant's agreement to provide space
on or near any tower or mount for the authority or local governmental
services at less than the market rate for space or to provide other
services via the structure or facilities at less than the market rate
for such services.
                                             
 (m) Limit the duration of the approval of a collocation
application or modification application.
                                             
 (n) Discriminate on the basis of the ownership, including by the
authority, of any property, structure, or tower when evaluating
collocation applications or modification applications.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding the limitations in paragraph I, nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to:
                                             
 (a) Limit or preempt the scope of an authority's review of
zoning, land use, or permit applications for the siting of new towers or
for substantial modifications to existing towers, mounts, or PWSFs.
                                             
 (b) Prevent a municipality from exercising its general zoning and
building code enforcement powers pursuant to RSA 672 through RSA 677 and
as set forth in this chapter.

**Source.** 2013, 267:8, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.
