---
title: 'CHAPTER 12-L MCAULIFFE-SHEPARD DISCOVERY CENTER'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 12-L
                                             
MCAULIFFE-SHEPARD DISCOVERY CENTER
----------------------------------

### Section 12-L:1

 **12-L:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commission'' means the McAuliffe-Shepard discovery center
commission.
                                             
 II. "Discovery center'' means the McAuliffe-Shepard discovery
center, which includes the planetarium and related exhibits pertaining
to astronomy, aviation, and earth and space sciences.
                                             
 III. "Touch the Future'' means the nonprofit corporation organized
to promote the welfare of the discovery center and to assist the
discovery center director and the commission.
                                             
 IV. "Planetarium'' means the discovery center planetarium.
                                             
 V. "Private operator'' means the McAuliffe-Shepard discovery center
corporation established in RSA 12-L:13 and the corporation's board
established in RSA 12-L:14 which is responsible for the management and
operation of the discovery center beginning January 1, 2013.

**Source.** 2001, 136:2. 2009, 13:3. 2012, 173:2, eff. June 11, 2012.

### Section 12-L:2

 **12-L:2 Declaration of Purpose. –** The McAuliffe-Shepard discovery
center is the official state memorial for Sharon Christa McAuliffe, the
Concord, New Hampshire social studies teacher who was chosen to be
America's first teacher in space. The discovery center is also the
official state memorial for Alan B. Shepard, the Derry, New Hampshire
native who was the first American in space. The discovery center's
mission is to educate, incite, and entertain learners of all ages in the
sciences and humanities by actively engaging them in the exploration of
astronomy, aviation, and earth and space science.

**Source.** 2001, 136:2. 2007, 39:1. 2009, 13:3, eff. April 17, 2009.

### Section 12-L:3-5

 **12-L:3 to 12-L:5 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 173:8, I, eff.
Mar. 31, 2013.
                                             ]

### Section 12-L:6

 **12-L:6 Administrative Attachment. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2007, 39:6, eff.
July 1, 2007.
                                             ]

### Section 12-L:7

 **12-L:7 Commission; Powers and Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall have the following responsibilities:
                                             
 (a) Supervise the design and program of the discovery center as
authorized by the general court in a manner consistent with the intent
of the project. All construction shall be undertaken under the
provisions of RSA 228 and all contracts shall receive final approval by
the governor and council.
                                             
 (b) Oversee the administration of the discovery center and ensure
that its mission is achieved.
                                             
 (c) Cooperate and consult with the discovery center director
concerning the daily operation of the discovery center, including the
planetarium and integrated educational programs.
                                             
 (d) Authorize the discovery center director to enter into
contracts which are necessary for the administration of its authority
pursuant to this chapter. All contracts, agreements, procurement,
personnel, and operations shall be subject to the same requirements as
all state agencies; provided, however, that any specialized discovery
center program or equipment for which the estimated cost is funded from
gifts, grants, or donations to the discovery center fund shall be exempt
from competitive bidding requirements.
                                             
 (e) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, authorize the
discovery center director to sell, lease, or trade specialized discovery
center programs or equipment. Proceeds from such transactions shall be
used to support the operations of the discovery center.
                                             
 (f) Delegate responsibilities for fund raising to Touch the
Future, as the commission deems appropriate.
                                             
 (g) Coordinate with the private operator to achieve an orderly
transition from operation of the discovery center as a state agency to
operation of the discovery center by the private operator.
                                             
 II. The commission shall:
                                             
 (a) Set and collect all fees generated by the discovery center,
such fees to be used by the commission in its duties and for its
expenses. Reasonable fees may be set by the commission without regard to
RSA 541-A. The commission's accounts shall be subject to annual audit by
the office of the legislative budget assistant.
                                             
 (b) Adopt rules under RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 (1) Requirements for use of facilities by outside parties.
                                             
 (2) Rights and responsibilities of patrons.
                                             
 (3) Rights and responsibilities of schools utilizing discovery
center programs and services.

**Source.** 2001, 136:2. 2007, 39:4. 2009, 13:4. 2012, 173:3, eff. June
11, 2012.

### Section 12-L:8

 **12-L:8 Director; Staff. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 173:8, II, eff. Jan.
1, 2013.
                                             ]

### Section 12-L:9

 **12-L:9 Gifts; Grants; Donations. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 173:8, III,
eff. Jan. 1, 2013.
                                             ]

### Section 12-L:10

 **12-L:10 McAuliffe-Shepard Discovery Center Fund and Transition
Fund. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 173:8, V, eff. Mar. 31, 2013.
                                             ]

### Section 12-L:11

 **12-L:11 Transfer of Funds. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 173:8, III, eff.
Jan. 1, 2013.
                                             ]

### Section 12-L:12

 **12-L:12 Gift Store. –** The discovery center may operate a gift
store in conjunction with and in support of its mission. Revenues from
the sale of store inventory shall be used for inventory replacement. Any
inventory replacement that is totally funded by revenues from the gift
store shall be exempt from competitive bidding requirements. Revenues
from sales which exceed the cost of inventory replacement shall be used
for discovery center operations.

**Source.** 2001, 136:2. 2009, 13:4, eff. April 17, 2009.

### Section 12-L:13

 **12-L:13 Corporation Established. –** There is hereby created a
body politic and corporate which shall have a distinct legal existence
separate from the state and shall not constitute a department of state
government, to be known as the McAuliffe-Shepard discovery center
corporation to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The corporation
shall be a private nonprofit corporation and shall have all of the
powers necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter, including
but not limited to, the power to receive and accept grants, loans, or
advances of funds from any public or private agency and to receive and
accept from any source, contributions of money, property, labor, or any
other thing of value, to be held, used, and applied for the purposes of
this chapter.

**Source.** 2012, 173:5, eff. June 11, 2012.

### Section 12-L:14

 **12-L:14 McAuliffe-Shepard Discovery Center Board. –**
                                             
 I. The powers of the McAuliffe-Shepard discovery center corporation
shall be vested in the members of a board consisting of not less than 9
members. One member shall be appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives and one member shall be appointed by the senate
president. The number of, the means of selection for, the length of
terms, and the initial selection of the remaining board members shall be
determined by the McAuliffe-Shepard discovery center commission,
established in RSA 12-L:3, working in conjunction with any nonprofit
organizations supporting the center, and shall be submitted to the
fiscal committee of the general court for approval before September 1,
2012.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. The board is empowered to manage and operate the
McAuliffe-Shepard discovery center beginning January 1, 2013.

**Source.** 2012, 173:5, eff. June 11, 2012. 2013, 144:103, eff. June
28, 2013.

### Section 12-L:15

 **12-L:15 Discovery Center Equipment, Software, Buildings, and
Grounds. –**
                                             
 I. Ownership of the discovery center equipment, software, buildings,
and grounds shall be retained by the state.
                                             
 II. The state shall retain responsibility for all debt service
incurred by the discovery center prior to January 1, 2013.
                                             
 III. The state shall assume buildings and grounds routine
maintenance and repair costs up to an amount appropriated by the general
court, which shall not exceed 
                                             $70,000 annually.
                                             
 IV. The state shall enter into a 10-year, renewable lease with the
private operator to occupy and operate the discovery center buildings
and grounds and utilize the equipment and software beginning on January
1, 2013, at a charge of 
                                             $1 per year. Either party may terminate this
lease with 90 days notice if the other party fails to make a good faith
effort to meet all of its obligations under RSA 12-L.

**Source.** 2012, 173:5, eff. June 11, 2012.

### Section 12-L:16

 **12-L:16 Discovery Center Exhibits, Equipment, Software Licenses,
and Supplies. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall compile a comprehensive inventory of all
equipment, including exhibits and software owned by the discovery
center, on June 30, 2012, which shall be updated through December 31,
2012.
                                             
 II. The annual lease to the private operator shall include the use
of all exhibits and equipment owned by the discovery center on December
31, 2012. The state shall allow the private operator, at its own
expense, to make any upgrades to the equipment, software, and exhibits
the private operator deems necessary.
                                             
 III. All equipment and exhibits on loan to the discovery center on
June 30, 2012, shall be identified and updated in a timely manner
through December 31, 2012.
                                             
 IV. The discovery center director shall work with the private
operator to contact the loaners and arrange for transfer of the loans to
the private operator, for those loans that the private operator wishes
to continue.
                                             
 V. The state shall transfer at no cost all supplies belonging to the
discovery center on December 31, 2012, to the private operator.

**Source.** 2012, 173:5, eff. June 11, 2012.

### Section 12-L:17

 **12-L:17 Discovery Center Visitor, Donor, Program Records and
Archives. –** All publicly available donor, visitor, and program records
and archival materials owned by the discovery center on December 31,
2012, shall continue to be available to the public and to the private
operator.

**Source.** 2012, 173:5, eff. June 11, 2012.

### Section 12-L:18

 **12-L:18 State Funds. –**
                                             
 I. All funds appropriated to the McAuliffe-Shepard discovery center
in 2011, 224:88 shall be transferred to the private operator on December
31, 2012.
                                             
 II. All funds in the discovery center transition fund established in
RSA 12-L:10, II shall be transferred to the private operator on December
31, 2012.
                                             
 III. The private operator may apply for state grants for which it is
eligible and shall receive due consideration in the state's selection of
grant recipients.

**Source.** 2012, 173:5, eff. June 11, 2012.
