---
title: 'CHAPTER 14-A MEMBERS OF THE GENERAL COURT'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 14-A
                                             
MEMBERS OF THE GENERAL COURT
----------------------------

### Section 14-A:1

 **14-A:1 Vacancy in Committee Chairman. –** If the office of
chairman of a committee of either branch of the general court becomes
vacant for any reason at any time after the adjournment of the biennial
session and before the dissolution of the general court under the
constitution, the presiding officer of the branch of the general court
in which the vacancy occurs may appoint a chairman to fill the vacancy
from among any of the members of the committee in which the vacancy
exists.

**Source.** 1965, 7:1, eff. May 15, 1965.

### Section 14-A:2

 **14-A:2 Resignations. –**
                                             
 I. A member of the general court may resign his office by delivering
a written resignation to the presiding officer of the branch in which
the member serves. When the general court is in session the resignation
becomes effective by delivering the letter of resignation to the
presiding officer concerned at the state house in Concord, by mail or
otherwise. If the general court is in recess, the resignation becomes
effective on the delivery of the letter of resignation to the presiding
officer concerned at his place of residence, by mail or otherwise. The
presiding officer who receives a letter of resignation shall send it to
the secretary of state for filing.
                                             
 II. If the general court is not in session, and if the office of the
presiding officer is vacant, a resignation from the general court may be
made and becomes effective by delivering a letter of resignation to the
secretary of state at his office in the state house, by mail or
otherwise. The secretary of state shall file the letter of resignation
in his office, and he shall notify the clerk of the branch in which the
resignation occurs of the existence of the vacancy. The secretary of
state shall also notify the town or city clerk of the town or ward in
which the vacancy occurs.

**Source.** 1965, 32:1, eff. May 31, 1965.

### Section 14-A:3

 **14-A:3 Travel and Expenses When on Legislative Business. –**
                                             
 I. A member of the general court shall be entitled to a mileage
allowance at the rates specified by RSA 14:15-a for miles actually
traveled while on legislative business. Except as otherwise specifically
provided only travel paid out of legislative travel funds shall be
considered legislative travel. The presiding officer of the house of
representatives or senate, or his respective designee, shall determine
what constitutes travel on legislative business for the members of his
respective house.
                                             
 II. In addition to legislative mileage, the president of the senate
or the speaker of the house may authorize payment of expenses incident
to travel by a member of his respective house on official legislative
business, provided that no additional expenses shall be paid for such
business at Concord on a day when the general court meets.
                                             
 III. Any member of the general court who travels on official state
business which is not legislative business as determined by the
president of the senate or the speaker of the house shall be reimbursed
for his actual travel by the appropriate state agency at the same rate
provided for state employees. Except as otherwise specifically provided,
no mileage paid out of executive agency funds shall be considered
legislative business.
                                             
 IV. The provisions of this section shall not apply to members of the
general court traveling on official business pursuant to a specific
statute which provides for legislative mileage. In such cases, the
members shall receive legislative mileage at the rate provided for in
RSA 14:15-a, notwithstanding that the mileage is paid out of executive
agency funds.

**Source.** 1965, 239:16. 1979, 294:2, eff. Dec. 3, 1980.

### Section 14-A:4

 **14-A:4 Members Entitled to Health Screening. –** Every 2 years,
the department of health and human services shall provide, at no charge,
health screening to be conducted at the state house for each member of
the general court who chooses to receive it. Such screening shall
include oral cancer, diabetes, glaucoma, hypertension and nutritional
counseling. The speaker of the house and the president of the senate
shall determine the date, time and place for administering these
examinations.

**Source.** 1979, 84:1. 1988, 139:1. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 14-A:5

 **14-A:5 Financial Disclosure. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 206:3, eff. June
6, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 14-A:6

 **14-A:6 Group Insurance Participation. –**
                                             
 I. Members of the general court may participate at their own expense
in a group health and dental insurance arrangement for members of the
general court during their tenure in office. Such group health and
dental insurance arrangement shall be the state employees group
insurance plan afforded full-time state employees. Participation in such
state employees group insurance plan by a member of the general court
shall not be considered by any judicial, administrative, executive or
any other body as evidence that a member of the general court is an
employee of the state.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding the terms of any state employee group insurance
contract or other state law to the contrary, members of the general
court who have participated in a group health and dental insurance
arrangement for members of the general court during their tenure in
office, shall elect, within 30 days after they leave the general court,
either to continue to participate fully in that arrangement for as long
as they choose to do so at their own expense, or to discontinue their
participation.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of the department of administrative services
shall invoice and collect amounts due from members. Collected amounts
shall be deposited in the employee and retiree benefit risk management
fund.
                                             
 IV. Failure to remit payment for participation pursuant to paragraph
I of this section in full within 30 days of billing shall be grounds for
terminating benefits, effective with the beginning of the billing
period. Reenrollment shall be dependent upon payment of outstanding
participation or other amounts.
                                             
 V. Failure to remit payment in full for participation pursuant to
paragraph II of this section within 60 days of billing shall be grounds
for permanently terminating benefits effective upon the beginning of the
billing period. Either in the billing notice or in a separate notice to
the person billed, the department of administrative services shall
advise that failure to pay the specified amount in full within the
required time shall be grounds for permanent termination of benefits.

**Source.** 1988, 162:1. 1991, 69:1. 1998, 339:1, eff. Aug. 25, 1998.
2012, 80:1, eff. July 22, 2012.
