---
title: 'CHAPTER 14-B LEGISLATIVE ETHICS COMMITTEE'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 14-B
                                             
LEGISLATIVE ETHICS COMMITTEE
----------------------------

### Section 14-B:1


                                             


                                             [RSA 14-B:1 effective until December 7, 2016; see also RSA 14-B:1 set
out below.
                                             ]

 **14-B:1 Definitions. –**
                                             
 In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Jurisdiction of the committee'' means those actions which allege
a violation of law, guideline, rule or regulation and relate to the
conduct of individuals in the performance of their duties as members,
officers, or employees of the legislature.
                                             
 I-a. (a) "Sexual harassment'' means an unwelcome sexual advance, a
request for a sexual favor, or other verbal or physical conduct of a
sexual nature, provided, that:
                                             
 (1) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term of the individual's employment;
                                             
 (2) Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an
individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such
individual; or
                                             
 (3) Such conduct is so pervasive or severe that it creates an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment.
                                             
 (b) As used in subparagraph (a), verbal or physical conduct of a
sexual nature may include:
                                             
 (1) Verbal abuse of a sexual nature;
                                             
 (2) Unwelcome offensive sexual flirtation;
                                             
 (3) Unwelcome graphic verbal comments about an individual's
body;
                                             
 (4) Sexually degrading words to describe an individual;
                                             
 (5) Unwelcome brushing, touching, patting, or pinching an
individual's body;
                                             
 (6) Sexually explicit gestures;
                                             
 (7) The display in the state house complex of sexually
suggestive, sexually demeaning, or pornographic objects, pictures,
posters, or cartoons; or
                                             
 (8) Unwelcome inquiry or comment about sexual conduct, sexual
orientation, or preference.
                                             
 II. "Sworn complaint'' means a statement of facts within the
personal knowledge of the complainant alleging a violation of law,
guideline, rule or regulation of the legislature and relating to the
conduct of individuals in the performance of their duties as members,
officers, or employees of the legislature.
                                             
 III. "Family member'' means any person related to and living in the
same domicile as the representative, senator, and officer of the house
of representatives or senate who shares a common economic interest in
the expenses of daily living, including, but not limited to, a spouse,
child, or parents.


                                             [RSA 14-B:1 effective December 7, 2016; see also RSA 14-B:1 set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**14-B:1 Definitions.** --
                                             
 In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Conflict of interest'' means the condition in which a legislator
has a special interest in any matter which could directly or indirectly
affect or influence the performance of the legislator's official
activities.
                                             
 II. "Household member'' means any person living in the same domicile
as the representative, senator, or officer of the house of
representatives or senate who shares a common economic interest in the
expenses of daily living, including, but not limited to, a spouse,
child, or parents.
                                             
 III. "Jurisdiction of the committee'' means those actions which
allege a violation of law, guideline, rule, or regulation and relate to
the conduct of individuals in the performance of their duties as
members, officers, or employees of the legislature.
                                             
 IV. (a) "Sexual harassment'' means an unwelcome sexual advance, a
request for a sexual favor, or other verbal or physical conduct of a
sexual nature, provided, that:
                                             
 (1) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term of the individual's employment;
                                             
 (2) Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an
individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such
individual; or
                                             
 (3) Such conduct is so pervasive or severe that it creates an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment.
                                             
 (b) As used in subparagraph (a), verbal or physical conduct of a
sexual nature may include:
                                             
 (1) Verbal abuse of a sexual nature;
                                             
 (2) Unwelcome offensive sexual flirtation;
                                             
 (3) Unwelcome graphic verbal comments about an individual's
body;
                                             
 (4) Sexually degrading words to describe an individual;
                                             
 (5) Unwelcome brushing, touching, patting, or pinching an
individual's body;
                                             
 (6) Sexually explicit gestures;
                                             
 (7) The display in the state house complex of sexually
suggestive, sexually demeaning, or pornographic objects, pictures,
posters, or cartoons; or
                                             
 (8) Unwelcome inquiry or comment about sexual conduct, sexual
orientation, or preference.
                                             
 V. "Special interest'' means any financial or personal interest in
the outcome of a matter that is the subject of official activity,
distinct from and greater than the interests of the public at large. A
financial interest exists where a legislator or household member could
stand to gain or lose anything of value as a result of the official
activity. A personal interest exists where a legislator or household
member could otherwise be affected by the outcome of such activity, or
when a legislator has a responsibility for the welfare of an
organization and where that welfare could be affected by the outcome of
such activity.
                                             
 VI. "Sworn complaint'' means a statement of facts within the
personal knowledge of the complainant alleging a violation of law,
guideline, rule, or regulation of the legislature and relating to the
conduct of individuals in the performance of their duties as members,
officers, or employees of the legislature.

**Source.** 1991, 105:1. 1994, 329:1. 2004, 234:2. 2009, 261:5, eff.
Sept. 14, 2009. 2016, 328:1, eff. Dec. 7, 2016.

### Section 14-B:2

 **14-B:2 Committee Established; Membership. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a legislative ethics committee to
develop standards for legislative ethics and resolve, through procedures
established in this chapter, issues, questions or complaints involving
legislators and legislative staff and officers. The committee shall have
the power to investigate allegations of improper conduct as set forth in
this chapter. The committee shall consist of the following members, at
least one of whom shall be an attorney who is a member of the New
Hampshire bar:
                                             
 (a) One house member, appointed by the speaker of the house.
                                             
 (b) One house member, appointed by the house minority leader.
                                             
 (c) One public member, appointed by the speaker of the house.
                                             
 (d) One senator, appointed by the senate president.
                                             
 (e) One senator, appointed by the senate minority leader.
                                             
 (f) One public member, appointed by the senate president.
                                             
 (g) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (h) One public member, appointed jointly by the speaker of the
house, the house minority leader, the senate president, and the senate
minority leader.
                                             
 II. No person registered with the secretary of state as a lobbyist
under RSA 15 shall serve as a member of the legislative ethics committee
or for 6 months following the expiration of such registration.
                                             
 III. Appointments to the committee shall be made by December 31
prior to the first legislative session of the biennium. A committee
meeting shall be called no later than February 1 in the first
legislative session of the biennium. Prior to the first committee
meeting, the speaker of the house of representatives and the senate
president shall jointly select from the members of the committee a
chairperson and vice-chairperson. The members shall serve for the
biennium and shall not be removed from the committee for any reason
except for good cause by unanimous vote of the remaining committee
members. Members shall receive no compensation, except that legislative
members shall receive mileage at the legislative rate and public members
shall receive mileage at the state employee rate. The committee shall
provide the executive branch ethics committee with copies of all
publicly issued guidelines, procedures, decisions, and opinions.

**Source.** 1991, 103:2; 105:1. 1994, 329:2, 5, 6. 1997, 113:1. 2001,
215:1, 2. 2004, 86:1. 2006, 21:5, eff. June 2, 2006.

### Section 14-B:3

 **14-B:3 Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The committee shall be authorized to:
                                             
 (a) Issue guidelines to elucidate proper and appropriate conduct
for individuals relating to the performance of their duties as members,
officers, or employees of the legislature. Such guidelines shall be
consistent with statute.
                                             
 (b) Issue interpretative rulings explaining and clarifying any
law, guideline, rule or regulation within the jurisdiction of the
committee.


                                             [Paragraph I(c) effective until December 7, 2016; see also paragraph
I(c) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 (c) Render an advisory opinion, in writing within a reasonable
time, in response to a written request by a member, officer, or
employee, concerning the application of any law, guideline, rule, or
regulation within its jurisdiction to a specific factual situation
pertinent to the conduct or proposed conduct of the person seeking the
advisory opinion. Any advisory opinion concerning any person subject to
the provisions of this chapter who acted in reliance thereon, shall be
binding upon the committee, and it shall be an absolute defense in any
complaint brought under this chapter or prosecution under RSA 15-A or
RSA 15-B that the person complained against acted in reliance upon such
advisory opinion.


                                             [Paragraph I(c) effective December 7, 2016; see also paragraph I(c) set
out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 (c) Render an advisory opinion, in writing within a reasonable
time, in response to a written request by a member, officer, or
employee, concerning the application of any law, guideline, rule, or
regulation within its jurisdiction to a specific factual situation
pertinent to the conduct or proposed conduct of the person seeking the
advisory opinion. Any advisory opinion concerning any person subject to
the provisions of this chapter who acted in reliance thereon, shall be
binding upon the committee, and it shall be an absolute defense in any
complaint brought under this chapter or prosecution under RSA 15-A or
RSA 14-C that the person complained against acted in reliance upon such
advisory opinion.
                                             
 (d) Receive sworn complaints, and investigate allegations of
improper conduct, including sexual harassment against members or
retaliation against employees who make good faith allegations of sexual
harassment, which may reflect upon the legislature, relating to the
conduct of individuals in the performance of their duties as members,
officers, or employees of the legislature, and make appropriate findings
of fact and conclusions with respect to such conduct. Deliberations on
such sworn complaints shall be conducted in nonpublic session and in
accordance with procedures set forth in RSA 14-B:4 and established by
the committee under RSA 14-B:5. The committee shall consider any sworn
complaint and shall conduct its initial review of each complaint in a
confidential manner, unless otherwise requested by the legislator,
officer, or employee complained against.
                                             
 (e) Investigate any unauthorized disclosure of information by any
committee member or employee of the committee and report to the
legislature concerning any allegation which it finds to be
substantiated.
                                             
 II. Before guidelines or amendments thereto become effective, the
committee shall distribute such guidelines or amendments to the members
of the senate and the house of representatives. Specific guidelines or
amendments shall be brought to a vote and approved by a majority vote of
both houses within a period of 3 legislative days after distribution
before they shall become effective.
                                             
 III. All actions of the committee shall require an affirmative vote
of 4 or more members of the committee before becoming effective.
                                             
 IV. The committee shall review all financial disclosure forms
required by RSA 14-B:8 and shall place the completed forms on file in
the office of the secretary of state for purposes of the requirements of
RSA 15-A, in accordance with the filing deadlines established under RSA
14-B:8 and RSA 14-B:9. The filing of a financial disclosure form in
accordance with RSA 14-B:8 by a representative, senator, or officer of
the house of representatives or senate shall satisfy the requirement of
filing a statement of financial interest pursuant to RSA 15-A.

**Source.** 1991, 105:1. 1994, 329:3. 1995, 196:1, 2. 2001, 215:3. 2004,
234:3. 2007, 194:1. 2009, 261:1, eff. Sept. 14, 2009. 2016, 328:2, eff.
Dec. 7, 2016.

### Section 14-B:4

 **14-B:4 Complaints; Procedures. –**


                                             [Introductory paragraph of paragraph I effective until December 7,
2016; see also introductory paragraph of paragraph I set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. Each complaint shall be submitted in writing and signed under
oath by the complainant. The sworn complaint shall be filed
confidentially with the committee and shall contain the name and address
of the complainant. The legislator, officer, or employee of the
legislature complained against shall be furnished with a copy of the
complaint and a copy shall be sent to each member of the committee for
review. The committee shall initiate a complaint on its own motion
against any individual the committee determines has not complied with
the provisions of RSA 15-A and RSA 15-B. The committee shall promptly
examine each sworn complaint and:


                                             [Introductory paragraph of paragraph I effective December 7, 2016; see
also introductory paragraph of paragraph I set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. Each complaint shall be submitted in writing and signed under
oath by the complainant. The sworn complaint shall be filed
confidentially with the committee and shall contain the name and address
of the complainant. The legislator, officer, or employee of the
legislature complained against shall be furnished with a copy of the
complaint and a copy shall be sent to each member of the committee for
review. The committee shall initiate a complaint on its own motion
against any individual the committee determines has not complied with
the provisions of RSA 14-B:8. The committee shall promptly examine each
sworn complaint and:


                                             [Paragraph I(a) effective until December 7, 2016; see also paragraph
I(a) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 (a) If by a unanimous affirmative vote it determines that a
complaint is frivolous, scurrilous, or retaliatory in nature, the
committee may discharge the complaint without the benefit of a meeting
or further proceeding. The committee shall notify the respondent and
complainant in writing of its action.


                                             [Paragraph I(a) effective December 7, 2016; see also paragraph I(a) set
out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 (a) If by an affirmative vote of at least 4 members it determines
that a complaint is frivolous, scurrilous, or retaliatory in nature,
fails to allege conduct which is contrary to the law, ethics guidelines,
rules, or regulations, or is otherwise plainly not within the
committee's jurisdiction, the committee may summarily discharge the
complaint without the benefit of a meeting or further proceeding. The
committee shall notify the respondent and complainant in writing of its
action.
                                             
 (b) For any complaint not discharged, the committee shall conduct
an initial review to ascertain whether the committee has jurisdiction to
consider the complaint or whether the complaint is without merit or is
unfounded.
                                             
 II. Any person who knowingly and willfully swears falsely to a sworn
complaint does so under penalty of perjury, and the committee may refer
any such case to the attorney general for prosecution.
                                             
 III. Except as provided in this chapter, all proceedings,
information, communications, materials, papers, files, and transcripts,
written or oral, received or developed by the committee in the course of
its work, shall be confidential. Any violation of these provisions
relating to confidentiality may result in action by the committee, at
the request of the non-violating party or on its own motion, to
terminate the proceedings with or without public comment.


                                             [Paragraph IV effective until December 7, 2016; see also paragraph IV
set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 IV. Upon completion of its initial review of a complaint, the
committee shall make available for public inspection all records, other
than its work product and internal memoranda, relating to any complaint
it does not dismiss, and shall conduct any subsequent proceedings, other
than its deliberations, in public session.


                                             [Paragraph IV effective December 7, 2016; see also paragraph IV set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 IV. Upon completion of its preliminary investigation of a complaint
and determination to resolve the complaint through an informal
resolution or to initiate a formal hearing, the committee shall make
available for public inspection all records, other than its work product
and internal memoranda, relating to any complaint it does not dismiss,
and shall conduct any subsequent proceedings, other than its
deliberations, in public session.


                                             [Paragraph IV-a repealed by 2016, 328:5, effective December 7, 2016.
                                             ]


                                             
 IV-a. In the case of sexual harassment complaints, all work product
and committee proceedings shall be nonpublic. Upon a finding that a
member has engaged in sexual harassment, the committee shall make
available for public inspection all records relating to the complaint.
The committee shall not disclose its work product, internal memoranda ,
or any other documentation or information that would be considered
confidential under RSA 91-A or any other law, except pursuant to a court
order.
                                             
 V. If, after receiving a sworn complaint, the committee concludes by
a recorded vote that the alleged conduct is not within the committee's
jurisdiction or is without merit or is unfounded, the committee shall
dismiss the complaint and shall report such conclusion to the
complainant and to the legislator, the officer, or the employee of the
legislature together with an explanation of the basis of such
determination.
                                             
 VI. If the committee concludes that the complaint is within its
jurisdiction and has merit, then by recorded vote, the committee may
conduct a preliminary investigation.
                                             
 VII. Upon completion of its preliminary investigation, the committee
shall conclude by recorded vote that:
                                             
 (a) No action is appropriate because no improper conduct
occurred;


                                             [Paragraph VII(b) effective until December 7, 2016; see also paragraph
VII(b) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 (b) The violation is inadvertent, technical or of a de minimis
nature and shall be addressed by informal methods; or


                                             [Paragraph VII(b) effective December 7, 2016; see also paragraph VII(b)
set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 (b) The matter does not merit the presentation of formal charges
and hearing and shall be resolved with the consent of the respondent by
an informal method. Such informal resolution may take the form of
written advice or admonishment, the requirement of remedial action, or
the imposition of conditions, or any combination thereof; or
                                             
 (c) The conduct complained of is of a serious nature and formal
proceedings should be instituted to inquire further into the complaint.
The committee shall then make a statement of formal charges and hold a
hearing on the complaint.
                                             
 VIII. Upon completion of the hearing, the committee shall conclude
by recorded vote that:
                                             
 (a) No action is appropriate because no improper conduct
occurred; or
                                             
 (b) No action is appropriate because there is not clear and
convincing evidence that improper conduct occurred; or
                                             
 (c) There was improper conduct based upon clear and convincing
evidence, but such conduct does not justify formal disciplinary action
and should be resolved by informal methods; or
                                             
 (d)(1) There was improper conduct based upon clear and convincing
evidence, and the improper conduct was of a serious nature so as to
warrant formal disciplinary action by the general court in the case of a
legislator or officer of the legislature, or formal disciplinary action
by the joint committee on legislative facilities in the case of an
employee of the legislature, except in the case of an employee of the
legislature employed by the legislative budget assistant, in which case
the formal disciplinary action shall be taken by the fiscal committee of
the general court. The committee shall submit to the speaker of the
house and senate president in the case of a legislator or officer of the
legislature, to the joint committee on legislative facilities in the
case of an employee of the legislature, or to the fiscal committee of
the general court in the case of an employee of the legislature employed
by the legislative budget assistant, a summary report of the
deliberations regarding the complaint and of its findings. The report
shall contain any specific recommendations concerning disciplinary
actions to be imposed. With respect to any recommendations for
disciplinary actions against a legislator, the committee may recommend
one or more of the following:
                                             
 (A) Reprimand.
                                             
 (B) Censure.
                                             
 (C) Expulsion from the senate or house of representatives.
                                             
 (D) Denial or limitation of any right, power, privilege, or
immunity of the legislator that the constitution of New Hampshire
permits the general court to deny or limit.
                                             
 (2) Before any disciplinary action may be taken against a
legislator or against an officer of the legislature, the report shall be
ratified by the legislator's or by the officer's respective body of the
general court. Such ratification need not occur during the biennium in
which the complaint was submitted, but may be considered and acted upon
by the general court in the next succeeding session; provided that no
action shall be taken against an individual who is no longer a member of
the general court.
                                             
 (3) In a case involving an employee of the legislature, the
joint committee on legislative facilities shall determine what
disciplinary action shall be taken against the employee. In a case
involving an employee of the legislature who is employed by the
legislative budget assistant, the fiscal committee of the general court
shall determine what disciplinary action shall be taken against the
employee. In making its determination, the joint committee on
legislative facilities or the fiscal committee of the general court as
appropriate may use any of the specific recommendations concerning
disciplinary actions which are contained in the report which it
receives.
                                             
 IX. In processing complaints filed under this chapter, the committee
shall have subpoena powers. If the legislator, the officer, or the
employee of the legislature refuses to participate in the proceedings,
the committee may refer the complaint to the attorney general for
appropriate action.
                                             
 X. Any member of the legislative ethics committee who is directly or
indirectly involved in any complaint before the committee shall not
participate in any proceedings regarding the complaint. In the event
that a member does not participate in a particular case, the appointing
authority shall designate an alternate to serve on the committee for
that case only.

**Source.** 1991, 105:1. 1994, 329:4. 1995, 196:3. 2001, 215:4. 2004,
86:2; 234:4. 2006, 21:6, eff. June 2, 2006. 2016, 328:3-6, eff. Dec. 7,
2016.

### Section 14-B:4-a

 **14-B:4-a Penalty for Unauthorized Disclosure. –** Any person who
knowingly or willfully makes unauthorized disclosure of confidential
matters or materials contrary to RSA 14-B:4, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and may be subject to disciplinary action as provided in
this chapter and other applicable law.

**Source.** 2008, 132:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 14-B:5


                                             


                                             [RSA 14-B:5 effective until December 7, 2016; see also RSA 14-B:5 set
out below.
                                             ]

 **14-B:5 Rules; Procedures and Standards. –**
                                             
 The committee shall adopt, publish, and make available to the public
rules governing its procedures, including rules specifically related to
sexual harassment complaints, as well as guidelines referred to in RSA
14-B:3, II consistent with the procedures set forth in RSA 541-A.


                                             [RSA 14-B:5 effective December 7, 2016; see also RSA 14-B:5 set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**14-B:5 Rules; Procedures and Guidelines.** --
                                             
 The committee shall adopt, publish, and make available to the public
rules governing its procedures as well as guidelines referred to in RSA
14-B:3, II consistent with the procedures set forth in RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1991, 105:1. 2004, 234:5, eff. June 11, 2004. 2016, 328:7,
eff. Dec. 7, 2016.

### Section 14-B:6

 **14-B:6 Publication and Retention of Records. –** All records
required to be filed or placed on file with the secretary of state under
the provisions of this chapter, or with the clerk of the senate or the
clerk of the house of representatives under the rules or guidelines
adopted in accordance with RSA 14-B:5, shall be made available on the
website maintained by the committee in a timely manner. Records
maintained by the office of the secretary of state shall be retained for
a period of 6 years, after which time they may be destroyed.

**Source.** 2001, 215:5. 2004, 86:3. 2009, 261:2, eff. Sept. 14, 2009.
2012, 126:1, eff. Aug. 4, 2012.

### Section 14-B:7

 **14-B:7 Financial Disclosure Form. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2006, 21:10, I,
eff. June 2, 2006.
                                             ]

### Section 14-B:8


                                             


                                             [RSA 14-B:8 effective until December 7, 2016; see also RSA 14-B:8 set
out below.
                                             ]

 **14-B:8 Financial Disclosure Form. –**
                                             
 Every representative, senator, and officer of the house of
representatives and the senate, shall file with the legislative ethics
committee a financial disclosure form annually no later than the third
Friday of January. The financial disclosure form shall include the
following information:
                                             
 I. The name, address, office, county or district, and telephone
number of the reporting individual.
                                             
 II. The name, address, and type of any business, profession, or
other organization (including any unit of government) in which the
reporting individual or reporting individual's family member was an
employee, officer, director, associate, partner, or proprietor, or
served in any other professional or advisory capacity, and from which
any income in excess of 
                                             $10,000 was derived during the preceding
calendar year. Sources of retirement benefits other than federal
retirement and/or disability benefits shall be included. If the
individual filing the financial interest statement or that individual's
family member has no qualifying income he or she shall report this by
writing his or her initials following the statement: "My or my family
member's income does not qualify 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _.''
                                             
 III. A statement of whether the reporting individual or reporting
individual's family member has a financial interest in any of the
businesses, professions, occupations, groups, or matters listed in this
paragraph and a place on the form where the nature of the financial
interest shall be described for each matter, as applicable.
                                             
 (a) Any profession, occupation, or business licensed or certified
by the state of New Hampshire, listing each such profession, occupation,
or category of business.
                                             
 (b) Health care.
                                             
 (c) Insurance.
                                             
 (d) Real estate, including brokers, agents, developers, and
landlords.
                                             
 (e) Banking or financial services.
                                             
 (f) State of New Hampshire, county, or municipal employment.
                                             
 (g) The New Hampshire retirement system.
                                             
 (h) The current use land assessment program.
                                             
 (i) Restaurants and lodging.
                                             
 (j) The sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages.
                                             
 (k) The practice of law.
                                             
 (l) Any business regulated by the public utilities commission.
                                             
 (m) Horse or dog racing, or other legal forms of gambling.
                                             
 (n) Education.
                                             
 (o) Water resources.
                                             
 (p) Agriculture.
                                             
 (q) New Hampshire taxes, specifying if business profits tax,
business enterprise tax, or interest and dividends tax.
                                             
 (r) A place where the reporting individual may, but is not
required by this chapter to, specify any other area for which he or she
or a family member has a financial interest.
                                             
 IV. The following statement regarding the disclosure of financial
interest: "An individual has a reportable financial interest in a
business, profession, occupation, group, or matter listed in this
section if a change in law, administrative rule, or other official
action by the general court affecting the listed business, profession,
occupation, group, or matter would potentially have a greater financial
effect on the individual reporting the financial interest or that
individual's family member than it would on the general public.''
                                             
 V. The following statement regarding the filing of a declaration of
intent form: "If your participation in an official activity creates a
conflict of interest not disclosed by the information on this form, you
must complete and file a Declaration of Intent Form in accordance with
section 5 of the Ethics Guidelines. See section 5 of the Ethics
Guidelines for information regarding particular conflicts of interest
you may have. Even if you disclose a financial interest on this form,
you may still have to file a separate Declaration of Intent Form on a
particular bill.''
                                             
 VI. The following statement followed by a line for the person filing
the form to sign and date the form: "I hereby swear or affirm that the
foregoing information is true and complete to the best of my knowledge
and belief.''
                                             
 VII. The full text of RSA 14-B:10.


                                             [RSA 14-B:8 effective December 7, 2016; see also RSA 14-B:8 set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**14-B:8 Financial Disclosure Form.** --
                                             
 Every representative, senator, and officer of the house of
representatives and the senate, shall file with the legislative ethics
committee a financial disclosure form annually no later than the third
Friday of January. If the legislator's or legislative officer's
financial circumstances change, he or she shall file a new financial
disclosure form prior to participation in any official activity which
would have been affected by the change. The financial disclosure form
shall include the following information:
                                             
 I. The name, address, office, county or district, and telephone
number of the reporting individual.
                                             
 II. The name, address, and type of any business, profession, or
other organization (including any unit of government) in which the
reporting individual or reporting individual's household member was an
employee, officer, director, associate, partner, or proprietor, or
served in any other professional or advisory capacity, and from which
any income in excess of 
                                             $10,000 was derived during the preceding
calendar year. Sources of retirement benefits other than federal
retirement and/or disability benefits shall be included. If the
individual filing the financial interest statement or that individual's
household member has no qualifying income he or she shall report this by
writing his or her initials following the statement: "My or my household
member's income does not qualify 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _.''
                                             
 III. A statement of whether the reporting individual or reporting
individual's household member has a financial interest in any of the
businesses, professions, occupations, groups, or matters listed in this
paragraph and a place on the form where the nature of the financial
interest shall be described for each matter, as applicable.
                                             
 (a) Any profession, occupation, or business licensed or certified
by the state of New Hampshire, listing each such profession, occupation,
or category of business.
                                             
 (b) Health care.
                                             
 (c) Insurance.
                                             
 (d) Real estate, including brokers, agents, developers, and
landlords.
                                             
 (e) Banking or financial services.
                                             
 (f) State of New Hampshire, county, or municipal employment.
                                             
 (g) The New Hampshire retirement system.
                                             
 (h) The current use land assessment program.
                                             
 (i) Restaurants and lodging.
                                             
 (j) The sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages.
                                             
 (k) The practice of law.
                                             
 (l) Any business regulated by the public utilities commission.
                                             
 (m) Legal forms of gambling or charitable gaming.
                                             
 (n) Education.
                                             
 (o) Water resources.
                                             
 (p) Agriculture.
                                             
 (q) New Hampshire taxes, specifying if business profits tax,
business enterprise tax, or interest and dividends tax.
                                             
 (r) A place where the reporting individual may, but is not
required by this chapter to, specify any other area for which he or she
or a household member has a financial interest.
                                             
 IV. The following statement regarding the disclosure of financial
interest: "You have a financial interest in a business, profession,
occupation, group, or matter listed in this section if a change in law,
administrative rule, or other official action by the general court
affecting the listed business, profession, occupation, group, or matter
would potentially have a financial effect on you or a household member
that is distinct from and greater than the interests of the public at
large.''
                                             
 V. The following statement regarding the filing of a declaration of
intent form: "If your participation in an official activity creates a
conflict of interest not disclosed by the information on this form, you
must complete and file a Declaration of Intent Form in accordance with
section 6 of the Ethics Guidelines. Also, if such activity could
reasonably have greater benefit or detriment to you or a household
member than other members of a group identified in this form, a
Declaration of Intent Form is required. See section 6 of the Ethics
Guidelines for information regarding particular conflicts of interest
you may have. .
                                             ]''
                                             
 VI. The following statement followed by a line for the person filing
the form to sign and date the form: "I hereby swear or affirm that the
foregoing information is true and complete to the best of my knowledge
and belief.''
                                             
 VII. The full text of RSA 14-B:10.

**Source.** 2009, 261:3, eff. Sept. 14, 2009. 2016, 328:8, eff. Dec. 7,
2016.

### Section 14-B:9

 **14-B:9 Filing With Secretary of State. –** All forms filed under
RSA 14-B:8 shall be on file with the secretary of state on or before
February 15.

**Source.** 2009, 261:3, eff. Sept. 14, 2009.

### Section 14-B:10

 **14-B:10 Penalty. –** Any representative, senator, or officer of
the house of representatives or senate who knowingly fails to file the
form required under RSA 14-B:8 or who knowingly files a false statement
on such form shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2009, 261:3, eff. Sept. 14, 2009.

### Section 14-B:11

 **14-B:11 Commission to Study and Update the Rules and Procedures of
the Legislative Ethics Committee Under RSA 14-B and the Laws Governing
Legislative Ethics Under RSA 15-B. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2013, 211:2, eff. Dec.
2, 2014.
                                             ]
