---
title: 'CHAPTER 15-A FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 15-A
                                             
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
--------------------

### Section 15-A:1

 **15-A:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that
the performance of official duties does not give rise to a conflict of
interest, by requiring the following persons to file a statement of
financial interests with the secretary of state. This chapter shall be
liberally construed to effect this purpose.

**Source.** 2006, 21:8, eff. June 2, 2006.

### Section 15-A:2

 **15-A:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Agency'' means the executive branch and any department,
division, board, commission, or equivalent entity of the executive
branch.
                                             
 II. "Agency head'' means the commissioner or equivalent leader of
any department, and the highest ranking member of any commission, board,
institution, bureau, or office, which is not a subordinate component of
a department or equivalent agency, by whatever name called, other than
the legislative and judicial branches of state government.
                                             
 III. "Family member'' shall mean any person related to and living in
the same domicile as the elected official, public official, public
employee, constitutional official, or legislative employee who shares a
common economic interest in the expenses of daily living, including, but
not limited to, a spouse, child, or parents.
                                             
 IV. "Income'' means any money or thing of value received.
                                             
 V. "Primary occupation'' means any business, business association,
public sector employment, nonprofit employment, or self- employment
which provides the largest source of income for the candidate.

**Source.** 2006, 21:8, eff. June 2, 2006.

### Section 15-A:3

 **15-A:3 Persons Required to File. –**
                                             
 I. The following persons shall file a statement of financial
interests as required by this chapter:
                                             
 (a) All candidates who file for state or county office.
                                             
 (b) All persons filing an acceptance of nomination form for state
or county office.
                                             
 (c) Every person appointed by the governor, governor and council,
president of the senate, or the speaker of the house of representatives
to any board, commission, committee, board of directors, authority, or
equivalent state entity whether regulatory, advisory, or administrative
in nature.
                                             
 (d) All agency heads.
                                             
 (e) Any public official designated, due to the responsibilities
of the position, by the agency head.
                                             
 (f) The secretary of state and the treasurer, and any of their
subordinates designated, due to the responsibilities of the position, by
the secretary of state or treasurer.
                                             
 (g) All persons elected to state or county office, and all
persons appointed to such elective office to fill a vacancy.
                                             
 (h) Any person, not employed by or working under contract for the
state, who is acting on behalf of the governor or an agency while
engaged in state business.
                                             
 II. The filing of a financial disclosure form by an elected member
of the house of representatives or senate pursuant to RSA 14-B:8 shall
satisfy the requirement for filing a statement of financial interest
pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 III. Any person who is otherwise subject to the filing requirements
of subparagraph I(h) shall be exempt from filing a statement of
financial interests provided the individual volunteering:
                                             
 (a) Does not directly or indirectly influence the setting of
public policy;
                                             
 (b) Does not directly or indirectly influence decisions on how
state funds will be expended; and
                                             
 (c) Does not directly or indirectly influence the selection of
vendors for the state.

**Source.** 2006, 21:8. 2009, 203:5, eff. Sept. 13, 2009; 261:4, eff.
Sept. 14, 2009.

### Section 15-A:4

 **15-A:4 Designated Public Officials. –** The governor shall file
with the secretary of state an organizational chart identifying the
names and titles of all persons who are acting on behalf of the governor
and who are required to file a statement of financial interests. Each
agency head shall file with the secretary of state an organizational
chart identifying the names, titles, and position numbers of persons in
his or her department that are required to file a statement of financial
interests. The secretary of state and the state treasurer shall file
with the secretary of state an organizational chart identifying the
names and titles of all persons in his or her department that are
required to file a statement of financial interests.

**Source.** 2006, 21:8, eff. June 2, 2006.

### Section 15-A:5

 **15-A:5 Form of Disclosure. –** The secretary of state shall
establish a uniform statement of financial interests, which may be in
paper or electronic form.
                                             
 I. The statement of financial interest shall include:
                                             
 (a) The full text of RSA 15-A.
                                             
 (b) The full name, work address, work phone number, primary
occupation, and, if different, the office, appointment, or employment
with government held by person filing the statement of financial
interest.
                                             
 (c) The name, address, and type of any profession, business, or
other organization in which the reporting individual or family member
was an officer, director, associate, partner, proprietor, or employee,
or served in any other professional or advisory capacity, and from which
any income in excess of 
                                             $10,000 was derived during the preceding
calendar year. Sources of retirement benefits other than federal
retirement and/or disability benefits shall be included. If the person
filing the financial interest statement has no qualifying income he or
she shall report this by writing his or her initials following the
statement "My income does not qualify 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _.''
                                             
 (d) A statement of whether the person reporting or a family
member has a special interest in any of the following businesses,
professions, occupations, groups, or matters. A person has a reportable
special interest in an item on this list if a change in law, a change in
administrative rule, a decision whether or not to award a contract,
grant a license or permit, discipline a licensee or permittee, or other
decision by government affecting the listed business, profession,
occupation, group, or matter would potentially have a greater financial
effect on the person reporting the financial interest or a family member
than it would on the general public:
                                             
 (1) Any profession, occupation, or business licensed or
certified by the state of New Hampshire, listing each such profession,
occupation, or category of business.
                                             
 (2) Health care.
                                             
 (3) Insurance.
                                             
 (4) Real estate, including brokers, agents, developers, and
landlords.
                                             
 (5) Banking or financial services.
                                             
 (6) State of New Hampshire, county, or municipal employment.
                                             
 (7) The New Hampshire retirement system.
                                             
 (8) The current use land assessment program.
                                             
 (9) Restaurants and lodging.
                                             
 (10) The sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages.
                                             
 (11) The practice of law.
                                             
 (12) Any business regulated by the public utilities
commission.
                                             
 (13) Horse or dog racing, or other legal forms of gambling.
                                             
 (14) Education.
                                             
 (15) Water resources.
                                             
 (16) Agriculture.
                                             
 (17) New Hampshire taxes, specifying if business profits tax,
business enterprise tax, or interest and dividends tax.
                                             
 (18) The reporting official may, but is not required by this
chapter to specify any other area for which he or she has a special
interest.
                                             
 (e) The following statement followed by a line for the person
filing the form to sign and date the form: "I have read RSA 15-A and
hereby swear or affirm that the foregoing information is true and
complete to the best of my knowledge and belief.''
                                             
 II. The secretary of state may also require information such as home
phone numbers, home addresses, and other information pertinent to the
administration and enforcement of laws relating to financial disclosure.
This information shall be non-public and shall not be subject to the
provisions of RSA 91-A.
                                             
 III. The statement of financial interests, if filed on paper, shall
be completed by typewriting or legible hand printing, and shall be
verified, dated, and signed by the reporting individual personally.
                                             
 IV. The secretary of state shall maintain the statement of financial
interests for 6 years, after which time the statement may be destroyed.
The public information on the forms shall be available to the public in
the form of a photocopy or an electronic record. The secretary of state
shall, as soon as is practical, implement an electronic record keeping
system that makes the public information on statements of financial
interest available to the public through the internet.

**Source.** 2006, 21:8, eff. June 2, 2006.

### Section 15-A:6

 **15-A:6 Deadlines for Filing. –** All persons subject to this
chapter shall file a statement of financial interests annually no later
than the third Friday in January. All persons subject to this chapter,
except those who are elected, shall file a statement of financial
interests within 14 days of assuming the office, position, or
appointment that makes the person subject to this chapter, unless the
person has previously filed a statement during the calendar year. No
person required to file a statement of financial interest pursuant to
RSA 15-A:3, I, shall be eligible to serve in his or her appointed
capacity prior to filing a statement in accordance with this section.

**Source.** 2006, 21:8. 2009, 154:1. 2010, 106:1, eff. May 26, 2010.

### Section 15-A:7

 **15-A:7 Penalty. –** Any person who knowingly fails to comply with
the provisions of this chapter or knowingly files a false statement
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. It shall be an absolute defense in any
prosecution under this chapter that the person acted in reliance upon an
advisory opinion on the subject issued under RSA 14-B:3, I(c) or RSA
21-G:30, I(c).

**Source.** 2006, 21:8. 2007, 194:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 15-A:8

 **15-A:8 Examination of Disclosures. –** The attorney general may
examine the statements of financial interests which are made under this
chapter to the secretary of state and compel such disclosures to be made
to comply with the law.

**Source.** 2006, 21:8. 2009, 203:8, eff. Sept. 13, 2009.

### Section 15-A:9

 **15-A:9 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared
to be severable.

**Source.** 2006, 21:8, eff. June 2, 2006.
