---
title: CHAPTER 16 SPECIAL LEGISLATIVE SESSIONS
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 16
                                             
SPECIAL LEGISLATIVE SESSIONS
----------------------------

### Section 16:1

 **16:1 Powers. –** During any recess the general court may convene
itself in special session in the manner herein provided.

**Source.** 1945, 134:1, par. 1, eff. April 26, 1945.

### Section 16:2

 **16:2 Petition. –** There shall be filed with the secretary of
state a petition for the calling of a special session of the general
court which petition shall be signed by not less than 50 members of the
house of representatives, not more than 10 of whom shall reside in the
same county, and signed by not less than 8 members of the senate. Said
petition shall state the reason or reasons why the public welfare
requires a special session of the general court.

**Source.** 1945, 134:1, par. 2, eff. April 26, 1945.

### Section 16:3

 **16:3 Notice. –** Upon receiving such petition, the secretary of
state shall forthwith mail a copy thereof to each member of the general
court together with a ballot upon which shall be stated the following
question: "Are you of the opinion that the general court should meet in
special session?''

**Source.** 1945, 134:1, par. 3, eff. April 26, 1945.

### Section 16:4

 **16:4 Vote Required. –** If within 10 days after the date of the
mailing of said ballot by the secretary of state a majority of the
members of the house and a majority of the members of the senate shall
return said ballot marked in the affirmative, the general court shall be
called in special session.

**Source.** 1945, 134:1, par. 4, eff. April 26, 1945.

### Section 16:5

 **16:5 Calling. –** Upon receipt of the affirmative votes above
required, the secretary of state shall set a day for the convening of
the general court which day shall not be more than 15 days thereafter
and notice thereof shall be sent by the secretary of state to each
member of both houses.

**Source.** 1945, 134:1, par. 5, eff. April 26, 1945.

### Section 16:6

 **16:6 Postponement. –** In the event that the governor prorogues
the reassembly of the general court under the provisions of Article 50,
Part II of the constitution, the general court shall reassemble the
Tuesday following the expiration of the time of such postponement,
unless the majority of the membership of each house shall have filed
with the secretary of state not less than 7 days prior thereto a
statement in writing that a special session no longer is desired. In
either event the secretary of state shall give notice thereof to each
member.

**Source.** 1945, 134:1, par. 6, eff. April 26, 1945.

### Section 16:7

 **16:7 Compensation and Mileage. –** In the event that the general
court convenes itself in special session in the manner provided by this
chapter, the officers and members shall receive for attendance
compensation of 
                                             $3 per day for a period not exceeding 15 days and the
usual mileage. The attaches of the general court shall receive for
attendance compensation at the rate of the next previous session, and
the usual mileage.

**Source.** 1954, 2:1, eff. April 6, 1954.
