---
title: 'CHAPTER 17-A DIRECTOR OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 17-A
                                             
DIRECTOR OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
--------------------------------

### Section 17-A:1

 **17-A:1 Office Established. –** There shall be a director of
legislative services, appointed as hereinafter provided, who shall have
the following functions and duties:
                                             
 I. To draft bills for both houses of the general court and the
individual members and incoming members thereof, both during sessions
and while the general court is not in session, and to check and examine
all bills and joint resolutions prior to final engrossment.
                                             
 II. Pursuant to the direction of the president of the senate and the
speaker of the house, to perform or cause to be performed, as
circumstances will permit, research and drafting service requested by
any committee of the general court in connection with the performance of
its functions; to give such consideration to and service concerning any
measure before the general court as circumstances will permit and which
is in any way requested by the house or senate or any committee of the
general court having the matter before it; and to assist and cooperate
with any interim legislative committee or commission. Research and
drafting assignments made to him by joint or concurrent action of the
general court shall be given priority over other research and drafting
requests received.
                                             
 III. The director shall perform a continuing review, revision and
codification of the Revised Statutes Annotated, as amended, and all
statutes of a public and general nature which are enacted at any session
of the general court. The director shall prepare legislation providing
for the revision and recodification of such statutes, and any revisions
and recodifications contained in such legislation shall take effect only
after they have been enacted into law.

**Source.** 1963, 297:1. 1975, 278:1; 465:5. 1987, 225:4, eff. May 18,
1987.

### Section 17-A:2

 **17-A:2 Appointment. –** The joint committee on legislative
facilities shall appoint the director of legislative services and fix
his salary. He shall hold office for a term of 2 years coterminous with
the biennial legislative term. He shall be chosen without reference to
party affiliation and solely on the ground of his fitness,
qualifications and experience to perform the duties of his office. In
the performance of its duties under this chapter, said joint committee
may act whether or not the general court is then in session; and 7
members thereof shall constitute a quorum.

**Source.** 1963, 297:1. 1975, 465:2. 1987, 225:5, eff. May 18, 1987.

### Section 17-A:3

 **17-A:3 Office. –** The director of legislative services shall
maintain a permanent office in the state house or legislative office
building where he shall be provided with suitable and sufficient offices
convenient to the chambers of the house and senate and shall be in
attendance upon all sessions of the general court. Said office shall be
kept open during the time provided for other state offices, and when the
general court is in session at such hours, day and night, as are most
convenient for members of the general court.

**Source.** 1963, 297:1. 1975, 479:3, eff. July 1, 1975.

### Section 17-A:4

 **17-A:4 Assistants. –** The director may, subject to the approval
of the joint committee on legislative facilities, appoint and fix the
compensation of such additional professional, technical, clerical or
other employees necessary to perform his functions and duties under this
chapter. He may, subject to like approval, designate one of said
employees to be his deputy to act in his absence.

**Source.** 1963, 297:1. 1975, 465:3, eff. June 22, 1975.

### Section 17-A:5

 **17-A:5 Attorney General's Office. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 225:6, I,
eff. May 18, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 17-A:6

 **17-A:6 Gender Neutral Drafting. –**
                                             
 I. It is the intent of the general court that the office of
legislative services continue its efforts to draft all bills,
resolutions and amendments using words that are neutral as to gender, to
the extent practicable.
                                             
 II. In addition, the office of legislative services shall continue
to study the issues involved in gender neutral drafting, including the
development and utilization of sexually neutral terms to replace
masculine gender terms currently in use.
                                             
 III. All members of the general court are encouraged to support the
use of gender neutral terms in the drafting of legislation.

**Source.** 1994, 104:1, eff. July 10, 1994.

### Section 17-A:7

 **17-A:7 Legislation Relating to Unclassified State Officers. –**
Legislation establishing a new, upgraded, or downgraded state
unclassified officer position under RSA 94 shall to the extent
practicable, be drafted by the office of legislative services without a
recommended salary allocation. Changes to the salaries of unclassified
officers listed in RSA 94:1-a, I shall be adopted in legislation
reflecting the review and allocation approval by the joint committee on
employee classification pursuant to the procedure in RSA 94:1-d and RSA
14:14-c.

**Source.** 2006, 290:20, eff. June 15, 2006.

### Section 17-A:8

 **17-A:8 Constitutional Amendments; Style and Form. –**
                                             
 I. A new article or amended article of the constitution shall
capitalize all proper nouns, phrases currently capitalized, and titles
of all officers.
                                             
 II. The secretary of state, the clerks of the house of
representatives and the senate, and the director of legislative services
shall have the authority to publish the unnumbered articles of the
constitution with the numbers used by convention and with titles
approved by the legislature or a constitutional convention.

**Source.** 2012, 259:1, eff. June 18, 2012.
