---
title: 'CHAPTER 17-D PERMANENT STANDING COMMITTEES OF THE GENERAL COURT'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 17-D
                                             
PERMANENT STANDING COMMITTEES OF THE GENERAL COURT
--------------------------------------------------

### Section 17-D:1

 **17-D:1 Committees Authorized. –** The house of representatives and
the senate are authorized to designate permanent standing committees in
such number as they may determine necessary. When created and designated
by rule of the house and senate, such permanent standing committees
shall exist, both during and between sessions, until the general court
is dissolved; and they shall be empowered to exercise all lawful
functions and authority of both standing and interim committees
including, but not limited to, those powers provided by this chapter.

**Source.** 1971, 489:1, eff. July 2, 1971.

### Section 17-D:2

 **17-D:2 Meetings and Rules. –** Each permanent standing committee
of the house and senate shall meet at such times as they shall
determine, and are authorized to adopt such rules of procedure as they
deem advisable.

**Source.** 1971, 489:1, eff. July 2, 1971.

### Section 17-D:3

 **17-D:3 Investigations. –** Each permanent standing committee of
the house and senate is authorized to invite public officials and
employees and private individuals to appear before it for the purpose of
submitting information to it. Each such committee shall be authorized to
maintain a continuous review of the work of the state agencies concerned
with its subject area and the performance of the functions of government
within each such subject area, and for this purpose, to request reports,
from time to time in such form as the committee shall designate,
concerning the operation of any state agency and presenting any
proposals or recommendations such agency may have with regard to
existing laws or proposed legislation in its subject area.

**Source.** 1971, 489:1, eff. July 2, 1971.

### Section 17-D:4

 **17-D:4 Reports of Permanent Standing Committees. –** Each
permanent standing committee of the house and senate shall prepare a
report or reports of its findings and submit it to the speaker of the
house and president of the senate prior to the time at which the session
of the legislature by which the committee was established is dissolved.

**Source.** 1971, 489:1, eff. July 2, 1971.

### Section 17-D:5

 **17-D:5 Assistance to Committees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 225:6, II,
eff. May 18, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 17-D:6

 **17-D:6 Interim Mileage. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1979, 294:3, eff. Dec. 3,
1980.
                                             ]
