---
title: 'CHAPTER 17-E JOINT COMMITTEE ON LEGISLATIVE FACILITIES'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 17-E
                                             
JOINT COMMITTEE ON LEGISLATIVE FACILITIES
-----------------------------------------

### Section 17-E:1

 **17-E:1 Committee Established. –** A joint committee on legislative
facilities is hereby established.

**Source.** 1975, 430:1, eff. June 18, 1975.

### Section 17-E:2

 **17-E:2 Membership. –** The committee shall consist of:
                                             
 I. The president of the senate or designee;
                                             
 II. The speaker of the house or designee;
                                             
 III. The majority leaders of each house, or designees;
                                             
 IV. The minority leaders of each house, or designees;
                                             
 V. The chairperson of the senate finance committee;
                                             
 VI. The chairperson of the house finance committee;
                                             
 VII. Two members of the house appointed by the speaker of the house;
and
                                             
 VIII. Two members of the senate appointed by the president of the
senate.

**Source.** 1975, 430:1. 1995, 9:10. 2006, 146:1, eff. July 21, 2006.

### Section 17-E:3

 **17-E:3 Chairperson. –** The chairperson for the committee shall
rotate biennially between the president of the senate or designee and
the speaker of the house or designee, provided that the speaker shall
serve as the first chairman. In the event that the presiding officer or
designee serving as chairperson resigns or for any reason is unable to
serve, the other presiding officer or designee shall become chairperson,
provided that such substitution shall not change the rotation
hereinabove provided for.

**Source.** 1975, 430:1. 2006, 146:2, eff. July 21, 2006.

### Section 17-E:4

 **17-E:4 Meetings. –** The committee shall meet on a regular stated
date monthly and at such other times at the call of the chair or upon
written request of 4 members and any such special meeting shall be held
within 5 days of such call or request.

**Source.** 1975, 430:1, eff. June 18, 1975.

### Section 17-E:5

 **17-E:5 House and Senate Subcommittees. –** The house members, with
the speaker as chairperson, shall be a subcommittee for legislative
management for the house; and the senate members, with the president as
chairperson, shall be a subcommittee for legislative management of the
senate. All transfers within the house or senate appropriations and all
salaries of legislative attaches and other employees unless otherwise
specifically provided by statute shall require the approval of the
respective subcommittee. The salaries as determined hereunder shall be a
charge upon the appropriation made for the legislature.

**Source.** 1975, 430:1. 2006, 146:3, eff. July 21, 2006.

### Section 17-E:5-a

 **17-E:5-a Powers and Duties. –** The committee shall have the
following powers and duties:
                                             
 I. To review and approve all joint legislative budgets.
                                             
 II. To appoint the directors or heads of all joint legislative
agencies, departments, or offices, and to establish the salary for such
positions, except as otherwise provided.
                                             
 III. To approve the appointment and compensation recommendations for
the employees of the office of legislative services made by the director
of that office, and the appointment and compensation recommendations
made by the director or head of any other joint legislative agency,
department, or office for the employees of those offices, except as
otherwise provided.
                                             
 IV. To establish a compensation and classification schedule for all
employees of joint legislative service agencies, departments, and
offices, except the legislative budget assistant and employees of that
office. The house subcommittee shall establish salary schedules and
benefits for all house employees. The senate subcommittee shall
establish salary schedules and benefits for all senate employees.
                                             
 V. To enter into contracts and hire consultants.
                                             
 VI. To establish rules of procedure for the conduct of the business
of the committee in accordance with rules of the house and the senate.
                                             
 VII. To conduct its proceedings in compliance with the provisions of
RSA 91-A.
                                             
 VIII. To establish policies regarding the use of the facilities
under control of the legislature in the state house, the legislative
office building, the Upham Walker house, parking garages and lots, and
any future facility that may come under legislative management.
                                             
 IX. To perform all actions authorized by statute.
                                             
 X. To study ways and means to improve legislative operation,
facilities, and working conditions.

**Source.** 2006, 146:4, eff. July 21, 2006.

### Section 17-E:6

 **17-E:6 Committee Records. –** A record of the minutes of committee
and subcommittee meetings shall be available to the public and shall be
maintained in accordance with the provisions of RSA 91-A:2, II. The
minutes shall include the names of members in attendance and of persons
appearing before the committee, and a brief description of the subjects
discussed, votes taken, and final dispositions of all actions. The
minutes shall be available and open to public inspection not more than 5
business days after the meeting. The record of the minutes of the joint
committee on legislative facilities and the house and senate
subcommittees shall be available at the office of legislative
accounting. For the purposes of this section, a business day means the
hours of 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. on Monday through Friday, excluding national
and state holidays.

**Source.** 2002, 135:1. 2006, 146:5. 2007, 59:1, eff. July 31, 2007.

### Section 17-E:7

 **17-E:7 State House Visitor's Center Revolving Fund. –** There is
hereby established in the office of the state treasurer a nonlapsing
fund to be known as the state house visitor's center revolving fund
which shall be kept separate and distinct from all other funds. The
state house visitor's center revolving fund shall be within the
oversight of the joint legislative facilities committee established in
RSA 17-E:1. Moneys received from the sale of merchandise at the state
house visitor's center, including online sales, shall be deposited in
such fund and used to purchase merchandise for the visitor's center. The
amount in the fund shall not exceed 
                                             $50,000 on June 30 of any fiscal
year and any moneys in excess of said amount shall be deposited in the
historical fund, established in RSA 177:8.

**Source.** 2005, 177:151, eff. July 1, 2005. 2016, 255:1, eff. June 30,
2016.

### Section 17-E:8

 **17-E:8 Naming of Areas of State House Complex. –** No area within
the state house complex, including buildings, interior rooms, and
grounds shall be named or renamed unless the proposed name is
recommended for approval by the joint committee on legislative
facilities and approved by both the house of representatives and the
senate.

**Source.** 2016, 291:3, eff. June 21, 2016.
