---
title: 'CHAPTER 17-I JOINT LEGISLATIVE HISTORICAL COMMITTEE'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 17-I
                                             
JOINT LEGISLATIVE HISTORICAL COMMITTEE
--------------------------------------

### Section 17-I:1

 **17-I:1 Committee Established. –** There is hereby established a
joint legislative historical committee. The committee shall consist of:
                                             
 I. The senate president, or designee.
                                             
 II. One member of the senate, appointed by the senate president.
                                             
 III. The speaker of the house of representatives, or designee.
                                             
 IV. One member of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 V. The majority leaders of the house of representatives and the
senate, or their designees.
                                             
 VI. The minority leaders of the house of representatives and the
senate, or their designees.

**Source.** 1981, 451:1, eff. June 23, 1981. 2012, 53:1, eff. May 14,
2012.

### Section 17-I:2

 **17-I:2 Committee Responsibilities. –** The committee shall have
the following responsibilities:
                                             
 I. To purchase and restore historical items, including paintings and
memorial plaques, for the state house, the legislative office building,
and other buildings or facilities under the jurisdiction of the general
court.
                                             
 II. To oversee the historical fund established under RSA 177:8.
                                             
 III. To research and record the history, background, and
achievements of the general court.
                                             
 IV. To accept and expend funds appropriated by the general court or
received from any other source for the purposes authorized by this
chapter.
                                             
 V. To administer and enforce the collections policy established by
the committee created in 1990, 41:1, for objects of historical,
cultural, or artistic value, and recommend legislation as needed to
implement this policy.
                                             
 VI. To maintain a descriptive inventory and photographic collection
of objects of historical, cultural, or artistic value owned by the
state, using current best practices.
                                             
 VII. To provide guidelines to all branches of state government
relative to the acquisition, disposal, care, and interpretation of
historical, cultural, and artistic objects.
                                             
 VIII. To cooperate with other New Hampshire institutions and
collecting agencies relative to the acquisition, disposal, care, and
interpretation of historical, cultural, and artistic objects.

**Source.** 1981, 45:1. 1986, 166:5. 1990, 59:1; 255:2. 1991, 129:2,
I-III. 2011, 104:2, eff. May 31, 2011.

### Section 17-I:3

 **17-I:3 State Historian. –** The committee may appoint a state
historian and determine his compensation.

**Source.** 1981, 451:1, eff. June 23, 1981.

### Section 17-I:4

 **17-I:4 Staff. –** The committee shall employ staff and consultants
needed to carry out its responsibilities, to be paid from the historical
fund.

**Source.** 1981, 451:1, eff. June 23, 1981.

### Section 17-I:5

 **17-I:5 Annual Appropriation. –** There is hereby appropriated
annually the sum of 
                                             $10,000 to the joint legislative historical
committee established in RSA 17-I for deposit in the nonlapsing
historical fund established under RSA 177:8, II for the purpose of
carrying out its statutory duties. The governor is authorized to draw
his warrant for said sum out of any money in the treasury not otherwise
appropriated.

**Source.** 1986, 166:4. 1990, 255:3, eff. July 1, 1990.

### Section 17-I:6

 **17-I:6 New Hampshire Heritage Trust Fund. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1991,
129:2, IV, eff. July 19, 1991.
                                             ]

### Section 17-I:7

 **17-I:7 Advisory Board. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1991, 129:2, V, eff. July
19, 1991.
                                             ]

### Section 17-I:8

 **17-I:8 Gifts; Grants; Donations. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1991, 129:2, VI,
eff. July 19, 1991.
                                             ]
