---
title: 'CHAPTER 17-J CAPITAL BUDGET OVERVIEW COMMITTEE'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 17-J
                                             
CAPITAL BUDGET OVERVIEW COMMITTEE
---------------------------------

### Section 17-J:1

 **17-J:1 Committee Established. –** A joint legislative capital
budget overview committee is hereby established.

**Source.** 1981, 551:1, eff. June 30, 1981.

### Section 17-J:2

 **17-J:2 Membership and Organization. –**
                                             
 I. The members of the committee shall be:
                                             
 (a) Chairperson of the house public works and highways
committee;
                                             
 (b) Two other members of the house public works and highways
committee, appointed by the speaker of the house;
                                             
 (c) Three members of the house finance committee, appointed by
the speaker of the house;
                                             
 (d) Chairperson of the senate capital budget committee; and
                                             
 (e) Three other senators appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 I-a. Of the 6 house members on the committee, not more than 5 shall
be members of the same party, and of the 4 senate members on the
committee, not more than 3 shall be members of the same party.
                                             
 II. In voting, the members from each house shall vote as a block,
casting a single vote. The committee shall elect its own officers.

**Source.** 1981, 551:1. 1995, 9:11, eff. June 11, 1995. 2012, 28:1,
eff. July 1, 2012.

### Section 17-J:3

 **17-J:3 Terms. –** All members shall be appointed to the committee
for a term ending when their elected legislative term ends.

**Source.** 1981, 551:1, eff. June 30, 1981.

### Section 17-J:4

 **17-J:4 Duties. –** The capital budget overview committee shall
review the status of capital budget projects both during and between
legislative sessions. Each state agency with capital budget projects
shall report to the department of administrative services, in the format
the department of administrative services prescribes, for the quarters
ending September 30, December 31, March 31, and June 30. The department
of administrative services shall combine these reports and present the
summarized report to the capital budget overview committee for review
quarterly on the first of November, February, May, and August. The
department of administrative services, division of public works design
and construction shall, within 90 days of the approval of funding for
any capital budget project, submit a timeline or schedule for such
project to the capital budget overview committee for review.

**Source.** 1981, 551:1. 2004, 257:37. 2011, 6:1, eff. June 24, 2011.
2014, 327:48, eff. Aug. 2, 2014.
