---
title: 'CHAPTER 17-M LONG RANGE CAPITAL PLANNING AND UTILIZATION COMMITTEE'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 17-M
                                             
LONG RANGE CAPITAL PLANNING AND UTILIZATION COMMITTEE
-----------------------------------------------------

### Section 17-M:1

 **17-M:1 Committee Established. –** There is hereby established a
committee to be known as the long range capital planning and utilization
committee. The committee shall consist of one member designated by the
governor, 4 members of the senate appointed by the president, not more
than 3 of whom shall be of the same party, and 4 members of the house of
representatives appointed by the speaker, not more than 3 of whom shall
be of the same party. The president of the senate and the speaker of the
house may, at any time, appoint alternate senate and house members to
replace regular members who are unable to appear at a committee meeting.
The commissioner of administrative services or his designee, and the
commissioner of transportation or his designee shall be advisory
members, without a vote. The legislative members shall serve for the
balance of their elected terms and the representative of the governor
shall serve for the balance of the term of the governor. The committee
shall choose a chairman, vice-chairman and clerk from among its members.
The members shall receive no compensation for their services, but the
legislative members shall receive legislative mileage while on official
business. Each member shall be reimbursed for his expenses incurred on
official business.

**Source.** 1983, 428:4. 1985, 399:3, I. 1986, 224:4, eff. Aug. 5, 1986.

### Section 17-M:2

 **17-M:2 Powers and Duties. –**
                                             
 I. (a) The committee shall conduct a study of the physical needs and
financial resources of the state. The study shall include, but not be
limited to, the following matters:
                                             
 (1) A continuing review of the need for additional space for
all state agencies;
                                             
 (2) A continuing review of all buildings and land presently
owned by the state, together with those under consideration for
construction or purchase and those under consideration for disposal;
                                             
 (3) A continuing review of the quantity, type, sufficiency and
cost of all space presently being leased or rented by state agencies;
                                             
 (4) A plan to coordinate the physical plant needs and capital
resources of the state into a feasible, long range capital improvement
program for the entire state;
                                             
 (5) Periodic recommendations for improvement in the capital
budget process; and
                                             
 (6) Investigation of the use of public property for low-income
housing sites.
                                             
 (b) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. In conducting its study, the committees may hold hearings at
such times and in such places as the committee deems advisable.
                                             
 III. The committee may require the assistance of any state
department, commission, board, agency or institution in conducting its
study, and such departments, commissions, boards, agencies and
institutions are directed to assist the committee whenever the committee
so requests.
                                             
 IV. The committee may, with the approval of the senate president and
the speaker of the house, employ a consultant to assist the committee in
its duties; provided, any consultant employed shall receive compensation
for his services only from federal or private funds, or from both.
                                             
 V. The committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the director
of the office of energy and planning.

**Source.** 1983, 428:4. 1986, 224:3. 1996, 101:2. 2003, 319:9. 2004,
257:44, eff. July 1, 2004. 2013, 83:1, eff. Aug. 18, 2013.

### Section 17-M:3

 **17-M:3 Reports. –** The committee shall compile and issue the
results of its study in the form of a report on or before December 1 in
each even numbered year. The committee shall deliver the report to the
governor and council and the presiding officer of each house. The report
shall be a public document available to the public.

**Source.** 1983, 428:4, eff. Aug. 23, 1983.
