---
title: 'CHAPTER 17-N LEGISLATIVE PERFORMANCE AUDIT AND OVERSIGHT'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 17-N
                                             
LEGISLATIVE PERFORMANCE AUDIT AND OVERSIGHT
-------------------------------------------

### Section 17-N:1

 **17-N:1 Performance Audit and Oversight Committee Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a joint legislative performance audit
and oversight committee of the general court.
                                             
 II. The committee shall consist of 10 members, 5 of whom shall be
members of the house of representatives, 3 appointed by the speaker of
the house and 2 appointed by the house minority leader, and 5 of whom
shall be senators, 3 appointed by the president of the senate, and 2
appointed by the senate minority leader. Members shall be appointed for
their term of office. All members shall be eligible for reappointment so
long as they are qualified under this section. Members shall be
appointed no later than December 30 of the year of their election to the
general court, except that vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired
term within 30 days of the creation of such vacancy, and the initial
appointments under this section shall be made within 30 days of the
effective date of this section. The members shall choose from their
number a chairman, provided that the chairmanship shall rotate
biennially between the house and senate members. Four members of the
committee shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 III. The committee shall, while the general court is in session and
during the interim, consider the need to review state departments,
boards, institutions, commissions, and agencies and shall make
recommendations to the fiscal committee for such reviews as provided in
RSA 14:30-a, II.

**Source.** 1987, 416:12, eff. July 1, 1987. 2016, 319:14, eff. June 24,
2016.
