---
title: 'CHAPTER 17-R NEW HAMPSHIRE STATE HOUSE BICENTENNIAL COMMISSION'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 17-R
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE STATE HOUSE BICENTENNIAL COMMISSION
-------------------------------------------------

### Section 17-R:1


                                             


                                             [RSA 17-R:1 repealed by 2014, 185:5, I, effective June 30, 2020.
                                             ]

 **17-R:1 New Hampshire State House Bicentennial Commission
Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a New Hampshire state house bicentennial
commission whose purpose is to plan and organize educational, cultural,
and commemorative events to celebrate the bicentennial of the New
Hampshire state house.
                                             
 II. The members of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) The governor, or designee.
                                             
 (b) The speaker of the house of representatives, or designee.
                                             
 (c) The house minority leader, or designee.
                                             
 (d) The senate president, or designee.
                                             
 (e) The senate minority leader, or designee.
                                             
 (f) The chief justice of the supreme court, or designee.
                                             
 (g) The secretary of state, or designee.
                                             
 (h) The commissioner of the department of education, or
designee.
                                             
 (i) The president of the New Hampshire Historical Society board
of trustees, or designee.
                                             
 (j) The chairman of the New Hampshire Preservation Alliance board
of directors, or designee.
                                             
 (k) The mayor of the city of Concord, or designee.
                                             
 (l) One member of the joint legislative historical committee,
established under RSA 17-I, appointed by the committee.
                                             
 (m) One member of the New Hampshire Supreme Court Society,
appointed by the society.
                                             
 (n) The commissioner of the department of cultural resources, or
designee.
                                             
 (o) The director of travel and tourism, department of resources
and economic development, or designee.
                                             
 (p) The commissioner of administrative services, or designee.
                                             
 (q) Two members of the public, appointed by the speaker of the
house of representatives.
                                             
 (r) Two members of the public, appointed by the senate
president.
                                             
 (s) Two members of the public, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (t) The chiefs of staff of the house of representatives and the
senate, or designees.
                                             
 (u) The clerks of the house of representatives and the senate, or
designees.
                                             
 III. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation,
except that legislative members shall receive mileage at the legislative
rate when attending to the duties of the commission.
                                             
 IV. The commission shall:
                                             
 (a) Plan and organize educational, cultural, and commemorative
events celebrating the bicentennial of the New Hampshire state house on
June 2, 2019.
                                             
 (b) Initiate preservation and access programs related to the
history of the general court and preservation of the New Hampshire state
house.
                                             
 (c) Solicit information and testimony from any individual or
entity with information or expertise relevant to the commission's
charge.
                                             
 V. The commission may accept any gifts, donations, or grants from
any source provided. Said gifts, donations, or grants shall be deposited
in the fund established in RSA 17-R:3 and used exclusively in the
furtherance of the duties of the commission.
                                             
 VI. The members of the commission shall elect a chairperson from
among the members. The first meeting of the commission shall be called
by the member of the joint legislative historical committee. The first
meeting of the commission shall be held within 45 days of the effective
date of this section. Eleven members of the commission shall constitute
a quorum.

**Source.** 2014, 185:3, eff. July 11, 2014. 2016, 146:1, eff. July 26,
2016.

### Section 17-R:2


                                             


                                             [RSA 17-R:2 repealed by 2014, 185:5, I, effective June 30, 2020.
                                             ]

 **17-R:2 Annual Report. –**
                                             
 Beginning November 1, 2014, the commission shall submit an annual
report by November 1 of its activities and findings, and any
recommendations for proposed legislation to the speaker of the house of
representatives, the president of the senate, the house clerk, the
senate clerk, the governor, and the state library.

**Source.** 2014, 185:3, eff. July 11, 2014.

### Section 17-R:3


                                             


                                             [RSA 17-R:3 repealed by 2014, 185:5, I, effective June 30, 2020.
                                             ]

 **17-R:3 New Hampshire State House Bicentennial Education and
Commemoration Fund Established. –**
                                             
 There is hereby established in the office of the state treasurer a
fund to be known as the New Hampshire state house bicentennial education
and commemoration fund, which shall be kept distinct and separate from
all other funds. The treasurer shall deposit all gifts, grants, and
donations received by the commission in the New Hampshire state house
bicentennial education and commemoration fund. All moneys in the fund
shall be nonlapsing and continually appropriated to the commission
established in RSA 17-R:1 for the purposes of this chapter.

**Source.** 2014, 185:3, eff. July 11, 2014.
