---
title: CHAPTER 18 COMMISSION TO STUDY UNIFORM STATE LAWS
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 18
                                             
COMMISSION TO STUDY UNIFORM STATE LAWS
--------------------------------------

### Section 18:1

 **18:1 Commission Created. –** There shall be a commission to study
uniform state laws consisting of 2 members of the New Hampshire bar
appointed by the governor with the consent of the council for terms of 4
years, and the attorney general ex officio; provided, however, that the
present attorney members of the commission on uniform state laws shall
be members of the commission created hereunder until the expiration of
the terms for which they were appointed to the commission on uniform
state laws.

**Source.** 1947, 100:1, par. 1. 1950, 5, part 5:6, par. 1, eff. June
30, 1950.

### Section 18:2

 **18:2 Duties. –** It shall be the duty of said commissioners to
promote uniformity in state laws on all subjects where uniformity is
desirable and practicable, and to meet and act with other similar
commissions appointed from other states for the above purpose, to be
represented at each annual conference of the national commissioners, and
to file with the secretary of state not later than the last December 1
preceding each legislative session, for the use of the governor and the
general court, a report of the progress of uniform legislation both
within and without the state to the end that uniform legislation, where
desirable and practical, be adopted in this state. The attorney general
shall act as secretary of the commission and shall maintain a record of
its proceedings in his office.

**Source.** 1947, 100:1, par. 2. 1950, 5, part 5:6, par. 2, eff. June
30, 1950.

### Section 18:3

 **18:3 Compensation. –** Said appointive commissioners shall serve
without compensation but shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred while
engaged in their official duties, in attending the national conference
and in making the biennial report.

**Source.** 1947, 100:1, par. 3. 1950, 5, part 5:6, par. 3, eff. June
30, 1950.

### Section 18:4

 **18:4 Appropriations. –** The legislature shall annually
appropriate sums sufficient for promoting and continuing the national
conferences of commissioners on uniform state laws and for the purpose
of paying expenses for attendance at said national conferences.

**Source.** 1947, 100:1, par. 4. 1950, 5, part 5:6, par. 4. RSA 18:4.
1955, 35:1, eff. July 1, 1955.
