---
title: 'CHAPTER 19-A COUNCIL ON THE ARTS'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 19-A
                                             
COUNCIL ON THE ARTS
-------------------

### Section 19-A:1

 **19-A:1 Declaration of Policy. –** It is hereby found that many of
our citizens lack the opportunity to view, enjoy or participate in
living theatrical performances, musical concerts, operas, dance and
ballet recitals, art exhibits, examples of fine architecture, and the
performing and fine arts generally. It is hereby further found that,
with increasing leisure time, the practice and enjoyment of the arts are
of increasing importance and that the general welfare of the people of
the state will be promoted by giving further recognition to the arts as
a vital aspect of our culture and heritage and as a valued means of
expanding the scope of our educational programs. It is hereby declared
to be the policy of the state to join with private patrons and with
institutions and professional organizations concerned with the arts to
insure that the role of the arts in the life of our communities will
continue to grow and will play an ever more significant part in the
welfare and educational experience of our citizens. It is further
declared that all activities undertaken by the state in carrying out
this policy shall be directed toward encouraging and assisting rather
than in any ways limiting the freedom of artistic expression that is
essential for the well-being of the arts.

**Source.** 1965, 194:1, eff. Aug. 27, 1965.

### Section 19-A:2

 **19-A:2 Council Created. –** A state council, to be known as the
New Hampshire state council on the arts, is hereby created and
established. The council shall consist of 15 members, broadly
representative of all fields of the performing and fine arts, to be
appointed by the governor with the advice and consent of the council
from among private citizens who are widely known for their professional
competence and experience in connection with the performing and fine
arts. In making such appointments, due consideration shall be given to
the recommendations made by representative civic, educational and
professional associations and groups, concerned with or engaged in the
production or presentation of the performing and fine arts generally.

**Source.** 1965, 194:1. 1981, 16:3. 1985, 268:27, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 19-A:3

 **19-A:3 Terms of Office. –** The term of office of each member
shall be 5 years, provided, however, that of the members first
appointed, 3 shall be appointed for terms of one year, 3 for terms of 2
years, 3 for terms of 3 years. The governor shall designate a chairman
from the members of the council, to serve as such. The chairman shall be
the chief executive officer of the council. All vacancies shall be
filled for the balance of the unexpired term in the same manner as
original appointments.

**Source.** 1965, 194:1. 1985, 268:28, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 19-A:4

 **19-A:4 Compensation. –** No member of the council shall receive
any compensation for his services.

**Source.** 1965, 194:1. 1985, 268:28, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 19-A:5

 **19-A:5 Duties. –** The duties of the council shall be:
                                             
 I. To stimulate and encourage throughout the state the study and
presentation of the performing and fine arts and public interest and
participation therein.
                                             
 II. To make such surveys as may be deemed advisable of public and
private institutions engaged within the state in artistic and cultural
activities, including, but not limited to, music, theatre, dance,
painting, sculpture, architecture, and allied arts and crafts, and to
make recommendations concerning appropriate methods to encourage
participation in and appreciation of the arts to meet the legitimate
needs and aspirations of persons in all parts of the state.
                                             
 III. To take such steps as may be necessary and appropriate to
encourage public interest in the cultural heritage of our state and to
expand the state's cultural resources.
                                             
 IV. To advise the commissioner of cultural resources in all matters
concerning the arts.
                                             
 V. To meet at least quarterly and at such other times as it deems
necessary.
                                             
 VI. To hold public hearings as it deems necessary.
                                             
 VII. To administer any federal funds received from the National
Endowment of the Arts and the art fund established under RSA 19-A:9.
                                             
 VIII. To accept restricted gifts where appropriate.

**Source.** 1965, 194:1. 1985, 268:28. 1989, 35:1. 1990, 73:1. 1998,
363:3, eff. Aug. 25, 1998.

### Section 19-A:6

 **19-A:6 Powers. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 268:43, I, eff. Jan. 1,
1986.
                                             ]

### Section 19-A:7

 **19-A:7 Reports. –** The council shall make biennial reports to the
governor and council.

**Source.** 1965, 194:1. 1973, 140:36. 1985, 268:29, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

State Art Fund
--------------

### Section 19-A:8

 **19-A:8 Definitions. –** As used in this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Acquisition'' means to obtain by commissioning an artist to
create or by purchasing.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of cultural resources.
                                             
 III. "Work of art'' means any object of historical significance or
work of visual art, including, but not limited to, a drawing, painting,
mural, fresco, sculpture, mosaic, or photograph, a work of calligraphy,
a work of graphic art, including, but not limited to, an etching,
lithograph, offset print, silk screen, or a work of graphic art of like
nature, crafts, including, but not limited to, crafts in clay, textile,
fiber, wood, metal, plastic, glass, and like materials, or mixed media,
including, but not limited to, a collage, assemblage, or any combination
of the foregoing art media. The term "work of art'' does not include
environmental landscaping placed about a building.

**Source.** 1979, 437:2. 1985, 268:30. 1990, 73:1. 1998, 363:3, eff.
Aug. 25, 1998.

### Section 19-A:9

 **19-A:9 Art Fund. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a non-lapsing art fund consisting of
1/2 of one percent of the first 
                                             $15,000,000 of the bid contract price
of each new building or major addition authorized by the capital budget
to be paid from the general fund. As used in this section, "major
addition'' means any addition which increases by 25 percent or more the
square footage of the building to which it is being added. Contracts for
the following projects are excluded:
                                             
 (a) Repairs;
                                             
 (b) University system of New Hampshire;
                                             
 (c) Those paid for by the highway fund, fish and game fund, or
federal funds; and
                                             
 (d) Self-liquidating projects.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of administrative services shall pay the
specified percent to the fund out of the original capital budget
appropriation when the governor and council approve the construction
contract. The percent shall be a charge against the bond or note
financing the construction.

**Source.** 1979, 437:2. 1981, 554:1. 1985, 399:3, I. 1998, 336:1, eff.
Aug. 25, 1998.

### Section 19-A:10

 **19-A:10 Powers and Duties of Commissioner. –** The commissioner
shall have the following powers and duties relative to this
subdivision:
                                             
 I. To adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, with the advice of the New
Hampshire state council on the arts, relative to the selection and
placement of art purchased through the state art fund established in
this subdivision.
                                             
 II. To select, with the advice of the New Hampshire state council on
the arts, state buildings and facilities as appropriate sites for works
of art.
                                             
 III. To acquire insurance when he deems such insurance necessary for
the protection of the works of art purchased, subject to the provisions
of RSA 21-I:7-c, V.
                                             
 IV. To establish selection committees of interested citizens and
experts to assist in the carrying out of the provisions of this chapter.
The selection committees may include the project architect, a
representative of the agency involved, a professional artist, a local
citizen, and either a state senator or a state representative from the
district in which the project will be located. The members of the
selection committee shall serve without pay, but may be compensated for
mileage by the department of cultural resources.

**Source.** 1979, 437:2. 1985, 268:31. 1990, 73:1. 1998, 336:3. 2006,
70:5, eff. June 24, 2006.

### Section 19-A:11

 **19-A:11 Repairs to Works of Art. –** Except in the buildings or
facilities covered under RSA 14:14-b, no conservation, restoration,
repair, or removal of any work of art purchased under the provisions of
this subdivision shall be undertaken without the approval of the
commissioner, who shall seek the advice of the New Hampshire state
council on the arts on any such matter.

**Source.** 1979, 437:2. 1985, 268:32, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 19-A:12

 **19-A:12 Placement of Other Works of Art. –** Nothing in this
subdivision shall be construed to preclude the placement of works of art
in state buildings or facilities other than those placed pursuant to
this subdivision.

**Source.** 1979, 437:2, eff. July 1, 1979.

Arts Development Program
------------------------

### Section 19-A:13

 **19-A:13 Program Established; Matching Funds. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established the New Hampshire arts development
program to be administered by the New Hampshire council on the arts. The
purpose of the program shall be to offer matching state funds for the
planning, development, design and management of quality cultural
facilities operated by New Hampshire non-profit organizations.
                                             
 II. The funds shall be expended for appropriate projects through an
application process administered by the council, provided that a
one-to-one match of funds shall be paid by sources other than the
state.
                                             
 III. Grants shall be screened by the council which shall consider
the following criteria:
                                             
 (a) The quality of the project.
                                             
 (b) The objectives of the project as stated in the application.
                                             
 (c) The probability that the project will achieve its stated
objectives.
                                             
 (d) The ability of the applicant to raise the necessary
one-to-one match of funds from sources other than the state.
                                             
 IV. The council shall make its selection within the limits of
appropriated funds. Any applicant who is rejected shall be sent written
notification of the rejection with the reasons stated for the rejection.

**Source.** 1987, 262:2, eff. July 1, 1987.

Commission to Study the Economic Impact of the Arts and Culture in New Hampshire
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 19-A:14


                                             


                                             [RSA 19-A:14 repealed by 2015, 122:2, effective November 1, 2016.
                                             ]

 **19-A:14 Commission Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a commission to study the economic impact of
the arts and culture in New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. The commission shall consist of the following members:
                                             
 (a) Three members of the house of representatives, one of whom
shall be a member of the commerce and consumer affairs committee and one
of whom shall be a member of the finance committee, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (b) One member of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (c) One member of the state council on the arts, appointed by the
council.
                                             
 (d) The director of travel and tourism development, or designee.
                                             
 (e) One member each from the division of the arts, the division
of libraries, the division of historical resources, and the New
Hampshire film and television commission, appointed by the commissioner
of the department of cultural resources.
                                             
 (f) One member from the board of directors of New Hampshire
Citizens for the Arts, appointed by the president of the organization.
                                             
 (g) One member from the board of directors of the New Hampshire
Preservation Alliance, appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (h) One member from the board of trustees of the League of New
Hampshire craftsmen, appointed by the president of the board of trustees
of the organization.
                                             
 (i) One member from the board of trustees of the New Hampshire
Historical Society, appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (j) One representative of the performing arts, appointed by the
governor.
                                             
 (k) One representative of New Hampshire art museums, appointed by
the governor.
                                             
 (l) One representative of New Hampshire history museums,
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 III. Legislative members of the commission shall receive mileage at
the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the commission.
                                             
 IV. The commission shall study the economic impact of the arts and
culture in New Hampshire and recommend ways in which the state can
enhance and expand this sector of the New Hampshire economy. In the
performance of its duties, the commission may solicit information and
testimony from local artists and any group or organization, and other
states with information relevant to the study.
                                             
 V. The members of the commission shall elect a chairperson from
among the members. The first meeting of the commission shall be called
by the first-named house member. The first meeting of the commission
shall be held within 45 days of the effective date of this section. Four
members of the commission shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 VI. The commission shall report its findings and any recommendations
for proposed legislation to the speaker of the house of representatives,
the president of the senate, the house clerk, the senate clerk, the
governor, and the state library on or before November 1, 2016.

**Source.** 2015, 122:1, eff. June 8, 2015.
