---
title: 'CHAPTER 19-H VOLUNTEER NH'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 19-H
                                             
VOLUNTEER NH
-------------

### Section 19-H:1

 **19-H:1 Volunteer NH; Board of Directors; Executive Director. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established Volunteer NH, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit
organization that incorporates the previous responsibilities and
programs of the New Hampshire office of volunteerism, the governor's
council on volunteerism, and the New Hampshire commission for national
and community service (AmeriCorps). The board of directors of Volunteer
NH shall consist of at least 15 members but not more than 25 members.
The board shall include, as a minimum:
                                             
 (a) The following members, appointed by the governor and
executive council:
                                             
 (1) An individual with expertise in the educational, training,
and developmental needs of youth, particularly disadvantaged youth.
                                             
 (2) An individual with experience in promoting the involvement
of adults 55 years of age or older in service and volunteerism.
                                             
 (3) A representative from a community-based agency or
community-based organization with volunteer participation.
                                             
 (4) A representative from local government.
                                             
 (5) A representative from a local labor organization.
                                             
 (6) At least one representative from the business community.
                                             
 (7) An individual between 16 and 25 years of age, inclusive,
who is or has been a participant or supervisor in a service program.
                                             
 (8) A representative of a national service program described
in section 122(a) of the National and Community Service Act of 1990, as
amended.
                                             
 (9) A representative from the religious community.
                                             
 (10) A representative from the philanthropic community.
                                             
 (11) A representative from post-secondary education.
                                             
 (b) The governor, or designee.
                                             
 (c) One member of the senate, appointed by the senate president.
                                             
 (d) One member of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house.
                                             
 (e) The commissioner of education, or designee.
                                             
 (f) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. The members in subparagraph (a) shall serve for renewable terms
of 3 years. The terms for members listed in subparagraphs (b) through
(e) shall be coterminous with their term of office. Vacancies shall be
filled for the remainder of the term in the same manner and from the
same group as the original appointment.
                                             
 III. The board shall appoint an executive director who shall be
qualified by reason of education and experience and who shall serve at
the pleasure of the board of directors.
                                             
 IV. The executive director may employ staff, in addition to using
the services of volunteers, to carry out the responsibilities and
programs of Volunteer NH.

**Source.** 2001, 288:1. 2006, 55:1-3, 5, I, eff. June 23, 2006.

### Section 19-H:2

 **19-H:2 Compensation. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2006, 55:5, II, eff. June 23,
2006.
                                             ]

### Section 19-H:3

 **19-H:3 Staff. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2006, 55:5, III, eff. June 23,
2006.
                                             ]

### Section 19-H:4

 **19-H:4 Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The board may organize program committees to develop, promote,
execute, sustain, and provide education and recognition to volunteer
activities and programs in New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. Volunteer NH shall:
                                             
 (a) Promote volunteerism and community service as a value in the
state.
                                             
 (b) Promote and support national, state, and local community
service initiatives.
                                             
 (c) Assume responsibility for duties established for state
commissions in section 178 of the National and Community Service Act of
1990, as amended.
                                             
 (d) Assist and advise state agencies and political subdivisions
to establish, maintain, and expand volunteer programs.
                                             
 (e) Serve as a resource to coordinate and collaborate with other
nonprofit and volunteer organizations throughout the state.
                                             
 (f) Provide technical assistance to state agencies and political
subdivisions, including a database that details the needs and
capabilities of volunteers and volunteer organizations throughout the
state.
                                             
 (g) Take other appropriate actions to promote active
participation of volunteers which would enrich state and local programs
without supplanting public employees.

**Source.** 2001, 288:1. 2006, 55:4, eff. June 23, 2006.

### Section 19-H:5

 **19-H:5 Cooperation. –** Volunteer NH may cooperate with any state
or federal agency or any private organization in conducting studies,
programs, and joint efforts in the areas of service and volunteerism.

**Source.** 2001, 288:1, eff. Sept. 15, 2001.

### Section 19-H:6

 **19-H:6 Report. –** The board shall submit an annual report of its
activities to the governor and council, the senate president, and the
speaker of the house of representatives.

**Source.** 2001, 288:1, eff. Sept. 15, 2001.

### Section 19-H:7

 **19-H:7 Authority to Accept Gifts. –** Volunteer NH may accept any
gifts, donations, bequests, federal, state, or local funds, or grants
from any source if the gifts, donations, bequests, funds, or grants
received are used to sustain the organization and to further the duties
and programs of Volunteer NH.

**Source.** 2001, 288:1, eff. Sept. 15, 2001.

### Section 19-H:8

 **19-H:8 Administratively Attached. –** Volunteer NH shall be
administratively attached to the department of administrative services
and shall receive in-kind office space and essential services and
support from the state.

**Source.** 2001, 288:1, eff. Sept. 15, 2001.

### Section 19-H:9

 **19-H:9 Limitation on Service. –** No volunteer whose service or
activities are promoted, coordinated, or assisted by Volunteer NH shall
be used in the enforcement of any law, or in any civil or criminal
investigation.

**Source.** 2001, 288:1, eff. Sept. 15, 2001.
