---
title: 'CHAPTER 19-K LEGISLATIVE YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 19-K
                                             
LEGISLATIVE YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL
----------------------------------

### Section 19-K:1

 **19-K:1 Legislative Youth Advisory Council Established. –** A
legislative youth advisory council is established to examine issues of
importance to youth, such as education, employment, strategies to
increase youth participation in local and state government, safe
environments for youth, substance abuse, emotional and physical health,
foster care, poverty, homelessness, and youth access to state and local
services. The council shall advise the legislature on these issues and
shall submit an annual report with any recommendations for future
legislation.

**Source.** 2006, 270:1, eff. Aug. 8, 2006.

### Section 19-K:2

 **19-K:2 Membership. –** The council shall consist of 21 members,
one of whom shall be a member of the house of representatives and one of
whom shall be a member of the senate. The remaining nineteen members
shall be youths between the ages of 15 and 22.
                                             
 I. The president of the senate shall appoint the following 7
members:
                                             
 (a) Three youths who are students in secondary schools, who are
home school students, or who are enrolled in programs that lead to a
secondary school diploma, certificate of attendance, or general
equivalency diploma.
                                             
 (b) Three youths who are residents of this state and who are
students at postsecondary education institutions located in the state.
                                             
 (c) One member of the senate.
                                             
 II. The speaker of the house of representatives shall appoint the
following 8 members:
                                             
 (a) Four youths who are students in secondary schools, who are
home school students, or who are enrolled in programs that lead to a
secondary school diploma, certificate of attendance, or general
equivalency diploma.
                                             
 (b) Three youths who are residents of this state and who are
students at postsecondary education institutions located in the state.
                                             
 (c) One member of the house of representatives.
                                             
 III. The governor shall appoint the following 3 members:
                                             
 (a) Two youths who are students in secondary schools, who are
home school students, or who are enrolled in programs that lead to a
secondary school diploma, certificate of attendance, or general
equivalency diploma.
                                             
 (b) One youth who is a resident of this state and who is a
student at a postsecondary education institution located in the state.
                                             
 IV. The secretary of state shall appoint the following 3 members:
                                             
 (a) Two youths who are students in secondary schools, who are
home school students, or who are enrolled in programs that lead to a
secondary school diploma, certificate of attendance, or general
equivalency diploma.
                                             
 (b) One youth who is a resident of this state and who is a
student at a postsecondary education institution located in the state.
                                             
 V. The appointing authorities shall make appointments that foster
geographic and socio-economic diversity among council members and shall
appoint at least one member from each of the 10 counties. The
legislative members of the council shall serve a term coterminous with
their term in office. Nonlegislative members shall serve 2-year terms,
except that the initial appointment of 9 of the members shall be for a
term of one year. Except for legislative members, no member shall serve
on the council for more than 4 years.
                                             
 VI. If a member misses 3 consecutive meetings, without cause, the
council may request that the appointing authority appoint a replacement
member. Upon appointment of the replacement, the prior appointment shall
terminate and the replacement shall serve for the remainder of the prior
member's term.

**Source.** 2006, 270:1. 2009, 36:1, eff. May 15, 2009.

### Section 19-K:3

 **19-K:3 Duties. –** The council shall perform the following
duties:
                                             
 I. Advise the legislature, the president of the senate, and the
speaker of the house of representatives on proposed or pending
legislation, state budget expenditures, and policy matters related to
youth.
                                             
 II. Advise the joint standing committees of the legislature and
legislative study committees, commissions, and task forces on issues
related to youth.
                                             
 III. Conduct an annual seminar each August for council members
regarding leadership, government, and the legislature.
                                             
 IV. Meet no fewer than 4 times per year and conduct 2 public forums
per year on issues of importance to youth.
                                             
 V. Communicate with other youth councils.
                                             
 VI. File an annual report of its activities, including any
recommendations for proposed legislation, on or before November 1 of
each year with the speaker of the house, the senate president, the
governor, the secretary of state, the house clerk, and the state
library.

**Source.** 2006, 270:1. 2008, 30:1, eff. July 11 2008.

### Section 19-K:4

 **19-K:4 Council Administration. –**
                                             
 I. The council member from the house of representatives shall serve
as the co-chair of the council and shall call the first meeting of the
council. At the first meeting after the August annual seminar, the
members shall elect one of the youth members to serve as co-chair for a
term of one year.
                                             
 II. The council shall set priorities, determine the function of any
subcommittees, and adopt procedures and rules governing the council's
meetings and activities.
                                             
 III. The council may provide testimony on legislation pending before
the legislature.
                                             
 IV. Members of the council shall not be compensated, except that
legislative members of the council shall receive mileage at the
legislative rate when attending to the duties of the council.
                                             
 V. Meetings of the council shall be open to the public, and all
records of the council shall be public records. A complete archive of
the council's records shall be kept in the house clerk's office.
                                             
 VI. The New Hampshire Alliance for Civic Engagement, in coordination
with the office of the speaker of the house of representatives and the
office of the senate president, shall provide staff assistance to the
council.

**Source.** 2006, 270:1. 2008, 30:2, 3, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 19-K:5

 **19-K:5 Funding; Legislative Youth Advisory Council Fund
Established. –**
                                             
 I. The council may accept and expend funds, with the approval of the
joint committee on legislative facilities, from public and private
sources to support its activities. Funds shall not be accepted from any
party with a pecuniary or other vested interest in the outcome of the
matters being studied or who would in any way compromise the work of the
council. Any person, other than a state agency, who desires to make a
financial or in-kind contribution shall certify to the council or its
designee in the manner prescribed by the council that the person has no
pecuniary or other vested interest in the outcome of the work of the
council. All contributions shall be subject to approval by the council
and the joint committee on legislative facilities.
                                             
 II. Any funds received by the council shall be deposited by the
state treasurer in a separate, non-lapsing account which shall be known
as the legislative youth advisory council fund. The fund shall be
continually appropriated to the legislative youth advisory council for
the purposes of this chapter and shall be within the oversight of the
joint committee on legislative facilities.

**Source.** 2006, 270:1, eff. Aug. 8, 2006.
