---
title: |
    CHAPTER 19-O NEW HAMPSHIRE'S PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY CENTENNIAL ANNIVERSARY
    COMMISSION
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 19-O
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE'S PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY CENTENNIAL ANNIVERSARY COMMISSION
----------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 19-O:1


                                             


                                             [RSA 19-O:1 repealed by 2014, 251:2, effective December 1, 2016.
                                             ]

 **19-O:1 New Hampshire's Presidential Primary Centennial Anniversary
Commission. –**
                                             
 I. There is established the New Hampshire presidential primary
centennial anniversary commission.
                                             
 II. (a) The members of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 (1) One member of the house of representatives, appointed by
the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (2) One member of the house of representatives, appointed by
the house minority leader.
                                             
 (3) One member of the senate, appointed by the president of
the senate.
                                             
 (4) One member of the senate, appointed by the senate minority
leader.
                                             
 (5) The secretary of state, or designee.
                                             
 (6) Three public members, appointed by the speaker of the
house of representatives.
                                             
 (7) Three public members, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (8) Five public members, one from each of the 5 executive
council districts, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (b) Legislative members of the commission shall receive mileage
at the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the commission.
                                             
 III. The commission shall encourage, plan, and coordinate
appropriate events and activities commemorating the 100^th^ anniversary
of the New Hampshire presidential primary, held on March 14, 1916.
                                             
 IV. The members of the commission shall elect a chairperson from
among the members. The first meeting of the commission shall be called
by the member appointed under subparagraph II(a)(1). The first meeting
of the commission shall be held within 45 days of the effective date of
this section. Nine members of the commission shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 V. The commission shall submit an interim report no later than
November 1, 2015 and a final report of its activities, and findings
together with any recommendations for proposed legislation, no later
than December 1, 2016 to the speaker of the house of representatives,
the president of the senate, the house clerk, the senate clerk, the
governor, and the state library.

**Source.** 2014, 251:1, eff. July 22, 2014.
