---
title: 'CHAPTER 20-A CENTRALIZED BUREAU FOR THE REPRODUCTION OF STATE DOCUMENTS'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 20-A
                                             
CENTRALIZED BUREAU FOR THE REPRODUCTION OF STATE DOCUMENTS
----------------------------------------------------------

### Section 20-A:1

 **20-A:1 Authority Granted. –** The governor, whenever he finds that
it would be in the best interests of the state to do so, may establish
within any department of the state a bureau for the mimeographing,
photostating, multilithing, microfilming, or reproducing by any other
similar methods, of forms, letters, papers, reports and the like for the
various state departments and agencies.

**Source.** 1955, 258:1, eff. July 1, 1955.

### Section 20-A:2

 **20-A:2 Rules and Regulations. –** If such a bureau is established,
the governor may make rules and regulations relative to the reproduction
of forms, letters, papers, reports and the like by said bureau.

**Source.** 1955, 258:2, eff. July 1, 1955.

### Section 20-A:3

 **20-A:3 Personnel Transferred. –** The governor is hereby
authorized to transfer to the bureau of mimeographing any employee of
any state department or agency, except as hereinafter provided,
authorized to do work on mimeographing, photostating or multilithing or
other such machines and all unexpended appropriations and funds
allocated for the payment of such employee's salary shall be transferred
to the bureau so established. Any such employee so transferred or
employed by the expenditure of such funds and appropriations shall be
directly responsible to the head of the department wherein said bureau
is established.

**Source.** 1955, 258:3, eff. July 1, 1955.

### Section 20-A:4

 **20-A:4 Limitations. –** Provided however that no employee and
funds shall be transferred under the authority of the preceding section
where such transfer would affect the receipt of federal assistance in
any way and provided further that no employee so transferred shall
receive less compensation than he was receiving from the department from
which transferred.

**Source.** 1955, 258:4, eff. July 1, 1955.

### Section 20-A:5

 **20-A:5 Equipment and Funds Transferred. –** The governor is
authorized to transfer to the bureau so established any equipment
belonging to any department or agency used in the mimeographing,
photostating, multilithing, microfilming or by any other method of
reproducing forms, letters, papers, reports and the like, except in
cases where such transfer would affect the receipt of federal aid to
such department or agency. The governor is also authorized to transfer
any materials used in connection with such reproducing machines and
funds which may have been appropriated for the upkeep of such machines.

**Source.** 1955, 258:5, eff. July 1, 1955.
