---
title: 'CHAPTER 21-G ORGANIZATION OF EXECUTIVE BRANCH'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 21-G
                                             
ORGANIZATION OF EXECUTIVE BRANCH
--------------------------------

### Section 21-G:1

 **21-G:1 Short Title. –** This chapter shall be known as the
Executive Branch Reorganization Act of 1983.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-G:2

 **21-G:2 Declaration of Findings. –** The general court finds that:
                                             
 I. The state constitution provides for the separation of powers
within state government among the legislative, the executive and the
judicial branches. The legislative branch has the broad objective and
responsibility to determine policies and programs and to review and
oversee program performance and implementation of policy previously
established. The executive branch has the responsibility to implement
and administer these policies and programs. The judicial branch has the
responsibility to resolve disputes arising from the interpretation or
application of the laws;
                                             
 II. The growth of the executive branch from 32 constitutional
offices and state agencies in 1900, to 96 in 1970, to more than 140 in
1983, has created an unwieldy and confusing state government structure.
This structure has developed piecemeal, resulting in lack of policy
coordination, excessive costs, inefficient use of personnel and capital,
overlapping agency jurisdictions, duplication, and the ineffective use
of the state's limited financial resources; and
                                             
 III. The size and complexity of the executive branch, including the
unnecessarily confusing current array of administrative terms, titles,
and appointment processes, has unintentionally altered some of the
constitutionally contemplated checks and balances by an unplanned
shifting of policy direction and implementation toward the independent,
non-elected executive branch agencies. This reduces the ability of the
legislature to assert its primary role as policymaker and the ability of
the governor to manage the implementation of that policy.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-G:3

 **21-G:3 Declaration of Policy. –** The general court declares the
following to be the policy and objectives of the state:
                                             
 I. The organization of state government should assure its
responsiveness to popular control, as expressed through the state's
elected officials. It is the goal of reorganization to improve
legislative policymaking capability and to improve the administrative
capability of the executive to carry out these policies.
                                             
 II. The organization of state government should facilitate
communication between citizens and government. It is the goal of
reorganization through coordination of related programs in
function-oriented departments to improve public understanding of
government programs and policies, by more clearly defining the
jurisdiction of departments, and to improve the relationships between
citizens and administrative agencies.
                                             
 III. The organization of state government should assure efficient,
effective and responsive administration of the policies established by
the legislature. It is the goal of reorganization to improve the
coordination and management of state services by establishing clear
lines of authority, responsibility and accountability for program
implementation within the executive branch.
                                             
 IV. The governor should meet regularly with the heads of all
agencies. Communication and exchange of information and ideas among the
agency heads, as well as between agency heads and the governor, should
be the goal of these meetings.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-G:4

 **21-G:4 Guidelines for Reorganization. –** The following provisions
shall serve as general guidelines for accomplishing executive branch
reorganization consistent with the policy and objectives of the state:
                                             
 I. In order to allow the chief executive to efficiently and
effectively implement legislative policy and programs, the governor
should be provided with a manageable administrative structure and the
authority to direct its operations.
                                             
 II. The large number of existing executive branch agencies,
departments, boards, commissions, authorities and institutions should be
significantly reduced by consolidating them into a reasonable number of
departments.
                                             
 III. The consolidation of agencies in the executive branch should be
on a functional basis, so that programs can be coordinated and
comprehensive planning can be undertaken.
                                             
 IV. Structural reorganization should be a continuing process through
careful executive and legislative appraisal of the placement of proposed
new programs, and the coordination of existing programs, in response to
changing public needs.
                                             
 V. There should be a uniform process for administrative appeals to
an impartial body provided for each department established following
July 1, 1983.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-G:5

 **21-G:5 Definitions. –** In this chapter, the following words shall
have the following meanings:
                                             
 I. "Administratively attached agency'' means an independent agency
linked to a department for purposes of reporting and sharing support
services.
                                             
 II. "Advisory committee'' means a committee established pursuant to
RSA 21-G:11 which shall furnish advice, gather information, make
recommendations and perform such other activities as may be instructed
or as may be necessary to fulfill advisory functions or to comply with
federal funding requirements, but which shall not administer a program
or function or set policy.
                                             
 III. "Agency'' means any department, commission, board, institution,
bureau, office, or other entity, by whatever name called, other than the
legislative and judicial branches of state government, established in
the state constitution, statutes, session laws or executive orders.
                                             
 IV. "Bureau'' means the principal unit within a division, which is
directly responsible to the division level and is concerned with
individual program management.
                                             
 V. "Commissioner'' means the individual in charge of the operations
of a department, who is directly responsible to the governor.
                                             
 VI. "Department'' means the principal administrative unit within the
executive branch of state government, which is concerned with broad
functional responsibilities.
                                             
 VII. "Division'' means the principal unit within a department, which
is directly responsible to the department level and is concerned with
related major functional programs and activities.
                                             
 VIII. "Field operations'' means district or area offices which may
combine division, bureau and section functions.
                                             
 IX. "Section'' means the principal unit of a bureau, which is
directly responsible to the bureau level and is concerned with direct
provision of services to the public or other state agencies.
                                             
 X. "Subsection'' means the principal unit of a section which is
directly responsible to the section level and is concerned with direct
provision of services to the public or other state agencies.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-G:5-a

 **21-G:5-a Statements of Financial Interest for Board and Commission
Members. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2006, 21:10, II, eff. June 2, 2006.
                                             ]

### Section 21-G:6

 **21-G:6 Structure of Executive Branch. –** All departments of the
state established following July 1, 1983, shall be structured as
follows, unless otherwise provided for specifically by the general
court:
                                             
 I. The department shall be the principal administrative unit of the
executive branch, and each department shall be headed by a commissioner.
Each department shall bear a title beginning with the words "The State
of New Hampshire Department of ..........'' and continuing with the name
designated for the department.
                                             
 II. All departments shall adhere to the following operational
structure and standard terminology:
                                             
 (a) The principal unit of the department shall be the division;
and each division shall be headed by a director.
                                             
 (b) The principal unit of the division shall be the bureau; and
each bureau shall be headed by an administrator.
                                             
 (c) The principal unit of the bureau shall be the section; and
each section shall be headed by a supervisor.
                                             
 (d) If further subdivision is necessary, sections may be divided
into subsections; and each subsection shall be headed by a chief.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-G:6-a

 **21-G:6-a Electronic Credit Card Payments; Authorization to
Administer. –** Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the
contrary, the head of any state agency or department and any authorized
employee or agent of the head, may accept credit cards or debit cards
for the online payment of any of the taxes, penalties, interest, or fees
administered by such commissioner or collected by the department. The
amount of any service charge collected shall be disclosed in advance of
the transaction to the individual paying the tax, penalty, or fee and
shall be at a reasonable and customary rate approved in advance by the
comptroller.

**Source.** 2015, 276:37, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 21-G:7

 **21-G:7 Field Operations. –**
                                             
 I. A department shall not establish field operations unless
specifically authorized to do so by statute; except that temporary field
operations may be established upon a specific written declaration by the
governor and council that an emergency exists. A temporary field
operation shall not be continued beyond the adjournment of the next
regular or special session of the general court following a declaration
of emergency.
                                             
 II. Legislative proposals by a department seeking establishment of
field operations shall include evidence of the commissioner's written
certification to the governor and council that all other agencies with
field operations in the same vicinity of the state have been consulted
to determine the feasibility of combining such field operations.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-G:8

 **21-G:8 Commissioners and Division Directors; Appointment; Term.
–**
                                             
 I. The commissioners of all departments established after July 1,
1983, shall be appointed by the governor, with the consent of the
council, except as otherwise provided by law. Each commissioner shall be
an unclassified employee.
                                             
 II. Each commissioner shall nominate for appointment by the
governor, with the consent of the council, each division director within
the commissioner's department, for all departments established after
July 1, 1983, except as otherwise provided by law. Each division
director shall be an unclassified employee.
                                             
 III. Commissioners shall serve terms of 4 years. Such terms shall
end on March 31 of an odd-numbered year. Initial terms for some
commissioners may be for approximately 2 years so that the terms of
one-half of the commissioners will end in each gubernatorial term.
                                             
 IV. Division directors shall serve terms of 4 years. Such terms
shall end on March 31 of an even-numbered year. Initial terms for some
directors may be for approximately 2 years so that the terms of one-half
of the directors will end one year after a commissioner's terms
commences and one-half 3 years after that date.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1. 1985, 418:1. 1995, 226:2, eff. Aug. 13, 1995.

### Section 21-G:9

 **21-G:9 Powers and Duties of Commissioners. –** The commissioner
shall be the chief administrative officer of the department and shall
have the following powers and duties:
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall manage all operations of the department
and administer and enforce the laws with which the commissioner or the
department is charged. The commissioner shall report directly to the
governor.
                                             
 II. To perform the commissioner's duties, the commissioner shall
have every power enumerated in the laws, whether granted to the
commissioner, the department, or any administrative unit of the
department. In accordance with these provisions, the commissioner
shall:
                                             
 (a) Biennially compile a comprehensive program budget which
reflects all fiscal matters related to the operation of the department
and each program and activity of the department.
                                             
 (b) Adopt all rules of the department, whether the rulemaking
authority delegated by the legislature is granted to the commissioner,
the department, or any administrative unit or subordinate official of
the department. All rules shall be adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A, unless
specifically and explicitly exempted by law. The provisions of this
subparagraph shall control existing legislative enactments unless the
provisions of RSA 21-H through RSA 21-P that created the department
specifically and clearly confer rulemaking authority on an
administrative unit or a subordinate official. The provisions of this
subparagraph shall also apply to subsequent legislative enactments
unless such enactments are contained in RSA 21-H through RSA 21-P or are
specifically exempted from the application of the provisions of this
subparagraph by language expressly referring to this subparagraph. For
the purposes of this subparagraph, "commissioner of the department of
education'' means the state board of education.
                                             
 (c) Exercise general supervisory and appointing authority over
all department employees, subject to applicable personnel statutes and
rules.
                                             
 (d) Delegate authority to subordinates as the commissioner deems
necessary and appropriate, except that rulemaking authority shall not be
delegated. The commissioner shall provide by delegation for a division
director to exercise all authority of the commissioner in the
commissioner's absence. All such delegations shall be made in writing,
shall be disseminated to all division directors, shall clearly delineate
the authority delegated and the limitations thereto, and shall be kept
on file in the commissioner's office.
                                             
 (e) Adopt practices which will improve the efficiency of the
department and the provision of services to the citizens of the state.
                                             
 (f) Provide cooperation, at the request of the heads of
administratively attached agencies, in order to:
                                             
 (1) Minimize or eliminate duplication of services and
jurisdictional conflicts;
                                             
 (2) Coordinate activities and resolve problems of mutual
concern; and
                                             
 (3) Resolve by agreement the manner and extent to which the
department shall provide budgeting, recordkeeping and related clerical
assistance to administratively attached agencies.
                                             
 (g) Give bond, and require division directors to give bond, to
the state as specified in RSA 93-B.
                                             
 (h) Where functions of departments overlap or a function assigned
to one department could better be performed by another department, a
commissioner shall recommend appropriate legislation to the next regular
session of the legislature.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may adopt such reasonable internal practices
and procedures as may be necessary to carry out the duties of the
department and its divisions consistent with this chapter.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 V. It shall be the duty of all commissioners of executive branch
agencies to continually reassess the organization of their agencies,
especially with regard to new programs and functions assigned to them.
Commissioners are hereby authorized, notwithstanding any provision of
law to the contrary, to:
                                             
 (a) Transfer or reassign personnel within and between any
division, office, unit, or other component of the department.
                                             
 (b) Delegate, transfer, or assign the authority to administer and
operate any program or service of the department to any employee,
division, office, bureau, or other component of the department. Such
delegation, transfer, or assignment shall include the authority to
conduct or perform any act necessary to administer the program or
service so assigned.
                                             
 (c) Propose legislation to the general court to accomplish
internal reorganizations deemed desirable.
                                             
 VI. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, administrative rule,
or administrative process to the contrary, the commissioner may
advertise requests for proposals and recruitment of personnel by using
the Internet rather than traditional newspaper print media. The
department shall regularly publish a notice in traditional print media
referring prospective service providers and persons seeking state
employment to the state's website for detailed information about
opportunities.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1. 1995, 226:3-6. 2009, 144:40. 2011, 131:1, eff.
Aug. 6, 2011. 2012, 247:40, I, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 21-G:10

 **21-G:10 Administratively Attached Agency. –**
                                             
 I. An agency administratively attached to a department shall:
                                             
 (a) Exercise its powers, duties, functions and responsibilities
independently of the department and without approval or control of the
department, except as otherwise specifically provided by statute;
                                             
 (b) Submit the budget requests required by RSA 9 through the
department; and
                                             
 (c) Submit reports required of it by law or by the governor
through the department.
                                             
 II. The department to which an agency is administratively attached
shall:
                                             
 (a) Provide budgeting, recordkeeping and related administrative
and clerical assistance to the agency, if mutually agreed to in writing,
provided that the agency shall pay the department on a cost allocation
basis for such services;
                                             
 (b) Include the agency's budget requests, as submitted and
without changes, in the departmental budget.
                                             
 III. Unless otherwise provided by law, the administratively attached
agency shall hire personnel in accordance with state personnel laws.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-G:11

 **21-G:11 Advisory Committees. –**
                                             
 I. A commissioner, with the approval of the governor, may create
advisory committees.
                                             
 II. Each department shall file a record of each advisory committee
created with the secretary of state, showing the committee's:
                                             
 (a) Name;
                                             
 (b) Composition;
                                             
 (c) Appointed members' names and addresses; and
                                             
 (d) Purpose and term of existence.
                                             
 III. The governor shall appoint the members of each advisory
committee, with the advice of the commissioner, who shall have
prescribed the functions of each advisory committee created.
                                             
 IV. Each advisory committee created under this section shall be
designated by name as follows: the ".......... advisory committee of the
department of ...''.
                                             
 V. A majority of the membership of an advisory committee shall
constitute a quorum.
                                             
 VI. No member of an advisory committee shall receive any
compensation, for services rendered the advisory committee, except
mileage payments at the state employee rate, within the limits of the
department's appropriations.
                                             
 VII. Each advisory committee created under this section after July
1, 1995, shall include a provision for its termination after a 3-year
period unless continued by legislative action.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1. 1995, 257:1, eff. July 1, 1995.

### Section 21-G:12

 **21-G:12 Conflicts of Law. –** If the provisions of RSA 21-G:9 or
RSA 21-G:11 conflict with the powers and duties specifically granted by
statute to a particular commissioner, the specific powers and duties
shall control. If the provisions of RSA 21-G:9 or RSA 21-G:11 conflict
with other statutes specifically limiting the powers of a commissioner,
the specific limitations shall control.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-G:13

 **21-G:13 Transfer of Functions of Abolished Agencies. –**
                                             
 I. The powers, duties, functions, responsibilities, programs and
operations of each agency abolished pursuant to acts of the general
court relative to executive branch reorganization shall, upon and after
the date of each abolition, be exercised and performed by the
commissioner of the department to which such powers, duties, functions
and responsibilities are transferred.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of each department shall have full authority,
consistent with this chapter, to assign powers, duties, functions,
responsibilities, programs and operations of abolished agencies to any
division within the department, or may determine that any or all of them
shall be exercised in such other manner as shall be allowed by law. The
commissioner shall make such assignment or determination in accordance
with the general functions of each division, as established by the
general court.
                                             
 III. Upon the abolition of each agency whose powers, duties,
functions and responsibilities are transferred in accordance with this
section, any pending or unfinished business of each such agency shall be
taken over and be completed by the department to which transferred and
its commissioner, with the same power and authority as that of the
agency abolished. The department and its commissioner shall be the
successor in every way to each such agency, and every act done by the
department or its commissioner in the exercise of the functions of each
shall be deemed to have the same force and effect under any provisions
of the constitution and laws in effect on July 1, 1983, as if done by
the agency abolished.
                                             
 IV. Upon the abolition of each agency whose powers, duties,
functions and responsibilities are transferred in accordance with this
section, the existing rules of each agency shall continue in full
effect, without interruption, as the rules of the department to which
those powers, duties, functions and responsibilities have been
transferred. Rules so continued shall be effective for the remainder of
the period originally established under RSA 541-A:17, I.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1. 1986, 41:32. 1994, 412:4, eff. Aug. 9, 1994.

### Section 21-G:14

 **21-G:14 Legal Proceedings and Documents. –**
                                             
 I. For purposes of this section, legal proceeding includes, but is
not limited to, any suit, action, incidental demand or action, claim,
and any other matter filed or pending before any court, administrative
agency, or other quasi-judicial body.
                                             
 II. For purposes of this section, document includes, but is not
limited to, any petition, application, exception, motion, rule, answer,
citation, notice, return, affidavit, certificate, oath, bond or other
security, summons, subpoena, writ, interrogatory, deposition, inventory,
appraisal, evidence, court record, instruction, verdict, judgment,
order, injunction, confirmation, appointment, warrant, letter, and any
other pleading or instrument whatsoever permitted or required in any
legal proceeding.
                                             
 III. Any legal proceeding to which any agency which is abolished,
whose powers, duties, functions, and responsibilities are transferred in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, is a party, and which is
filed, initiated, or otherwise pending before any court on the effective
date of such abolition and transfer, and all documents involved in or
affected by such legal proceeding, shall retain their effectiveness and
shall be continued in the name of the agency abolished. All further
legal proceedings and documents in the continuation, disposition, and
enforcement of such legal proceedings shall be in the name of the
original party agency which is abolished; and the department to which
the powers, duties, functions, and responsibilities of the agency are
transferred shall be substituted for the original party agency without
necessity for amendment of any document to substitute the name of the
department or the name or title of any subdivision, official, employee,
or other agent or representative of the department.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-G:15

 **21-G:15 Protection of Obligations. –**
                                             
 I. The general court hereby specifically states that this chapter is
in no way and to no extent intended to, nor shall it be construed in any
manner to, impair the contractual or other obligations of any agency
abolished by the general court or of the state of New Hampshire. It is
hereby specifically provided that all obligations of any agency
abolished, whose powers, duties, functions, and responsibilities are
transferred in accordance with this chapter, hereafter shall be deemed
to be the obligations of the department to which the powers, duties,
functions, and responsibilities of the agency are transferred, and of
its commissioner, to the same extent as if originally made by them. In
like manner, and in order to prevent any violation of the provisions,
terms, or conditions of any gift, donation, deed, will, trust, or other
instrument or disposition by which property of any kind has been vested
in an agency abolished by the general court, or diversion from the
purposes for which such property was thus vested in any such agency, it
is hereby specifically provided that each such instrument or disposition
hereafter shall be deemed to have been vested in the department to which
the powers, duties, functions, and responsibilities of the agency are
transferred, and its commissioner, in the same manner and to the same
extent as if originally so done.
                                             
 II. The department to which the powers, duties, functions, and
responsibilities of each such agency are transferred and its
commissioner shall be the successor in every way to each such agency,
including all of the obligations and debts of each such agency. All
funds heretofore dedicated by or under authority of the constitution and
laws of this state, or any of its subdivisions, to the payment of any
bonds issued for construction or improvements for any institution or
facility under the control of any such agency shall continue to be
collected and dedicated to the payment of those bonds. In like manner,
all other dedications and allocations of revenues and sources of
revenues heretofore made shall continue in the same manner, to the same
extent, and for the same purposes as were provided prior to the
enactment of this chapter, and shall so continue, notwithstanding the
passage of any laws by the general court relative to reorganization of
the executive branch.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-G:16

 **21-G:16 Effect on Federal Law. –** This chapter and any laws
enacted by the general court relative to executive branch reorganization
shall not be construed or applied in any way which will prevent full
compliance by the state, or any department, office, or agency thereof,
with the requirements of any act of the Congress of the United States or
any regulation made thereunder by which federal aid or other federal
assistance has been or hereafter is made available to this state, or any
department, office, agency, or subdivision thereof; and such compliance
hereafter shall be accomplished by the commissioner insofar as such
compliance affects any abolished agency whose powers, duties, functions,
and responsibilities are transferred in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and any laws enacted by the general court relative to
executive branch reorganization.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-G:17

 **21-G:17 Transfer of Property. –** All books, papers, records and
unexpended appropriations or other funds, actions, and other property of
every kind, movable and immovable, real and personal, heretofore
possessed, controlled, or used by each agency abolished whose powers,
duties, functions and responsibilities are transferred in accordance
with this chapter and any laws enacted by the general court relative to
executive branch reorganization are hereby transferred to the department
to which such powers, duties, functions, and responsibilities are
transferred.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-G:18

 **21-G:18 Transfer of Employees. –** All employees heretofore
engaged in the performance of duties in each agency abolished whose
powers, duties, functions, and responsibilities are transferred in
accordance with this chapter and any laws enacted by the general court
relative to executive branch reorganization are hereby transferred to
the department to which such powers, duties, functions, and
responsibilities are transferred to the extent the commissioner deems
necessary to carry out the functions of the abolished agency and shall,
insofar as practicable and necessary, continue to perform the duties
heretofore performed, subject to applicable personnel statutes.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-G:19

 **21-G:19 Reference to Abolished Agency. –** Wherever any agency
abolished, whose powers, duties, functions, and responsibilities are
transferred in accordance with this chapter and any laws enacted by the
general court relative to executive branch reorganization, is referred
to or designated by any law or contract or other document after the
effective date of the abolition of such agency, such reference or
designation shall be deemed to apply to the department to which the
transfer is made or to its commissioner.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-G:20

 **21-G:20 New Agencies and Programs. –**
                                             
 I. After July 1, 1983, no agency, as defined in RSA 21-G:5, III,
shall be established unless it shall be structured in accordance with
this chapter.
                                             
 II. After July 1, 1983, no new powers, duties, functions,
responsibilities or programs shall be assigned to any agency, as defined
in RSA 21-G:5, III, except an agency which exists on July 1, 1983, or an
agency established by the general court in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and any laws enacted by the general court
relative to executive branch reorganization.

**Source.** 1983, 372:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

Code of Ethics
--------------

### Section 21-G:21

 **21-G:21 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Agency'' means any executive branch agency, department,
division, board, commission, or entity of the executive branch.
                                             
 I-a. "Classified employee'' means any person in the state classified
service system as defined in RSA 21-I:49.
                                             
 II. "Conflict of interest'' means a situation, circumstance, or
financial interest which has the potential to cause a private interest
to interfere with the proper exercise of a public duty.
                                             
 II-a. "Executive branch official'' means the governor, members of
the executive council, every commissioned, unclassified, or
nonclassified executive branch employee other than one elected by the
legislature, every constitutional official as defined by RSA 15-B:2, II,
and any person other than a classified employee who conducts business on
behalf of the governor, an executive branch official, or executive
branch agency, including a volunteer.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 2004, 214:1. 2006, 21:1, 10, III-V, eff. June 2, 2006. 2016,
57:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 21-G:22

 **21-G:22 Conflict of Interest. –** Executive branch officials and
classified employees shall avoid conflicts of interest. Executive branch
officials and classified employees shall not participate in any matter
in which they, or their spouse or dependents, have a private interest
which may directly or indirectly affect or influence the performance of
their duties.

**Source.** 2004, 214:1. 2006, 21:2, eff. June 2, 2006. 2016, 57:2, eff.
July 4, 2016.

### Section 21-G:23

 **21-G:23 Misuse of Position. –** No executive branch official or
classified employee shall:
                                             
 I. Disclose or use confidential or privileged information acquired
in the performance of his or her duties for the state for personal
benefit or for financial gain.
                                             
 II. Use his or her position with the state to secure privileges or
advantages for himself or herself, which are not generally available to
governmental employees, or to secure governmental privileges or
advantages for others to which they are not otherwise entitled.

**Source.** 2004, 214:1. 2006, 21:2. 2009, 239:2, eff. July 16, 2009.
2016, 57:3, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 21-G:24

 **21-G:24 Acceptance of Campaign Contributions. –** An executive
branch official or classified employee who is a candidate for an
elective office that is not subject to the reporting requirements of RSA
664 and who accepts a political contribution from any person or entity
which is or is likely to become subject to that executive branch
official's or classified employee's duties shall make a disclosure of
such contributions to the secretary of state within 5 days of receipt of
such contributions. The disclosure shall be in writing and on such form
as the secretary of state shall prescribe.

**Source.** 2004, 214:1. 2006, 21:2, eff. June 2, 2006. 2016, 57:4, eff.
July 4, 2016.

### Section 21-G:25

 **21-G:25 Restrictions on Simultaneous Employment and Public
Service. –** Volunteer service shall not be used, directly or
indirectly, for personal financial gain, or to facilitate non-public
communications with executive branch officials or classified employees
for the purpose of promoting or advancing any matter on behalf of a
third party, or to influence executive branch officials or classified
employees in the performance of their duties. In furtherance of this
prohibition:


                                             [Paragraph I effective until December 7, 2016; see also paragraph I set
out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. No person shall serve as a public employee, as defined by RSA
15-B:2, IX, or serve as an appointee or volunteer for any multi-branch
commission, committee, board, or similar governmental entity, and
simultaneously be a person who has a duty to register as a lobbyist
pursuant to RSA 15, or is employed by, or maintains an ownership
interest in, any entity which employs a registered lobbyist.


                                             [Paragraph I effective December 7, 2016; see also paragraph I set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. No person shall serve as a public employee, as defined by RSA
15-B:2, VIII, or serve as an appointee or volunteer for any multi-branch
commission, committee, board, or similar governmental entity, and
simultaneously be a person who has a duty to register as a lobbyist
pursuant to RSA 15, or is employed by, or maintains an ownership
interest in, any entity which employs a registered lobbyist.
                                             
 II. No person shall serve as a public employee in a position that
establishes policy or adjudicates matters before any agency while
maintaining any ownership interest in, or being employed by, any entity,
engaged in promoting or opposing, directly or indirectly, any
legislation pending or proposed before the general court, or promoting
or opposing any action or inaction on any matter, contract, license,
permit, or administrative rule, proposed or pending, before the
executive branch.
                                             
 III. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the prohibitions of RSA
21-G:25, I and II, shall not apply to:
                                             
 (a) Appearances before the courts or any adjudicative
proceedings, or non-adjudicative processes, as defined by RSA 541-A;
                                             
 (b) Service in a position subject to appointment by the governor
and council;
                                             
 (c) Testimony or participation in any public meeting, or service
on any commission, committee, board, panel, or other similar
governmental entity that is subject to the public meeting and notice
requirements of RSA 91-A, or the public right of access mandated by part
1, article 8 of the New Hampshire constitution.
                                             
 (d) Volunteer public service related entirely to a ceremonial,
celebratory, historical, or recreational program or event; public health
or safety incident or drill, or consumer protection assistance;
                                             
 (e) Ownership of publicly-traded stock; or
                                             
 (f) A public employee, appointee, or volunteer's personal
application for any license, permit, or ruling from a state agency.

**Source.** 2004, 214:1. 2006, 21:2, eff. June 2, 2006. 2016, 57:5, eff.
July 4, 2016; 328:16, eff. Dec. 7, 2016.

### Section 21-G:26

 **21-G:26 Employment Restrictions. –** For 6 months after leaving
office or employment with the state, no executive branch official or
classified employee shall appear as a lobbyist:
                                             
 I. To promote or oppose directly any specific legislation pending or
proposed before the general court; or
                                             
 II. To directly promote or oppose action or inaction on any matter,
contract, license, permit, or administrative rule pending before the
executive branch or with regard to any matter over which that executive
branch official or classified employee had personal and direct
responsibility while in state government.

**Source.** 2004, 214:1. 2006, 21:2, eff. June 2, 2006. 2016, 57:6, eff.
July 4, 2016.

### Section 21-G:26-a

 **21-G:26-a Nepotism. –** No executive branch official or classified
employee shall directly hire, evaluate, set the compensation or salary
for, supervise, or terminate the employment of any full-time or
part-time employee, temporary employee, or member of a state board or
commission if such employee or member is related to such official in one
of the following ways:
                                             
 I. Spouse;
                                             
 II. Parent by birth or adoption;
                                             
 III. Son or daughter by birth or adoption;
                                             
 IV. Stepson or stepdaughter;
                                             
 V. Brother or sister by whole or half blood or by adoption; or
                                             
 VI. Mother-in-law, father-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law,
daughter-in-law, or son-in-law.

**Source.** 2009, 239:1, eff. July 16, 2009. 2016, 57:7, eff. July 4,
2016.

### Section 21-G:27

 **21-G:27 Supplemental State Agency Ethical Codes. –** In addition
to this code, each agency may promulgate a supplemental ethics code to
address issues specific to that agency. In the event of a conflict with
the provisions of this code, a stricter provision of an agency code
shall govern. To the extent that this code or an ethics code adopted by
an agency shall apply to classified employees, this code, or an agency
code, shall be interpreted to be consistent with the provisions of the
classified employees' collective bargaining agreement and the state
personnel rules.

**Source.** 2004, 214:1. 2006, 21:2, eff. June 2, 2006.

### Section 21-G:28

 **21-G:28 Financial Disclosure. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2006, 21:10, VI, eff.
June 2, 2006.
                                             ]

### Section 21-G:28-a

 **21-G:28-a Filing Officer; Appointment; Duties and
Responsibilities. –**
                                             
 I. The secretary of state shall designate an individual to serve as
the state filing officer, who shall be responsible for the
administration of this subdivision.
                                             
 II. The filing officer shall:
                                             
 (a) Review the administrative requirements of this subdivision
and the submission of forms pursuant to RSA 15-A and RSA 15-B.
                                             
 (b) Respond to any inquiries from candidates for public office
and executive branch officials on the administrative requirements of
this subdivision and the submission of forms pursuant to RSA 15-A and
RSA 15-B.
                                             
 (c) As soon as practicable after the RSA 15-A filing deadline,
forward a list of those individuals who have not filed a RSA 15-A form
or whose forms are incomplete to the legislative ethics committee, or
the executive branch ethics committee, or the attorney general, as may
be appropriate.
                                             
 (d) Not be authorized to render legal advice.
                                             
 III. Each appointing authority under RSA 15-A:3 shall provide the
secretary of state with the name and address and appointment date of any
person appointed by him or her to any board, commission, committee, or
board of directors after the effective date of this section.
                                             
 IV. The secretary of state:
                                             
 (a) Shall maintain a list, as reasonably as practicable, of
public officials required to submit forms pursuant to RSA 15-A; and
                                             
 (b) May enter into memoranda of understandings with other state
agencies or branches of government to facilitate requirements of this
subdivision.
                                             
 V. Any state agency, commission, or committee authorized by statute
to issue opinions interpreting a state ethics law shall submit a copy of
any written decision or opinion to the state filing officer and to the
secretary of state. Such written decisions or opinions may be redacted
prior to submission in order to protect confidential or nonpublic
information.

**Source.** 2009, 203:7, eff. Sept. 13, 2009.

### Section 21-G:29

 **21-G:29 Executive Branch Ethics Committee Established;
Jurisdiction; Membership. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established an executive branch ethics committee
to issue guidelines, interpretive rulings, and advisory opinions
relative to standards for ethical conduct in the executive branch and to
resolve, through procedures established under RSA 21-G:32, issues,
questions, or complaints involving executive branch officials.
                                             
 II. The jurisdiction of the committee shall consist of matters
arising under the executive branch code of ethics, RSA 21-G:21-27, RSA
15-A, RSA 15-B, and rules or guidelines adopted thereunder, as applied
to current or former executive branch officials, provided that the
committee may only consider a complaint against a former executive
branch official if the complaint is filed no later than 180 days after
the day the official resigned, retired, or otherwise left his or her
position.
                                             
 III. The committee shall consist of 7 members, nominated in the
following manner:
                                             
 (a) Three members, nominated by the governor, one of whom shall
be a member of the democratic party, one of whom shall be a member of
the republican party, and one of whom shall have no political party
affiliation.
                                             
 (b) Two members, nominated by the secretary of state, one of whom
shall be a member of the democratic party and one of whom shall be a
member of the republican party.
                                             
 (c) Two members, nominated by the treasurer, one of whom shall be
a member of the democratic party and one of whom shall be a member of
the republican party.
                                             
 IV. All nominations under paragraph III shall be confirmed by the
governor and executive council.
                                             
 V. Persons appointed to the committee shall be qualified by
excellent personal reputation and by education or experience in public
service, in resolving ethical issues facing persons in public service,
or in the law. No executive branch official shall serve as a committee
member, and no person who has registered as a lobbyist under RSA 15:1
shall serve as a committee member, or for 6 months following the
expiration of such registration.
                                             
 VI. Committee members shall serve terms of 3 years and until their
successors are appointed and qualified. However, initially, the governor
shall nominate one member for a one-year term, one member for a 2-year
term and one member for a 3-year term; the secretary of state shall
nominate one member for a 2-year term, and one member for a 3-year term;
the treasurer shall nominate one member for a one-year term and one
member for a 2-year term. Initial nominations to the committee shall be
made no later than 90 days after the effective date of this section. The
initial appointments shall begin on July 1, 2006 and end on June 30 of
the appropriate year. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of any
unexpired term. During their term of appointment, members may not hold
or campaign for partisan elective office, serve as an officer of any
political party or political committee, permit their names to be used in
support of or in opposition to any local or state partisan candidate,
participate in any way in any local or state partisan election campaign,
make a contribution as defined in RSA 664:2 to any local or state
candidate for office or state political committee, or act as or assist a
lobbyist required to be registered under RSA 15:1.
                                             
 VII. The governor shall designate one of the governor's appointees
as chair, who shall convene the first meeting, which shall take place no
later than 30 days after a majority of the membership has been
appointed. The members shall elect by majority vote a vice-chair and
secretary from the remaining members.
                                             
 VIII. Committee members shall receive no compensation, except that
committee members shall receive mileage at the state employee rate.

**Source.** 2004, 214:1. 2006, 21:3, eff. June 2, 2006. 2015, 82:1, eff.
Aug. 1, 2015. 2016, 57:8, 9, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 21-G:30

 **21-G:30 Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The committee shall be authorized to:
                                             
 (a) Issue guidelines consistent with the executive branch code of
ethics, RSA 21-G:21-27, RSA 15-A, and RSA 15-B, relative to proper and
appropriate conduct for individuals relating to the performance of their
duties as executive branch officials. Such guidelines shall be
consistent with statute.
                                             
 (b) Issue interpretative rulings explaining and clarifying any
law, guideline, or rule within the jurisdiction of the committee.
                                             
 (c) Render advisory opinions in accordance with RSA 21-G:31-a.
                                             
 (d) Receive sworn complaints, investigate allegations of
violations of this subdivision by executive branch officials and make
appropriate findings of fact and conclusions with respect to such
conduct.
                                             
 (e) Investigate any unauthorized disclosure of information by any
committee member or assistant and report to the appropriate authority
any allegation which it finds to be substantiated.
                                             
 II. A quorum of 4 members shall be required for all actions of the
committee. All actions of the committee shall require an affirmative
vote of 4 or more members of the committee before becoming effective,
except that a vote to summarily dismiss a complaint shall be by
unanimous vote of all members present, and a vote pursuant to RSA
21-G:31, VII shall require only a majority of the members present and
voting. The committee shall request to meet with the legislative ethics
committee established under RSA 14-B at least twice yearly to facilitate
uniformity in the interpretation of statutory provisions.
                                             
 III. The committee shall provide the legislative ethics committee
with copies of all publicly issued guidelines, procedures, decisions, or
opinions.

**Source.** 2006, 21:3. 2007, 194:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2008. 2015, 82:2, eff.
Aug. 1, 2015. 2016, 57:10, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 21-G:31

 **21-G:31 Complaints; Procedure. –**
                                             
 I. Each complaint shall be submitted in writing and signed under
oath by the complainant. The sworn complaint shall be filed
confidentially with the committee and shall contain the name and address
of the complainant. Before any other action is taken by the committee,
the executive branch official complained against shall be furnished with
a copy of the complaint and a copy shall be sent to each member of the
committee for review. The committee may initiate a complaint on its own
motion against any individual the committee has reason to believe has
violated any law, guideline, rule, or regulation within the committee's
jurisdiction. The committee shall promptly examine each sworn complaint
and:
                                             
 (a) Upon first examination, if by a unanimous vote of all members
present it determines that a complaint is frivolous, scurrilous,
retaliatory in nature, or plainly not within the committee's
jurisdiction, the committee may summarily discharge the complaint
without further meeting or proceeding. The committee shall notify the
respondent and complainant in writing of its action.
                                             
 (b) For any complaint not summarily discharged, the committee
shall conduct an initial review to ascertain whether the committee has
jurisdiction to consider the complaint or whether the complaint is
without merit or is unfounded. If the committee concludes that the
alleged conduct is not within the committee's jurisdiction, is without
merit, or is unfounded, the committee shall dismiss the complaint and
shall report such conclusion to the complainant and to the executive
branch official, with an explanation of the basis of such
determination.
                                             
 II. If the committee, by recorded vote, concludes that the complaint
is within its jurisdiction and may have merit, the committee may proceed
to conduct a preliminary investigation. Upon completion of its
preliminary investigation, the committee shall conclude by recorded vote
that:
                                             
 (a) No violation occurred and no further action is appropriate;
                                             
 (b) The violation is inadvertent, technical, or of a *de minimis*
nature and shall be addressed by informal methods; or
                                             
 (c) There are reasonable grounds to believe a violation occurred
and formal proceedings shall be instituted to inquire further into the
complaint. In that event, the committee shall issue a formal statement
of charges and proceed to a hearing on the complaint.
                                             
 III. Upon completion of the hearing, the committee shall conclude by
recorded vote that:
                                             
 (a) No violation occurred and no further action is appropriate;
                                             
 (b) No action is appropriate because there is not clear and
convincing evidence that a violation occurred;
                                             
 (c) Based upon clear and convincing evidence, a violation
occurred, but such violation does not justify formal disciplinary action
and shall be resolved by informal methods; or
                                             
 (d) Based upon clear and convincing evidence, a violation
occurred, and the violation was of a serious nature so as to warrant
formal action. In the case of a finding of violation by a former
executive branch official, the committee may issue a censure. In the
case of a finding of violation by a current executive branch official,
the committee may issue a censure or recommend disciplinary action by
the appropriate body, including but not limited to a recommendation for
disciplinary action by the executive branch official's supervisor,
removal from office under RSA 4:1, or, in the case of the governor,
executive council member, or other officer of the state, impeachment or
other appropriate action pursuant to part II, article 38 of the New
Hampshire constitution. In addition to any action taken under this
subparagraph, the committee may refer the case to the department of
justice for criminal prosecution. In the event that conduct may
constitute both a criminal act and misconduct subject to the
jurisdiction of the committee, the committee may on its own motion or by
motion of the attorney general suspend its investigation or a pending
hearing for the time period reasonably necessary to avoid compromising a
criminal prosecution.
                                             
 IV. Any person who knowingly or willfully swears falsely to a sworn
complaint does so under penalty of perjury, and the committee may refer
any such case to the department of justice for prosecution.
                                             
 V. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph and
notwithstanding any other provision of law, all proceedings,
information, communications, materials, papers, files, and transcripts,
written or oral, received or developed by the committee in the course of
its work, shall be confidential. The committee shall first examine any
sworn complaint and shall conduct its initial review and preliminary
investigation of complaints in a confidential manner, unless otherwise
requested by the executive branch official complained against. The
committee shall conduct formal proceedings, other than its
deliberations, in public session. The committee's deliberations on
complaints shall be conducted in nonpublic session. Upon completion of
the preliminary investigation conducted under paragraph II or at the
conclusion of formal proceedings under paragraph III, the committee
shall make available for public inspection all records, other than its
work product and internal memoranda relating to the complaint.
                                             
 VI. In proceedings under this subdivision, the committee shall have
the power to issue subpoenas and administer oaths. Such subpoena powers
may be exercised for the committee by the chairperson or legal counsel
to the committee. The fees for witnesses shall be consistent with RSA
516:16 and shall be borne by the committee or the party requesting the
subpoena.
                                             
 VII. Any member of the committee who is directly or indirectly
involved in any complaint before the committee or who otherwise has
personal knowledge of facts material to the determination of the
complaint shall not participate in any proceedings regarding the
complaint. In the event that recusals under this paragraph reduce the
number of participating members to fewer than 4, the remaining
participating members shall designate an alternate or alternates
sufficient to increase the committee to 4 members, to serve on the
committee for that case only.

**Source.** 2006, 21:3, eff. June 2, 2006. 2015, 82:3, 4, eff. Aug. 1,
2015. 2016, 57:11, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 21-G:31-a

 **21-G:31-a Advisory Opinions; Procedure. –**
                                             
 I. Any executive branch official may request, in writing, an
advisory opinion regarding the application of any law, guideline, or
rule within the committee's jurisdiction to a specific factual situation
pertinent to the requester's conduct or proposed conduct.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all proceedings,
information, communications, materials, papers, files, and transcripts,
written or oral, received or developed by the committee in the course of
its work in response to a request for an advisory opinion, except for
the opinion itself, shall be confidential. The advisory opinion shall be
made public but the name of the person seeking the opinion and any
information in the opinion that would identify such person shall be
nonpublic.
                                             
 II. Any advisory opinion concerning any person subject to the
provisions of this subdivision who acted in reliance thereon, shall be
binding upon the committee, and it shall be an absolute defense in any
complaint brought under this subdivision or prosecution under RSA 15-A
or RSA 15-B that the person complained against acted in reliance upon
such advisory opinion.

**Source.** 2016, 57:12, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 21-G:31-b

 **21-G:31-b Interpretive Rulings; Procedure. –** The committee may
initiate or any person may request an interpretive ruling explaining or
clarifying a law, guideline, or rule of general applicability within the
committee's jurisdiction. If the committee determines that a requested
interpretive ruling will be helpful to those individuals under the
committee's jurisdiction, it shall take up the request in public,
receive testimony and other information that it deems helpful on the
issue, and render a public ruling.

**Source.** 2016, 57:12, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 21-G:32

 **21-G:32 Rules; Procedures and Standards. –** The committee shall
adopt, publish, and make available to the public rules governing its
procedures, including provisions for disqualification of members for
conflict of interest and provisions for the committee to discipline its
members for breach of committee procedures, consistent with the
procedures set forth in RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 2006, 21:3, eff. June 2, 2006. 2016, 57:13, eff. July 4,
2016.

### Section 21-G:33

 **21-G:33 Committee Administration and Staff. –** The committee
shall be administratively attached to the department of justice, which
shall provide appropriate administrative and investigative staff and
legal counsel in support of the committee's activities, at the
committee's request. Files and records of the committee shall be
protected against access other than by members of the committee and
other persons specifically authorized by the committee.

**Source.** 2006, 21:3, eff. June 2, 2006.

### Section 21-G:34

 **21-G:34 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who knowingly or willfully violates RSA 21-G:21-27 or
makes unauthorized disclosure of confidential matters or materials
contrary to RSA 21-G:31, or interferes with or obstructs lawful
activities of the committee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
subject to disciplinary action as provided in RSA 21-G:31, III(d) and
other applicable law.
                                             
 II. In the case of any person convicted under this section, the
court may order restitution.

**Source.** 2006, 21:3, eff. June 2, 2006.

### Section 21-G:35

 **21-G:35 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared
to be severable.

**Source.** 2006, 21:3, eff. June 2, 2006.

Financial Information Regarding Requests for Bids and Proposals
---------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 21-G:36

 **21-G:36 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Agency'' means any executive branch department, commission,
board, institution, bureau, office, or other executive branch entity
established in the state constitution, statutes, session laws, or
executive orders.
                                             
 II. "Bidder'' means a contractor, supplier, or vendor who responds
to an RFB, RFP, RFA, or similar request for submission with an offer to
sell goods or services.
                                             
 III. "Request for application (RFA)'' means an invitation to submit
an offer to provide identified services to an agency where the amount of
funding available and the particulars of how the services are to be
provided are defined by the agency and where the selection of qualifying
vendors will be according to identified criteria as provided in RSA
21-I:22-a and RSA 21-I:22-b.
                                             
 IV. "Request for bid (RFB)'' means an invitation to submit an offer
to provide specified commodities or services to an agency at a price
proposed by the bidder where selection is based on the lowest price
meeting or exceeding specifications as stated in the bid.
                                             
 V. "Request for proposal (RFP)'' means an invitation to submit a
proposal to provide specified goods or services, where the particulars
of the goods or services and the price are proposed by the vendor and,
for proposals meeting or exceeding specifications, selection is
according to identified criteria as provided in RSA 21-I:22-a and RSA
21-I:22-b.
                                             
 VI. "Selected vendor'' means the qualified bidder which has been
identified by the agency as having received the best score for its
proposal according to the criteria set forth in an RFP, RFA, or similar
request for submission, as provided in RSA 21-I:22-a and RSA 21-I:22-b,
or which has been identified by the agency as providing the best price
as set forth in an RFB.
                                             
 VII. "Vendor'' means a person or entity who offers products or
services for sale.

**Source.** 2015, 185:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 21-G:37

 **21-G:37 Financial Information Regarding Requests for Bids or
Requests for Proposals. –**
                                             
 I. In order to protect the integrity of the bidding process,
notwithstanding RSA 91-A:4, no information shall be available to the
public, or to the members of the general court or its staff concerning
specific responses to requests for bids (RFBs), requests for proposals
(RFPs), requests for applications (RFAs), or similar requests for
submission for the purpose of procuring goods or services or awarding
contracts from the time the request is made public until the closing
date for responses.
                                             
 II. On the closing date for responses, the agency shall:
                                             
 (a) In the case of an RFB, hold a public bid opening at which it
shall disclose the name of the bidders which submitted timely bids and
the prices offered.
                                             
 (b) In the case of an RFP, RFA, or similar request for
submission, post the number of responses received on the agency
website.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding RSA 91-A:4, no information other than that
specified in paragraph II shall be available to the public or to the
members of the general court or its staff concerning specific RFBs,
RFPs, RFAs, or similar requests for submission made by any state agency
from the closing date for responses until the contract is approved by
the governor and executive council, or, if the contract does not require
approval from the governor and executive council, until the contract has
been actually awarded as determined by the issuing agency, except:
                                             
 (a) In the case of an RFB that requires approval from the
governor and executive council, the issuing agency shall, at least 5
business days prior to submitting the contract to the department of
administrative services, post the vendors' names and respective prices
for each responding vendor on its website.
                                             
 (b) In the case of an RFB that does not require approval from the
governor and executive council, the issuing agency shall, at minimum,
post the vendors' names and respective prices for each responding vendor
on its website at the time that the RFB is awarded.
                                             
 (c) In the case of an RFP, RFA, or similar request for submission
that requires approval from the governor and executive council, the
issuing agency shall, at least 5 business days prior to submitting the
proposed contract to the department of administrative services, post the
rank or score for each responding vendor on its website.
                                             
 (d) In the case of an RFP, RFA, or similar request for submission
that does not require approval from the governor and executive council,
the issuing agency shall, at least 5 business days before final approval
of the proposed contract by the appropriate agency authority, post the
rank or score for each responding vendor on its website.
                                             
 IV. A bidder questioning an agency's identification of the selected
vendor may request that the agency review its selection process. Such
request shall be made in writing and be received by the agency within 5
business days after the rank or score is posted on the agency website.
The request shall specify all points on which the bidder believes the
agency erred in its process and shall contain such argument in support
of its position as the bidder seeks to present. In response, the issuing
agency shall review the process it followed for evaluating responses
and, within 5 business days of receiving the request for review, issue a
written response either affirming its initial selection of a vendor or
canceling the bid. In its request for review, a bidder shall not submit,
and an agency shall not accept nor consider, any substantive information
that was not included by the bidder in its original bid response. No
hearing shall be held in conjunction with a review. The outcome of the
agency's review shall not be subject to appeal.
                                             
 V. The head of the issuing agency may waive the requirements of
paragraphs II through IV in the event of an emergency situation or to
prevent the loss of federal or other funds subject to recapture. Each
agency shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to
circumstances constituting an emergency or loss of funding under this
paragraph.
                                             
 VI. (a) When an agency cancels an RFB, RFP, RFA, or similar request
for submission, terminates the selection process, or otherwise does not
select a bidder, no information shall be available to the public or to
the members of the general court or its staff concerning the RFB, RFP,
RFA, or similar request for submission, notwithstanding the provisions
of RSA 91-A:4, for a period of 2 years following the cancellation,
termination, or other non-selection, subject to subparagraph (b).
                                             
 (b) If, within 2 years following the cancellation, termination,
or other non-selection, a new RFB, RFP, RFA, or similar request for
submissions is issued, which the issuing agency determines is
substantially related to the original RFB, RFP, RFA, or similar request
for submission, information concerning the original bid or proposal
shall, if requested and upon payment of any costs established pursuant
to RSA 91-A:4, IV, be made available only after selection of a bidder on
the new request for submission, but only to the extent that such
information is not exempt from disclosure under RSA 91-A:5 or other law.

**Source.** 2015, 185:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016. 2016, 55:1, eff. May 5,
2016.

### Section 21-G:38

 **21-G:38 Ethics. –**
                                             
 I. From the time the bid is published until a contract is awarded,
no bidder shall offer or give, directly or indirectly, any gift, expense
reimbursement, or honorarium, as defined by RSA 15-B, to any elected
official, public official, public employee, constitutional official, or
family member of any such official or employee who will select,
evaluate, or award an RFB, RFP, RFA, or similar request for submission.
Any bidder that violates this section shall be subject to prosecution
for an offense under RSA 640:2. Every RFB, RFP, RFA, or similar request
for submissions issued by any state agency shall contain a provision
stating that any bidder who has been convicted of an offense based on
conduct in violation of this section, which has not been annulled, or
who is subject to a pending criminal charge for such an offense, shall
be disqualified from bidding on the RFB, RFP, RFA, or similar request
for submission and every such bidder shall be disqualified from bidding
on any RFB, RFP, RFA, or similar request for submission issued by any
state agency. An agency which becomes aware of any such charge or
conviction shall notify the department of administrative services, which
department shall maintain a list of vendors reported to it and make that
list available for agency reference on the state's internal intranet
system. A bidder that was disqualified under this section because of a
pending criminal charge which is subsequently dismissed, results in an
acquittal, or is annulled, may notify the department of administrative
services, which shall note that information on the list maintained on
the state's internal intranet system, except that in the case of
annulment, the information shall be deleted from the list.
                                             
 II. No elected official, public official, public employee,
constitutional official, or family member of any such official or
employee who was, is, or will be involved in the selection, evaluation,
or award of an RFB, RFP, RFA, or similar request for submission, shall
accept any gift, expense reimbursement, or honorarium, as defined in RSA
15-B, from a bidder.
                                             
 III. Each agency and executive branch official and employee shall
avoid any situation that might constitute a conflict of interest, misuse
of position, or otherwise violate the code of ethics under RSA
21-G:21-27.

**Source.** 2015, 185:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016. 2016, 55:2, eff. May 5,
2016.
