---
title: 'CHAPTER 21-H DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 21-H
                                             
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS
-------------------------

### Section 21-H:1

 **21-H:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to improve the
administration of state government by consolidating and providing
unified direction of policies, procedures and programs in the field of
corrections. It is the intent of the general court that this
consolidation lead to improved integration of state corrections programs
and increased efficiency and effectiveness in the administration of
these programs. It is also the intent of the general court that the
department of corrections provide for consistency and continuity in the
collection, retention and analysis of management information and records
and reduction in the administrative and operating costs of corrections
agencies.

**Source.** 1983, 461:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-H:2

 **21-H:2 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter, the following
words shall have the following meanings:
                                             
 I. "Adult'' means any person 18 years of age or older or any person
under the age of 18 who has been certified as an adult pursuant to RSA
169-B:24.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the individual in charge of the operations
of the department of corrections, who is directly responsible to the
governor.
                                             
 III. "Correctional facility'', "facility'', or "institution'' means
any building, enclosure, space, or structure used for the confinement of
persons committed to the custody of the commissioner, or for any other
matter related to such confinement.
                                             
 IV. "Delinquent'' or "delinquent child'' means a person who has
committed an offense before reaching the age of 18 years which would be
a felony or misdemeanor under the criminal code of this state if
committed by an adult.
                                             
 V. "Department'' means the department of corrections.
                                             
 VI. "Division'' means a principal unit within the department, which
is directly responsible to the commissioner.
                                             
 VII. "Inmate'' means any adult committed by law to the custody of
the commissioner.
                                             
 VIII. "Offender'' means any adult person convicted of a crime or
offense under the laws of this state.

**Source.** 1983, 461:1. 1995, 308:97, 98, eff. Jan. 1, 1996. 2014,
215:1, 2, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 21-H:3

 **21-H:3 Establishment; General Functions. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a department of corrections, an
agency of the state.
                                             
 II. The department of corrections, through its officials, shall be
responsible for:
                                             
 (a) Providing for, maintaining and administering such state
correctional facilities and programs as may be required for the custody,
safekeeping, control, correctional treatment and rehabilitation of
inmates.
                                             
 (b) Supervising persons placed on probation and persons released
on parole and administering probation and parole services.
                                             
 (c) Acting in an advisory capacity in assisting law enforcement
agencies and communities in the prevention of crime and delinquency.
                                             
 (d) Ensuring that victims of crime are treated in a manner
consistent with RSA 21-M:8-k.

**Source.** 1983, 461:1. 2009, 283:1, eff. Sept. 27, 2009.

### Section 21-H:4

 **21-H:4 Internal Organizational Units. –** The department shall
include the following internal organizational units performing the
following major functions:
                                             
 I. The division of administration, under the supervision of a
director of administration, who shall, in accordance with applicable
laws:
                                             
 (a) Be responsible to provide for:
                                             
 (1) Accounting, purchasing, and budget control.
                                             
 (2) Property, contracts, and grant management.
                                             
 (3) Assistance to the commissioner with short and long range
department-wide planning activities.
                                             
 (b) Exercise, subject to the supervision of the commissioner,
superior authority over the directors of the other divisions of the
department relative to areas of responsibility specified in this
paragraph.
                                             
 (c) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. The division of field services, under the supervision of a
director of field services, who shall be responsible for supervising
adults placed on probation and inmates placed on parole.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. The division of medical and psychiatric services, under the
joint supervision of a medical director and a non-medical director, who
shall respectively have the duties and responsibilities provided in RSA
622:43, and who shall act in an advisory and coordinative capacity in
assisting other agencies and activities in the provision of mental
health and psychiatric services to persons involved in the criminal
justice system.
                                             
 V. The professional standards director, under the supervision of the
commissioner, who shall:
                                             
 (a) Conduct and supervise investigations and audits relating to
all aspects of the operations and programs of the department, including
but not limited to, complaints and grievances.
                                             
 (b) Coordinate and recommend policies designed to promote
economy, efficiency, and effectiveness in the administration of the
department, and to detect and prevent fraud and abuse in departmental
programs and operations.
                                             
 (c) Advise the commissioner concerning problems or deficiencies
relating to the administration of departmental programs and operations,
and provide advice on the necessity for, and progress of, correctional
action.
                                             
 (d) Perform other duties as assigned by the commissioner.
                                             
 VI. The director of security and training, under the supervision of
the commissioner, who shall:
                                             
 (a) Be responsible for the security and safety of the operations
in all facilities and ensure the consistency of the operations within
departmental policies.
                                             
 (b) Review and research inquiries, complaints, and grievances
from the inmate population and provide a timely, proper response.
                                             
 (c) Monitor and ensure the proper functioning of the facilities
security program.
                                             
 (d) Oversee and ensure the proper training and development of
staff.
                                             
 (e) Oversee and ensure the proper functioning of the emergency
management program.
                                             
 (f) Perform other duties as assigned by the commissioner.
                                             
 VII. The director of community corrections, under the supervision of
the commissioner, who shall:
                                             
 (a) Direct and oversee departmental services for inmates
preparing for release from institutional settings into the community.
                                             
 (b) Direct and oversee departmental services for individuals
under probation or parole supervision in order to achieve stability
within the community and reduce recidivism.
                                             
 (c) Operate and administer all transitional work and housing
units where inmates are assigned for minimum security and work release.
                                             
 (d) Serve as the primary liaison between the department and
community-based service providers, state courts, and municipal, county,
and state entities with common issues and responsibilities, including
substance abuse and mental health issues.
                                             
 (e) Work with the department of justice and other state and
federal agencies to identify, secure, and manage grant funds to
supplement services available to offenders under departmental
supervision, including but not limited to housing and employment
assistance, substance abuse treatment, mental health treatment, and
medical and prescription services.
                                             
 VIII. The victim-offender dialogue program which shall be a
victim-initiated, voluntary program to assist crime victims who seek
access to restorative justice programs as provided under RSA 21-M:8-k,
II(u), under the direction of the victim services coordinator who
shall:
                                             
 (a) Implement and oversee the program.
                                             
 (b) Advocate for the rights of crime victims.
                                             
 (c) Provide corrections-based victim services including but not
limited to:
                                             
 (1) Notification of offender status changes.
                                             
 (2) Victim-initiated victim-offender dialogue.
                                             
 (3) Advocacy, safety, and support for victims during reduced
custody, offender re-entry, and hearings of the adult parole board.
                                             
Participation in the program shall not affect the court's decision
relative to sentencing, parole, or other types of supervised or
unsupervised release programs.

**Source.** 1983, 461:1. 1988, 170:1. 1993, 321:1, 2. 1996, 159:8. 1998,
270:1. 2008, 313:1, 2. 2009, 144:184, eff. July 1, 2009; 222:2, 8, eff.
June 30, 2009; 283:2, eff. Sept. 27, 2009.

### Section 21-H:5

 **21-H:5 Internal Structure. –**
                                             
 I. For its internal structure the department shall adhere to the
following standard terms:
                                             
 (a) The principal unit of the department shall be the division,
and each division shall be headed by a director.
                                             
 (b) The principal unit of the division shall be the bureau, and
each bureau shall be headed by an administrator.
                                             
 (c) The principal unit of the bureau shall be the section, and
each section shall be headed by a supervisor.
                                             
 (d) If further subdivision is necessary, a section may be divided
into units known as subsections, and each subsection shall be headed by
a chief.
                                             
 II. Whenever the commissioner determines that the administration of
the functions of the department may be more efficiently performed by
eliminating, merging, or consolidating existing statutory internal
units, or by establishing a new division, he shall present a plan to the
general court for its consideration.

**Source.** 1983, 461:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-H:6

 **21-H:6 Commissioner and Other Department Officials; Appointment;
Term. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department shall be appointed by the
governor, with the consent of the council, and shall serve for a term of
4 years from the date of appointment and until a successor is
appointed.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of the department shall nominate for
appointment by the governor, with the consent of the council, an
assistant commissioner who shall serve at the pleasure of the
commissioner.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall nominate for appointment by the
governor, with the consent of the council, a professional standards
director who shall serve at the pleasure of the commissioner.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner shall nominate for appointment by the governor,
with the consent of the council, a director of security and training who
shall serve at the pleasure of the commissioner.
                                             
 IV-a. The commissioner shall nominate for appointment by the
governor, with the consent of the council, a director of community
corrections who shall serve at the pleasure of the commissioner.
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall nominate for appointment by the governor,
with consent of the council, each division director and warden of all
the New Hampshire state prisons. All division directors and the wardens
shall serve at the pleasure of the commissioner.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner of the department shall nominate for
appointment by the governor, with the consent of the council,
physicians, and dentists who shall serve at the pleasure of the
commissioner.
                                             
 VII. Wardens, physicians, and dentists may be assigned to any
correctional facility at the discretion of the commissioner.

**Source.** 1983, 461:1. 1996, 159:3. 1999, 296:10. 2001, 179:1; 237:8,
9. 2007, 156:3. 2008, 313:3. 2009, 144:185, eff. July 1, 2009; 222:6,
eff. June 30, 2009.

### Section 21-H:7

 **21-H:7 Qualifications and Compensation of Certain Officials. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner, assistant commissioner, professional standards
director, director of security and training, director of community
corrections, and the division directors of the department shall be
qualified to hold such positions by reason of education and experience.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. The salaries of the commissioner, assistant commissioner,
professional standards director, director of security and training,
director of community corrections, and the division directors of the
department shall be as specified in RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 1983, 461:1. 2001, 237:10, 11. 2008, 313:4, 5, 10. 2009,
144:186, 187, eff. July 1, 2009; 222:3, 7, eff. June 30, 2009.

### Section 21-H:8

 **21-H:8 Powers and Duties of Commissioner. –** The commissioner
shall be the chief administrative officer of the department and shall
have the following powers and duties:
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall manage all operations of the department
and administer and enforce the laws with which he or the department is
charged. He shall report directly to the governor.
                                             
 II. To perform his duties, the commissioner shall have every power
enumerated in the laws, whether granted to the commissioner, the
department or any administrative unit of the department. In accordance
with these provisions, the commissioner shall:
                                             
 (a) Biennially compile a comprehensive program budget which
reflects all fiscal matters related to the operation of the department
and each program and activity of the department.
                                             
 (b) Adopt all rules of the department, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
whether the rulemaking authority delegated by the legislature is granted
to the commissioner, the department or any administrative unit or
subordinate official of the department either by this chapter or by
existing statutes.
                                             
 (c) Exercise general supervisory and appointing authority over
all department employees, subject to applicable personnel statutes and
rules.
                                             
 (d) Delegate authority to subordinates as the commissioner deems
necessary and appropriate, except that rulemaking authority shall not be
delegated. The commissioner shall provide by delegation for the
assistant commissioner, warden, or a division director to exercise
authority in the commissioner's absence. All such delegations shall be
made in writing, shall be disseminated to all division directors, shall
clearly delineate the authority delegated and the limitations thereto,
and shall be kept on file in the commissioner's office. The assistant
commissioner shall assume the duties of the commissioner in the event
that the commissioner becomes incapacitated and is unable to perform
such duties.
                                             
 (e) Adopt practices which will improve the efficiency of the
department and the provision of services to the citizens of the state.
                                             
 (f) Provide cooperation, at the request of the heads of
administratively attached agencies in order to:
                                             
 (1) Minimize or eliminate duplication of services and
jurisdictional conflicts;
                                             
 (2) Coordinate activities and resolve problems of mutual
concern; and
                                             
 (3) Resolve by agreement the manner and extent to which the
department shall provide budgeting, recordkeeping and related clerical
assistance to administratively attached agencies.
                                             
 (g) Give bond, and require division directors to give bond, to
the state as specified in RSA 93-B.
                                             
 (h) Where functions of departments overlap or a function assigned
to one department could better be performed by another department,
recommend appropriate legislation to the next regular session of the
general court.
                                             
 (i) Be responsible for the operation of the special school
district established under RSA 194:60 for the purpose of providing
appropriate education services to eligible offenders held in facilities
operated by the department.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall adopt such reasonable internal practices
and procedures, which shall not be considered rules subject to the
provisions of RSA 541-A, as may be necessary to carry out the duties of
the department and its divisions, consistent with this chapter. These
procedures shall include at least the following elements:
                                             
 (a) A comprehensive manual of procedures for the operation of the
state prison and other adult correctional facilities of the department,
including provisions for the humane treatment of inmates.
                                             
 (b) A classification system for evaluating probationers and
parolees to establish the appropriate level of supervision.
                                             
 (c) Criteria used to determine when probationers will be reported
to the court for violations of probation or when parolees shall be
reported to the parole board for violation of the conditions of parole.
                                             
 (d) A policy on notification of law enforcement agencies for
parolees who abscond from supervision.
                                             
 (e) Criteria for determining when a parolee who has absconded to
another state shall be returned to this state.
                                             
 (f) A policy on and procedures for an internal clemency board to
review each request for sentence modification pursuant to RSA 651:20 and
to provide a recommendation on each request to the sentencing court.

 (g)  A policy and procedure for the involuntary administration of 
medication and treatment to inmates with a diagnosed mental illness.

 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall have the authority to adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, necessary to assure the continuation or granting
of federal funds or other assistance not otherwise provided for by law.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner may enter into contracts with the state's
counties, the governments of other states, and the federal government,
and appropriate private agencies or facilities and make proper and
necessary arrangements with them for the transfer and reception of
inmates and allow transfers to state prisons of any person. Any person
who is confined awaiting trial on a felony charge may be transferred to
the state prison from the county correctional facility, upon the
recommendation of the superintendent of the county department of
corrections, and with the approval of the county commissioners of said
county. The superintendent may transfer a prisoner, without the approval
of the county commissioners, if the superintendent determines the
transfer is necessary for public safety or emergency reasons. The county
commissioners shall review any such transfer at their next regular
meeting. If the county commissioners reject the transfer, the prisoner
shall be returned to the facility from which the prisoner came as soon
as practicable.
                                             
 VII. The commissioner may order the assignment and transfer of
persons committed to his custody to correctional facilities of the
department or facilities under contract with the department.
                                             
 VIII. The commissioner shall appoint probation-parole officers as
provided in RSA 504-A:8 through RSA 504-A:12-a.
                                             
 IX. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 X. The commissioner shall develop, publish, and periodically revise
an annual comprehensive plan for the state's correctional system which
shall indicate, among other things, the department's goals, objectives,
resources, current conditions, and needs. The report shall contain
information on any substantial modification of existing facilities, the
progress on construction of new facilities, and whether such
construction or modification is being undertaken by public or private
entities. The commissioner shall annually submit such comprehensive plan
to the governor and council, speaker of the house, president of the
senate, and governing bodies of municipalities where state corrections
facilities are located.
                                             
 XI. The commissioner and the commissioner of the department of
health and human services shall jointly establish procedures for sharing
data, at least in the aggregate, on delinquents and offenders for
purposes of correctional planning and needs assessments. These
procedures shall not be considered rules subject to RSA 541-A and shall
be established so as to ensure compliance with state and federal
confidentiality and privacy laws.
                                             
 XI-a. The commissioner shall be the principal administrator of the
secure psychiatric unit established pursuant to RSA 622:41. He shall
establish the treatment standards for the unit after consultation with
the commissioner of the department of health and human services. The
commissioner shall:
                                             
 (a) Administer the unit;
                                             
 (b) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (c) Consult with the commissioner of the department of health and
human services regarding transfers to the unit;
                                             
 (d) Transfer persons in his custody to the unit if treatment is
needed for mental disturbance;
                                             
 (e) Discharge persons pursuant to RSA 622:48;
                                             
 (f) Review, at least annually, the mental health programs with
the commissioner of the department of health and human services to
determine what policies, standards, or practices should be revised to
improve treatment;
                                             
 (g) Appoint qualified persons to positions established in RSA
622:43, I;
                                             
 (h) Administer the unit in such a manner as to meet accreditation
standards and to seek accreditation; and
                                             
 (i) Perform other tasks necessary to carry out the administration
of RSA 622:40-48.
                                             
 XI-b. Whenever it appears to the commissioner that a person who has
been committed to the custody of the department of corrections is
substantially deprived of his capacity to manage his own affairs and is
as a result at risk of substantial harm to himself or his estate and
such person does not have a legal guardian, the commissioner shall take
such steps as are appropriate to safeguard such person as are consistent
with RSA 464-A and RSA 547-B, including the nomination of a guardian
when no less restrictive alternative is available.
                                             
 XII. If this section conflicts with other powers and duties
specifically granted by statute to the commissioner, the specific powers
and duties shall control. If this section conflicts with other statutes
specifically limiting the powers of the commissioner, the specific
limitations shall control.

**Source.** 1983, 291:1; 461:1. 1985, 337:2. 1988, 170:2, 3. 1992,
143:1. 1994, 212:2. 1995, 181:1; 310:66, 170, I, 182. 1996, 13:7; 232:1.
1998, 386:1, 2. 1999, 296:1, 4. 2008, 203:1; 313:6. 2009, 222:1. 2011,
65:3, eff. July 15, 2011. 2012, 247:40, II, eff. Aug. 17, 2012. 2015,
259:31, I, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 21-H:8-a

 **21-H:8-a Status in Retirement System. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 226:4,
IV, eff. June 16, 2012.
                                             ]

### Section 21-H:9

 **21-H:9 Site Visits by Commissioner. –** To ensure that the
programs of the department operate efficiently and effectively, and that
persons committed to his custody are treated humanely, the commissioner
shall frequently visit the institutions, units and field offices of the
department. At least one such visit each year shall be unannounced.

**Source.** 1983, 461:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-H:10

 **21-H:10 Commitment of Adults. –**
                                             
 I. All offenders committed by a court for a period of incarceration
of more than one year shall be committed to the custody of the
commissioner. The commissioner shall assign a newly committed inmate to
an appropriate correctional facility.
                                             
 II. The sentence of imprisonment of any adult committed to the
custody of the commissioner shall begin to run from the date on which
the person is received at a correctional facility, except that if such a
person is committed to a detention facility to await transportation to
the appropriate correctional facility his sentence shall begin to run
from the date on which he is received at that detention facility.

**Source.** 1983, 461:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-H:11

 **21-H:11 Female Inmates. –** Females committed to the custody of
the commissioner shall be housed in appropriate institutions or quarters
which shall be separate from those for males.

**Source.** 1983, 461:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-H:12

 **21-H:12 Transfer of Inmates. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner may transfer any inmate, provided that whenever
a transfer involves a county facility, a contract specifying the
conditions of that transfer shall have been executed in advance.
                                             
 II. A transfer may be made whenever the commissioner determines that
an inmate cannot be properly or safely kept at the correctional facility
at which he is confined or that such transfer is in the best public
interest or furthers legitimate penological objectives. When any
transfer involves a county facility, the commissioner of corrections
shall obtain the approval of the appropriate county correctional
administrator before making such a transfer.

**Source.** 1983, 461:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-H:13

 **21-H:13 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Standards for the management, and operation, of all state
correctional facilities.
                                             
 II. The administration of the institutions and other facilities
under his control.
                                             
 II-a. The administration of the secure psychiatric unit as required
under RSA 622:44.
                                             
 III. Standards for the management and operation of rehabilitation
related programs, including, but not limited to:
                                             
 (a) Classification;
                                             
 (b) Diagnosis;
                                             
 (c) Education;
                                             
 (d) Casework;
                                             
 (e) Counseling;
                                             
 (f) Therapy;
                                             
 (g) Vocational training;
                                             
 (h) Guidance;
                                             
 (i) Work, including the terms and conditions of work release;
and
                                             
 (j) Library.
                                             
 IV. Standards for health and medical services provided at
correctional facilities.
                                             
 V. Payment and collection of all fees for which the department is
responsible.
                                             
 VI. The activities of visitors to all institutions and facilities of
the department.

**Source.** 1983, 461:1. 1985, 337:3, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 21-H:14

 **21-H:14 Behavior of Inmates. –** The commissioner shall establish
written standards regarding the behavior and responsibilities of
inmates. These standards shall be made available to all such inmates and
shall be considered public records. These standards shall not be
considered rules subject to the provisions of RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1983, 461:1, eff. July 1, 1983.

### Section 21-H:14-a

 **21-H:14-a Strategic Capital Plan Committee. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010,
368:1(4), eff. Dec. 31, 2010.
                                             ]

### Section 21-H:14-b

 **21-H:14-b Administrator of Women Offenders and Family Services.
–**
                                             
 I. There is hereby created the position of administrator of women
offenders and family services within the department of corrections. The
administrator shall be responsible for programming and services for
women offenders in the state adult correctional system including
probation, parole, and state correctional facilities. The administrator
of women offenders and family services shall be a classified position.
                                             
 II. The administrator may:
                                             
 (a) Establish goals and objectives for state correctional systems
within the framework of the department's philosophy, including planning,
organizing, implementing, directing, and monitoring state
gender-responsive programs and services, as well as developing policies,
procedures, and standards for the provision of such programs and
services. The administrator shall participate in the development,
implementation, and review of all policies, directives, and standards
that involve supervision of women offenders. The administrator shall
also coordinate continuum and continuation of gender-responsive services
to women offenders moving from one setting to another, and re-entering
their communities.
                                             
 (b) Write standards for, execute, and monitor all non-clinical
contracts with service providers who work exclusively with women
offenders. The administrator shall review and provide feedback on an
ongoing basis on all clinical contracts and services for women offenders
regarding consistency with contract language and gender-responsive
principles.
                                             
 (c) Establish and coordinate partnerships, and maintain working
relationships within the department of health and human services, with
other government agencies, with communities, and with community-based
organizations, volunteers, advocacy groups, the academic community, and
other external stakeholders.
                                             
 (d) Provide supervision and technical assistance to the women's
facility warden and field managers regarding issues related to women
offenders and gender-responsive programs, services, and practices. The
administrator shall provide input into the evaluations of other facility
wardens, field managers, and personnel relative to their roles in the
supervision and provision of services for women offenders.
                                             
 (e) Provide input regarding necessary data collection and
evaluation to measure effective programming and supervision of women
offenders. The administrator shall consult with and provide input with
other directors regarding appropriate levels of staffing in both the
field and institutions responsible for the management of women
offenders. The administrator shall also confer with and make
recommendations to the commissioner regarding women offender supervision
and services, oversee the planning, development, and implementation of
training guidelines for staff working with women offenders, and
recommend changes in duties assigned to casework and security staff who
work with women offenders.
                                             
 (f) Act as a resource in cases of staff sexual misconduct
involving women offenders and provide input into personnel actions for
addressing misconduct involving staff who work with women offenders and
misconduct involving women offenders.
                                             
 III. The administrator shall:
                                             
 (a) Prepare budget recommendations regarding women offenders'
program services consistent with the departmental budget cycle. The
administrator shall also engage in budget formation, grant applications,
and resource allocation activities related to women offenders as
assigned.
                                             
 (b) Act as liaison to the interagency coordinating council for
women offenders and the department of corrections.

**Source.** 2006, 269:1, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 21-H:14-c

 **21-H:14-c Interagency Coordinating Council for Women Offenders.
–** 
                                             [Repealed 2015, 146:2, eff. Aug. 11, 2015.
                                             ]

### Section 21-H:14-d

 **21-H:14-d Transitional Housing Unit Maintenance Fund Established.
–** There is established in the office of the commissioner a fund to be
known as the transitional housing unit maintenance fund. This fund shall
be nonlapsing and continually appropriated to the commissioner for the
purpose of the general care, maintenance, repair, and proper upkeep of
transitional housing units. The commissioner shall collect funds as
specified in RSA 651:25, V for deposit into the fund and may expend such
funds as set forth in this section. The commissioner may also accept
gifts, grants, and donations from any state or federal source for
deposit into the fund.

**Source.** 2015, 276:220, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 21-H:15

 **21-H:15 Severability. –** This chapter shall be construed in all
respects so as to meet all constitutional requirements. If any provision
or clause of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances, is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this chapter, and to that end, the
provisions of this chapter shall be separable from all other sections
hereof and the nullification of any section from this chapter shall have
no effect on the remaining sections of this chapter.

**Source.** 1983, 461:1, eff. July 1, 1983.
