---
title: 'CHAPTER 21-K DEPARTMENT OF CULTURAL RESOURCES'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 21-K
                                             
DEPARTMENT OF CULTURAL RESOURCES
--------------------------------

### Section 21-K:1

 **21-K:1 Finding; Intent. –** The general court finds that the state
library, commission on the arts, and historic preservation office, in
existence prior to the effective date of this chapter, and all of which
currently function separately, are inextricably linked because they are
ultimately and fundamentally engaged in pursuits which are cultural in
nature, and deserve increased visibility and recognition within state
government. Therefore, in recognition of its duty under Part 2, Article
83 of the state constitution to cherish the interest of literature, and
to encourage public institutions for the promotion of arts and sciences,
the general court enacts this chapter creating a department of cultural
resources. The general court intends by this action to provide for the
general welfare of the citizens of the state by recognizing the
essential nature of pursuits which broaden our minds and spirits and
preserve our history and culture for future generations. Combining state
government functions of collecting, cataloguing, and making available
all manner of books and other information; encouraging and assisting the
development of the arts; and preserving historical, archaeological,
architectural, and cultural heritage, is intended to enhance and
strengthen the role of cultural arms of state government. The general
court intends that a single, strong, visible cultural agency shall
assume equal status with other major departments of state government.

**Source.** 1985, 268:1. 1990, 73:1. 1998, 363:3, eff. Aug. 25, 1998.

### Section 21-K:2

 **21-K:2 Establishment; General Functions. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a department of cultural resources,
an agency of the state under the executive direction of a commissioner
of cultural affairs.
                                             
 II. The department of cultural resources, through its officials,
shall be responsible for the following general functions:
                                             
 (a) Providing information services to state government.
                                             
 (b) Developing and coordinating a statewide library service
network.
                                             
 (c) Stimulating and encouraging public interest and participation
in the study and presentation of the performing and fine arts.
                                             
 (d) Sponsoring state historic preservation activities.
                                             
 (e) Marketing and promotion of film and digital media for the
purpose of strengthening the cultural, educational, and economic impact
of media production in New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1985, 268:1. 1990, 73:1. 1998, 363:3, eff. Aug. 25, 1998.
2016, 142:1, eff. July 26, 2016.

### Section 21-K:3

 **21-K:3 Commissioner; Directors; Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department of cultural resources shall be
appointed by the governor, with the consent of the council, and shall
serve for a term of 4 years. The commissioner of cultural affairs shall
be qualified by reasons of professional competence, education and
experience.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall nominate each division director for
appointment by the governor, with the consent of the council. Division
directors shall serve for a term of 4 years. The directors of the
divisions of arts, historical resources, and film and digital media
shall be qualified by reason of professional competence, education, and
experience. The director of the division of libraries, who shall also be
known as the state librarian, shall hold a master of library science
degree from an accredited library school and shall have had at least 4
years' experience in a library in an administrative capacity. An
accredited library school means an institution of higher education which
is accredited by the American Library Association to grant a degree of
master of library science.
                                             
 III. The salaries of the commissioner and the division directors
shall be as specified in RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 1985, 268:1. 1989, 35:3, 4. 1990, 73:1. 1998, 363:3, eff.
Aug. 25, 1998. 2016, 142:3, eff. July 26, 2016.

### Section 21-K:4

 **21-K:4 Duties of Commissioner. –** In addition to the powers,
duties and functions otherwise vested by law in the commissioner of the
department of cultural resources, the commissioner shall:
                                             
 I. Represent the public interest in the administration of the
department and be responsible to the governor, the general court and the
public for such administration.
                                             
 II. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, have the
authority to adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, necessary to assure the
continuance or granting of federal funds or other assistance intended to
promote library service, the arts, or historic preservation efforts not
otherwise provided for by law.
                                             
 III. Have the authority to establish a unit within the office of the
commissioner to provide for internal department administrative
functions, including financial, personnel and other management
functions.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 V. Have authority, with regard to the administration of RSA 19-A,
and with the approval of a majority of the members of the New Hampshire
state council on the arts as established by RSA 19-A:2, to:
                                             
 (a) Accept gifts, contributions and bequests of unrestricted
funds from individuals, foundations, corporations, and other
organizations or institutions for the purpose of furthering the
educational objectives of the programs established pursuant to RSA
19-A.
                                             
 (b) Make and sign any agreements and to do and perform any acts
that may be necessary, desirable, or proper to carry out the purposes of
RSA 19-A.
                                             
 (c) Request and receive from any department, division, board,
bureau, commission, or other agency of the state such assistance and
data as will enable the commissioner to carry out properly the powers
and duties under this chapter.
                                             
 (d) Receive funds provided by the National Endowment for the Arts
under the National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities Act of
1965, and under such additional federal legislation and state
appropriations as may be enacted.
                                             
 (e) Allocate and disburse said funds by entering into contracts
and agreements with any department, agency, or subdivision of federal,
state, county, or municipal government or any individual, foundation,
corporation, association, or public authority in order to carry out the
purposes of RSA 19-A, subject to approval by the governor and council.

**Source.** 1985, 268:1. 1989, 35:23, I. 1990, 73:1. 1995, 21:1-3. 1998,
363:3, eff. Aug. 25, 1998.

### Section 21-K:4-a

 **21-K:4-a Donations. –** The commissioner may receive and accept at
any time such sums of money as may be donated for any purpose related to
cultural resources. Money so received shall be converted into a
continuous fund or funds, which shall not lapse, to be held by the state
treasurer from which payments shall be made in accordance with the
stipulations of the donor.

**Source.** 2002, 266:3, eff. May 18, 2002.

### Section 21-K:5

 **21-K:5 Division of Libraries. –** There is hereby established
within the department the division of libraries, which shall also be
known as the state library, under the supervision of an unclassified
director of libraries, who shall also be known as the state librarian
and who shall be responsible for the following functions in accordance
with applicable law:
                                             
 I. Operating a state library in order to provide general and
specific reference services, including, but not limited to, services
designed to assist the general court and the judicial branch.
                                             
 II. Operating the New Hampshire automated information system as
provided for by RSA 201-A:22, I.
                                             
 III. Promoting and coordinating a statewide library system.
                                             
 IV. Providing for library services for persons with disabilities.
                                             
 V. Otherwise administering the provisions of RSA title XVI.

**Source.** 1985, 268:1. 1990, 140:2, III. 1992, 51:1, eff. June 12,
1992.

### Section 21-K:6

 **21-K:6 Division of the Arts. –** There is hereby established
within the department the division of the arts, under the supervision of
an unclassified director of arts, who shall have either a masters degree
in art administration and 3 years of experience in nonprofit arts
administration or at least 5 years' experience administering a major
arts organization or at least 5 years' experience in public
administration of a major program within a local, state, or federal arts
agency, and who shall be responsible for administering the provisions of
RSA 19-A, with the primary goal of supporting and promoting the arts in
all of their manifestations.

**Source.** 1985, 268:1. 1998, 363:1, eff. Aug. 25, 1998.

### Section 21-K:7

 **21-K:7 Division of Historical Resources. –** There is hereby
established within the department the division of historical resources,
which shall also be known as the state historic preservation office,
under the supervision of an unclassified director of historical
resources, who shall be responsible for administering the state historic
preservation program in accordance with RSA 227-C.

**Source.** 1985, 268:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 21-K:8

 **21-K:8 Rulemaking Authority. –** The commissioner of cultural
resources shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The use and control of the state library and its holdings, as
authorized by RSA 201-A:9, I; provided that the rules shall be subject
to review and recommendation by the state library advisory council
established by RSA 201-A:3.
                                             
 II. The New Hampshire automated information system, as authorized by
RSA 201-A:25, II.
                                             
 III. The statewide library development system, as authorized by RSA
201-D:10; provided that the rules shall be subject to review and
recommendation by the state library advisory council established by RSA
201-A:3.
                                             
 IV. Historic preservation activities, as authorized by RSA 227-C:5,
provided that the rules shall be subject to ratification by the state
historical resources council established by RSA 227-C:13.
                                             
 V. Requirements for selecting art to be funded by the state art
fund, as authorized by RSA 19-A:10, I, subject to ratification by the
New Hampshire state council on the arts, established by RSA 19-A.
                                             
 VI. Standards for city and town libraries; provided that the state
library advisory council review and make recommendations relative to the
standards by a majority vote of all members.
                                             
 VII. New Hampshire state government information access libraries and
retention schedules for state publications as provided in RSA 202-B.
                                             
 VIII. The administration of the museum property act, as authorized
by RSA 201-E:7.

**Source.** 1985, 268:1; 345:6. 1987, 5:1. 1989, 35:5-7; 87:1. 1990,
73:1. 1992, 51:2. 1998, 363:3. 2001, 281:3. 2010, 368:10, eff. Dec. 31,
2010.

### Section 21-K:9

 **21-K:9 Federal Funds. –** Notwithstanding any provision of law to
the contrary, the state librarian with the advice of the state library
advisory council shall administer all federal funds collected under RSA
201-A:13.

**Source.** 1985, 268:1. 1989, 35:8, eff. June 11, 1989.

Christa McAuliffe Planetarium Commission
----------------------------------------

### Section 21-K:10-16

 **21-K:10 to 21-K:16 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 133:15, I, eff.
July 1, 1995.
                                             ]

Granite State Cultural Legacy Award; Criteria; Selection Process
----------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 21-K:17

 **21-K:17 Granite State Cultural Legacy Award; Criteria; Selection
Process. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 368:1(7), eff. Dec. 31, 2010.
                                             ]

New Hampshire Civil War Memorials Commission
--------------------------------------------

### Section 21-K:18-22

 **21-K:18 to 21-K:22 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 368:1(38), eff.
Dec. 31, 2010.
                                             ]

New Hampshire Film and Television Commission
--------------------------------------------

### Section 21-K:23

 **21-K:23 Commission Established; Members; Duties. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a New Hampshire film and television
commission within the department of cultural resources. The purposes of
the commission shall be:
                                             
 (a) To promote the economic development of the film and
television industry in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (b) To promote the utilization of location sites by the film and
television industry in the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (c) To increase the use of New Hampshire hotels, restaurants, and
local businesses by visiting film and television production companies.
                                             
 II. The commission shall:
                                             
 (a) Identify opportunities for activities related to the film and
television industries.
                                             
 (b) Recommend both long-range and short-term programs that will
result in economic gain for the state.
                                             
 (c) Educate state, local, and private officials and organizations
regarding the benefits and rewards that can result from increased
development of this industry.
                                             
 (d) Secure sites, as appropriate, within the state suitable for
filming by the motion picture industry, the television industry,
independent film producers, and other filmmakers.
                                             
 III. Members of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) Five members appointed by the commissioner of the department
of cultural resources:
                                             
 (1) Three members representing the film and television
industry.
                                             
 (2) Two members of the general public with an interest in the
film industry.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner of the department of cultural resources, or
designee.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development, or designee.
                                             
 (d) The commissioner of safety, or designee.
                                             
 (e) The executive director of the fish and game department, or
designee.
                                             
 (f) A representative of the New Hampshire Association of Chamber
of Commerce Executives, appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (g) A representative the New Hampshire Municipal Association,
appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (h) A representative of the New Hampshire Police Chiefs'
Association, appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (i) A member of the senate, appointed by the senate president.
                                             
 (j) A member of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 IV. Members appointed under subparagraph III(a) shall serve as
voting members of the commission; all other members shall serve as
ex-officio members of the commission. The term of office for members
shall be 3 years and until a successor is appointed, except that members
of the executive branch and legislature shall serve a term coterminous
with their appointment or term in office. The initial members of the
commission shall serve staggered terms. Vacancies shall be filled in the
same manner and for the unexpired terms. The members of the commission
shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for necessary
travel and other necessary expenses. Legislative members shall receive
mileage at the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the
commission.
                                             
 V. The members shall annually elect a person from among its
membership to act as chairperson.
                                             
 VI. The department of cultural resources shall cooperate with the
commission and shall provide necessary information and staff support.

**Source.** 2004, 257:38. 2005, 66:1, eff. July 22, 2005.

New Hampshire Commission on Native American Affairs
---------------------------------------------------

### Section 21-K:24


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-K:24 repealed by 2010, 325:2, effective July 1, 2020.
                                             ]

 **21-K:24 New Hampshire Commission on Native American Affairs
Established. –**
                                             
 I. In order to recognize the historic and cultural contributions of
Native Americans to New Hampshire, to promote and strengthen their own
heritage, and to further their needs through state policy and programs,
there is hereby established the New Hampshire commission on Native
American affairs.
                                             
 II. The commission shall consist of 15 members who derive from
geographically diverse areas of the state and are representative of the
diverse groups, organizations, and individuals knowledgeable about
Native American history, culture, and affairs as follows:
                                             
 (a) The director or designee of the division of travel and
tourism development.
                                             
 (b) The director or designee of the Native American Program at
Dartmouth College.
                                             
 (c) An archeologist appointed by the director of the division of
historical resources.
                                             
 (d) The director or designee of the state council on the arts.
                                             
 (e) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (f) Eleven members from the public at large, who shall be
representatives from the Native American community, appointed by the
governor from recommendations prepared by the director of the division
of historical resources. All interested individuals shall submit a
letter to the director of the division of historical resources stating
why they wish to be considered and their qualifications accompanied by 3
letters of recommendation.
                                             
 III. Each member of the commission shall serve a 3-year term, and no
member shall serve more than 2 consecutive terms. A vacancy occurring
other than by expiration of term shall be filled in the same manner as
the original appointment was made but for the unexpired term only.
Initial appointments by the governor shall be for staggered terms of
one, 2, or 3 years. Members of the commission shall serve without
compensation.
                                             
 IV. For voting purposes a quorum shall be 9 members.
                                             
 V. At the first meeting, which shall be called by the first named
member of the commission within 45 days after the completion of the
naming of the commission members, members of the commission shall elect
a chairman, secretary, and treasurer. Officers shall be elected for a
one-year term but may be elected to serve an additional term. All
officers of the commission shall be elected by a majority vote of the
members.
                                             
 VI. The commission shall:
                                             
 (a) Review and study local, state, and federal issues common to
Native Americans and persons of Native American descent who are residing
in this state.
                                             
 (b) Develop recommendations to assist state agencies with the
preservation and protection of Native American artifacts and burial
grounds under the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act
of 1990, P.L. 101-601.
                                             
 (c) Assist Native American groups, organizations, and individuals
in New Hampshire with:
                                             
 (1) Securing social services, education, employment
opportunities, health care, housing, cultural opportunities, and census
information as available at both the state and federal levels, including
assistance in determining eligibility for the Indian Child Welfare Act
of 1978, 25 U.S.C. section 1902 et seq.
                                             
 (2) Establishing and/or continuing programs concerning Native
American history, culture, and affairs, including those offered through
the United States Department of Education Office on Indian Education
pursuant to Title VII of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act
established in 1972.
                                             
 (3) Promoting and strengthening the creation, display, and
sale of Native American arts and crafts, and providing educational
information to artisans and marketing outlets promoting the legal
labeling of such products as Indian or Native American produced, as
provided in 18 U.S.C. section 1159(c)(3)(B) and 25 U.S.C. section
305e(d), as well as determining eligibility for the Indian Arts and
Crafts Act of 1990, P.L. 101-644, and receiving assistance and support
from the Indian Arts and Crafts Board, as provided in 25 U.S.C. section
305 et seq.
                                             
 VII. The commission shall meet at least 4 times a year and at any
other times at the request of the chairperson or by 7 members of the
commission. Notice of all meetings and minutes of such meetings shall be
posted on the New Hampshire department of cultural resources website.
                                             
 VIII. The commission may accept any gifts, grants, or donations from
any public or private source, provided that such gifts, grants, or
donations shall be used exclusively to advance the commission's purpose
and duties. Information concerning the receipt of any gifts, grants, or
donations shall be posted on the department of cultural resources
website.
                                             
 IX. Beginning November 1, 2011, and each year thereafter, the
commission shall submit an annual report of its activities, findings,
and recommendations to the governor, the speaker of the house of
representatives, the senate president, the commissioner of the
department of cultural resources, and the state library. The annual
report shall be approved by a majority vote of the commission and shall
be posted on the department of cultural resources website.
                                             
 X. The commission shall be administratively attached to the
department of cultural resources.
                                             
 XI. Nothing in the purposes and duties of the commission shall be
interpreted to provide any Native American with any other special rights
or privileges that the state does not confer on or grant to other state
residents. The authority to grant state tribal status or recognition
under Section 104 of the Indian Arts and Crafts Act of 1990, 18 U.S.C.
section 1159(c)(3)(B), is reserved solely to the New Hampshire general
court.

**Source.** 2010, 325:1, eff. July 20, 2010. 2015, 28:1, 3, eff. July 6,
2015.

Division of Film and Digital Media
----------------------------------

### Section 21-K:25

 **21-K:25 Division of Film and Digital Media Established. –** There
is hereby established within the department the division of film and
digital media, which shall also be known as the state film office, under
the supervision of an unclassified director of film and digital media,
with the primary goal of marketing and promotion of film, video, and
digital media production for the purpose of strengthening the cultural,
educational, and economic impact of media production in New Hampshire.

**Source.** 2016, 142:2, eff. July 26, 2016.
