---
title: 'CHAPTER 21-L DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 21-L
                                             
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
----------------------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 21-L:1

 **21-L:1 Findings; Intent. –**
                                             
 I. The general court finds that the efficient administration of
transportation functions is best achieved by the consolidation and
unified direction of transportation procedures, programs, and related
functions. The general court declares that the economic well-being and
physical safety of the citizens of New Hampshire are best secured by
establishing a single department responsible for transportation
functions.
                                             
 II. This act shall not be construed in any way to affect dedications
of revenue provided for in the constitution or laws of the state,
including the dedicated highway fund provided for by part II, article
6-a of the New Hampshire constitution.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1. 1996, 23:1, eff. June 14, 1996.

### Section 21-L:2

 **21-L:2 Establishment; General Functions. –**
                                             
 I. There is established the department of transportation, an agency
of the state under the executive direction of a commissioner of
transportation.
                                             
 II. The department of transportation, through its officials, shall
be responsible for the following general functions:
                                             
 (a) Planning, developing, and maintaining a state transportation
network which will provide for safe and convenient movement of people
and goods throughout the state by means of a system of highways,
railroads, air service, mass transit, and other practicable modes of
transportation, in order to support state growth and economic
development and promote the general welfare of the citizens of the
state.
                                             
 (b) Performing any regulation of transportation activities
required by law which is not within the jurisdiction of another state
agency.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1. 2005, 291:10, eff. July 25, 2005.

### Section 21-L:3

 **21-L:3 Commissioner; Directors; Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department shall be appointed by the
governor, with the consent of the council, and shall serve a term of 4
years. The commissioner shall be qualified to hold that position by
reason of education and experience.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall nominate each division director for
appointment by the governor, with the consent of the council. Division
directors shall serve a term of 4 years. Directors shall be qualified to
hold their respective positions by reason of education and experience.
                                             
 III. The salary of the commissioner and each division director shall
be as specified in RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 21-L:4

 **21-L:4 Duties of Commissioner. –** In addition to the powers,
duties, and functions otherwise vested by law in the commissioner of the
department of transportation, he shall:
                                             
 I. Represent the public interest in the administration of the
functions of the department and be responsible to the governor, the
general court, and the public for such administration.
                                             
 II. Consult regularly with regional planning commissions established
pursuant to RSA 36:45-53 with regard to department planning activities.
                                             
 III. Provide for a support unit within his office which shall
include the function of monitoring projects and conducting audits of
department activities to insure compliance with state and federal
contracts, laws, and program objectives.
                                             
 IV. Require the director of the division of finance, in consultation
with the commissioner of administrative services and the state
treasurer, to provide for a system of accounts and reports which will
insure the integrity and lawful use of all revenues collected by the
department, the use of which is restricted by state or federal law.
                                             
 V. Adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, necessary to assure the
continuation or granting of federal funds or other assistance not
otherwise provided for by law.
                                             
 VI. Approve rates for and regulate every corporation, company,
association, joint stock association, partnership and person, their
lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court, except municipal
corporations operating within their corporate limits, owning or
operating any toll bridge or toll road.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1. 1986, 136:2. 2007, 263:82, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 21-L:4-a

 **21-L:4-a Reports, Manuals, and Other Publications; Reimbursement
Fees. –** The commissioner of transportation is authorized to prepare,
publish, and distribute reports, manuals, plans, specifications, charts,
surveys, or other documents consistent with the responsibilities of the
department. The commissioner may charge fees to reimburse the department
for costs incurred in copying such documents, and for applicable mailing
costs. The commissioner shall publish a schedule of reimbursement fees
to be approved by the fiscal committee of the general court. The
schedule of reimbursement fees may be updated on a bi-annual basis.

**Source.** 2008, 77:1, eff. July 20, 2008.

### Section 21-L:5

 **21-L:5 Assistant Commissioner. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of transportation shall nominate an assistant
commissioner for appointment by the governor, with the consent of the
council. The assistant commissioner shall serve a term of 4 years. The
assistant commissioner shall be a registered professional engineer and
shall be otherwise qualified to hold that position by reason of
education and experience. The assistant commissioner shall also be known
as the chief engineer of the department.
                                             
 II. The assistant commissioner shall perform such duties as are
assigned by the commissioner. The assistant commissioner shall assume
the duties of the commissioner in the event that the commissioner is
unable for any reason to perform such duties.
                                             
 III. The salary of the assistant commissioner shall be as specified
in RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 21-L:5-a

 **21-L:5-a Deputy Commissioner. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of transportation shall nominate a deputy
commissioner for appointment by the governor, with the consent of the
council. The deputy commissioner shall serve a term of 4 years. The
deputy commissioner shall be qualified to hold that position by reason
of education and experience.
                                             
 II. The deputy commissioner shall perform such duties as are
assigned by the commissioner or assistant commissioner and, in
accordance with applicable laws, shall be responsible for the following
functions:
                                             
 (a) Long and short range department level planning in areas of
strategic, financial, and human capital programs.
                                             
 (b) Policies, practices, and procedures to ensure compliance with
laws and high standards of continuous quality improvement.
                                             
 (c) Evaluations and audits of financial, human capital,
environmental, and safety practices and internal audits.
                                             
 (d) Policy development.
                                             
 (e) Adjudicative hearings procedures.
                                             
 (f) Public information.
                                             
 (g) Liaison with the department of information technology.
                                             
 III. The position shall be unclassified, and the salary of the
deputy commissioner shall be as specified in RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 2007, 263:80. 2008, 335:5, eff. Sept. 5, 2008.

### Section 21-L:5-b

 **21-L:5-b Director of Policy and Administration. –**
                                             
 I. There is established within the department a position of an
unclassified director of policy and administration. The commissioner of
transportation shall nominate a director of policy and administration
for appointment by the governor, with consent of the council. The
director shall serve a term of 4 years. The director shall be qualified
to hold that position by reason of education and experience.
                                             
 II. The director shall perform such duties as are assigned by the
commissioner or deputy commissioner and, in accordance with applicable
laws, shall administer the following:
                                             
 (a) Bureau of human resources.
                                             
 (b) Office of stewardship and compliance.
                                             
 (c) Office of federal compliance.
                                             
 (d) Office of hearings and legislation.
                                             
 (e) Office of public information.
                                             
 (f) Executive office administrative support.
                                             
 III. The position of the director of policy and administration shall
be unclassified. The salary of the director shall be as specified in RSA
94:1-a, I(b).

**Source.** 2009, 144:73. 2010, 236:9, eff. July 1, 2010.

Internal Organization
---------------------

### Section 21-L:6

 **21-L:6 Division of Finance. –** There is established within the
department the division of finance, under the supervision of an
unclassified director of finance, who shall, in accordance with
applicable laws, be responsible for the following functions:
                                             
 I. Financial management systems.
                                             
 II. Bonding activities, including Garvee and turnpike bonds.
                                             
 III. Budget control.
                                             
 IV. Accounts payable and receivable systems.
                                             
 V. Federal billing.
                                             
 VI. Purchasing.
                                             
 VII. Contracts and grants management.
                                             
 VIII. Control of department inventory.
                                             
 IX. Department printing.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1. 2005, 291:11. 2007, 263:81, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 21-L:7

 **21-L:7 Division of Aeronautics, Rail, and Transit. –** There is
established within the department the division of aeronautics, rail, and
transit, under the supervision of an unclassified director of
aeronautics, rail, and transit, who shall be responsible for the
following functions:
                                             
 I. Locating, constructing, and maintaining all air navigation
facilities within the state which are built or maintained either in
whole or in part with state funds.
                                             
 II. Coordinating agencies and persons participating in aircraft
search and rescue missions within the state.
                                             
 III. Assisting state and federal officials in the investigation of
civil aircraft accidents and civil aircraft incidents within the state.
                                             
 IV. Otherwise administering the provisions of RSA title XXXIX,
relative to aeronautics.
                                             
 V. Assisting municipalities and others in planning, acquiring,
developing, constructing, maintaining, operating, and improving safety
at facilities included in the state airways system.
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VII. Planning, designing, and facilitating construction, and
servicing rail and transit facilities including but not limited to
pedestrian, bicycle, transit, rideshare, and railroad modes.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1. 1987, 64:1. 1997, 107:2. 2002, 6:3. 2004,
257:28, 29, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 21-L:8

 **21-L:8 Aviation Users Advisory Board. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be an aviation users advisory board consisting of 7
members. All members, except the members set forth in subparagraphs (c),
(d), and (g), shall hold a valid pilot's certificate at the time of
appointment. The members shall be appointed by the governor, with the
consent of the council, and shall include the following:
                                             
 (a) One member representing an airline.
                                             
 (b) One member representing corporate aviation.
                                             
 (c) One member who shall be an airport manager.
                                             
 (d) One member who shall be a member of an airport authority or
of the governing body of a municipality maintaining a municipal
airport.
                                             
 (e) One member representing general aviation who shall be chosen
from a list of at least 4 and not more than 6 names submitted to the
governor by the Aviation Association of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (f) One member representing general aviation.
                                             
 (g) The commissioner, or designee, who shall serve as an ex
officio voting member of the board.
                                             
 II. Except for the commissioner, or designee, board members shall
serve for a term of 4 years. Board members shall not serve more than 2
consecutive terms. The board shall annually elect from among its members
a chairman.
                                             
 III. Board members shall serve without compensation, except that
they shall receive reimbursement for their reasonable and necessary
expenses in the performance of their duties. This reimbursement shall be
a charge against the appropriation for the division of aeronautics,
rail, and transit.
                                             
 IV. The board shall meet at least 4 times per year at a time and
place to be fixed by the chairman, either upon his own motion or at the
request of 3 or more board members.
                                             
 V. The aviation users advisory board shall regularly advise the
director of the division of aeronautics, rails, and transit on all
matters relative to the operation of the division. The director shall
consult the board on all matters relative to the operation of airports
and licensing of pilots and other aviation personnel.
                                             
 VI. The aviation users advisory board shall act as the board of
appeal for aeronautical matters. Appeals from the decisions of the
director of aeronautics, rail, and transit may be taken to the
commissioner. Decisions of the commissioner may be appealed to the
board, and such appeal shall be a condition precedent to any appeal to
any court, contrary provisions of RSA 541-A notwithstanding. The board
shall adopt rules of procedure for its appeals process.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1. 1997, 144:1, 2. 2003, 146:4. 2004, 257:30, 31,
eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 21-L:9

 **21-L:9 Division of Project Development. –** There is established
within the department the division of project development, under the
supervision of an unclassified director of project development, who
shall be a registered professional engineer and shall be responsible for
the following functions, in accordance with applicable laws:
                                             
 I. Transportation engineering, including planning and design for
state highway, rail, and other forms of transportation, as required to
coordinate the state's transportation system.
                                             
 II. Materials research and testing.
                                             
 III. Acquisition of all real property rights necessary to carry out
department responsibilities.
                                             
 IV. Field supervision of all transportation construction for which
the department is responsible, except air navigation facilities.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1. 2005, 291:12, eff. July 25, 2005.

### Section 21-L:10

 **21-L:10 Division of Operations. –** There is established within
the department the division of operations, under the supervision of an
unclassified director of operations, who shall be a registered
professional engineer and shall be responsible for the following
functions, in accordance with applicable law:
                                             
 I. Maintenance and supervision of the state transportation network.
                                             
 II. Maintenance of department equipment.
                                             
 III. Issuing of all permits, registrations, and licenses for which
the department is responsible with the exception of those issued by the
division of aeronautics, rail, and transit.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1. 2005, 291:13, eff. July 25, 2005.

### Section 21-L:11

 **21-L:11 Division of Public Works. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2005, 291:27, I,
eff. July 25, 2005.
                                             ]

### Section 21-L:12

 **21-L:12 Required Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of
transportation shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Bidding for transportation projects that do not relate to public
works projects handled by the department of administrative services, as
authorized by RSA 228:4, I and 228:4-a.
                                             
 II. Issuing securities for certain carriers, as authorized by RSA
228:76-92, in the event that federal responsibility in this area is
repealed.
                                             
 III-V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. Application procedures and approval criteria for state bridge
aid, as authorized by RSA 234:5.
                                             
 VII. Application procedures for state aid for class II highway
construction, as authorized by RSA 235:14.
                                             
 VIII-X. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XI. Application procedures for advertising licenses, as authorized
by RSA 236:71.
                                             
 XII. Application procedures for advertising permits, as authorized
by RSA 236:72.
                                             
 XIII. Removing nonconforming signs, as authorized by RSA 236:77.
                                             
 XIV. Denial or revocation of an advertising license, as authorized
by RSA 236:78.
                                             
 XV. Effective control of junk yards as authorized by RSA
236:92-110.
                                             
 XVI. Application procedures and approval criteria for access route
permits, as authorized by RSA 265:108.
                                             
 XVII. Application procedures and approval criteria for special
permits to move over-dimensional or overweight loads, as authorized by
RSA 266:24.
                                             
 XVIII-XXIV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XXV. Procedures for notification and investigation of railroad
accidents, as authorized by RSA 367:56, in the event that federal
responsibility in this area is repealed.
                                             
 XXVI-XXVIII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XXIX-XXXIV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XXXV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XXXVI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XXXVII. 
                                             [Repealed
                                             ].
                                             
 XXXVIII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XXXIX. Application and approval criteria for tall structure permits,
as authorized by RSA 422-B.
                                             
 XL. Notice and hearing procedures for air navigation hazards, as
authorized by RSA 422-B:9-10.
                                             
 XLI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XLII. Preparation of airport-approach plans, as authorized by RSA
424:3-4.
                                             
 XLIII. Airport zoning, as authorized by RSA 424:5.
                                             
 XLIV. Any interpretations of federal highway regulations necessary
to implement federal requirements in the state.
                                             
 XLV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XLVI. Application procedures and approved criteria for real estate
professionals for sales of surplus commercial and industrial property
under RSA 228:31-b.
                                             
 XLVII. "RV friendly'' markers as authorized by RSA 236:73-a.
                                             
 XLVIII. Application procedures for DWI fatality signs authorized by
RSA 236:48-a.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1. 1986, 136:3. 1988, 288:28, I, II. 1989, 9:2;
147:2, I-III. 1990, 229:15. 1996, 227:4, I-X, XII. 1997, 290:2-4. 2000,
105:8. 2002, 6:4, I-VII. 2003, 88:1, II, III. 2005, 212:3; 291:14. 2007,
87:2. 2010, 80:2, eff. May 19, 2010.

### Section 21-L:12-a

 **21-L:12-a Optional Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of
transportation may adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Establishing standards for private water supplies affected by
highway construction or reconstruction, as authorized by RSA 228:34.
                                             
 II. Using bicycle routes, as authorized by RSA 230:75, IV.
                                             
 III. Supervision of trees and vegetation adjoining certain highways,
as authorized by RSA 231:155.
                                             
 IV. Restoration of highways and bond requirements, as authorized by
RSA 236:10.
                                             
 V. Permits for moving special objects, as authorized by RSA 266:24.
                                             
 VI. Filing railroad maps or profiles, as authorized by RSA 367:44,
IV.
                                             
 VII. The maximum occupancy time of a grade crossing, as authorized
by RSA 373:16.
                                             
 VIII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IX. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 X. Establishing rates, fares, charges and classifications of joint
service, as authorized by RSA 379:1, II.
                                             
 XI. Terms and conditions of joint use by railroads as authorized by
RSA 379:13.
                                             
 XII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XIII. Procedures for the creation of highway planning corridors, and
procedures and criteria for administering corridor permits and the
acquisition of corridor protection restrictions, as authorized by RSA
230-A.
                                             
 XIV. The operation of the turnpike system as authorized by RSA
237:5.
                                             
 XV. Non-police escort vehicles for the transport of manufactured
housing or modular buildings as authorized by RSA 266:10, II.
                                             
 XVI. Establishing specific pre-approved routes for the transport of
manufactured housing or modular building as authorized by RSA 266.
                                             
 XVII. Establishing criteria to determine the need for police escort
vehicles for the transport of manufactured housing or modular buildings
as authorized by RSA 266. In determining such criteria, the commissioner
shall consider the anticipated road, traffic, and weather conditions
that indicate that the safety of the public will be increased or the
likelihood of damage to roadside objects will be reduced by providing a
police escort.

**Source.** 1986, 136:4. 1988, 288:28, III. 1991, 309:3. 1996, 95:2.
2002, 6:4, VIII. 2004, 182:4, eff. July 31, 2004.

### Section 21-L:12-b

 **21-L:12-b Bridge and Highway Construction Requirements for State
Bridge Aid and State Highway Aid Projects. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph III, the most current versions of
the following design standards and manuals promulgated by the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO),
inclusive of any amendments, revisions, interim revisions, or new
editions promulgated by AASHTO are hereby adopted by reference, and the
commissioner shall apply them to any project funded by state bridge aid
or state highway aid as minimum standards in the state:
                                             
 (a) AASHTO load and resistance factor design for bridge design
specifications;
                                             
 (b) AASHTO manual for condition evaluation of bridges;
                                             
 (c) AASHTO guide specifications for seismic isolation design;
                                             
 (d) AASHTO manual for condition evaluation and load resistance
factor rating (LRFR) of highway bridges;
                                             
 (e) AASHTO standard specifications for structural supports for
highway signs, luminaries, and traffic signals;
                                             
 (f) AASHTO policy on geometric design of highways and streets;
and
                                             
 (g) AASHTO roadside design guide.
                                             
 II. At least 90 days prior to the adoption of any design standards
or manuals under paragraph I the commissioner:
                                             
 (a) Shall publish notice of such standards or manuals in a
statewide newspaper and at least one newspaper of general circulation in
each county of the state.
                                             
 (b) Shall provide written notice of such standards or manuals to
the associated general contractors of New Hampshire and other
contractors with whom the department is doing business.
                                             
 (c) May, in appropriate situations, hold a public hearing.
                                             
 III. For modifications to an existing bridge, the commissioner may
require load resistance factor design (LRFD) specifications from the
most current version of the applicable AASHTO manual listed in paragraph
I or the specifications that were used for the original design of the
bridge.

**Source.** 2007, 60:1, eff. July 31, 2007.

Appeals
-------

### Section 21-L:13

 **21-L:13 Definition. –** For purposes of this subdivision,
"department decision'' means the final action on an application,
petition, or request taken by the commissioner or any department
official to whom the commissioner has properly delegated the authority
to take such final action. "Department decision'' does not mean
rulemaking or an agency declaratory ruling as provided for in RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 21-L:14

 **21-L:14 Appeals Board; Composition; Compensation; Removal. –**
                                             
 I. There is established an appeals board consisting of 3 members.
One member shall be a registered professional engineer, one member shall
be a person admitted to the practice of law in this state, and one
member shall be a person skilled in the field of public works and
construction who shall represent the general public. There shall be 2
alternate board members, who shall meet at least one of the
qualification categories set forth for board members. Each board member
and alternate board member shall be appointed by the governor with the
consent of the council to a term of 3 years, provided that of the
initial members appointed under this section one member shall be
appointed to a term of one year, one member to a term of 2 years, and
one member to a term of 3 years. Vacancies shall be filled in a like
manner for the unexpired term. The governor shall designate one member
to serve as board chairman, and the board shall elect one member to
serve as vice-chairman. In the event of illness or disqualification of a
member as set forth in RSA 673:14, the chairman shall designate an
alternate member to act in his place.
                                             
 II. Members of the board shall each receive a per diem, set by the
governor and council out of any available funds of the department, for
each day devoted to the work of the board and shall be reimbursed for
necessary travel expenses.
                                             
 III. Members of the board shall be removed only as set forth in RSA
4:1.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 21-L:15

 **21-L:15 Powers and Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall hear and decide appeals from decisions of the
commissioner relative to contract interpretation or other decisions
affecting persons not employed by the department, municipalities, or
private property, except condemnations of property for public uses, and
the assessment of damages therefor. Decisions of division directors
shall be appealed to the commissioner. Decisions of the commissioner may
be appealed to the appeals board, except decisions relative to
aeronautical matters, which may be appealed to the aviation users
advisory board established under RSA 21-L:8, and decisions relative to
common carriers by rail, which may be appealed to the railroad appeals
board established under RSA 21-L:16.
                                             
 II. Decisions by the appeals board under paragraph I shall be made
within a reasonable time. An appeal to the board shall be a condition
precedent to any appeal to any court.
                                             
 III. The board shall hear and decide applications made under the
provisions of RSA 155-E:2, IV(c).
                                             
 IV. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for its appeals process
under RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1. 1989, 363:17. 1995, 226:7. 2005, 291:15. 2006,
324:16, eff. Jan. 1, 2007. 2013, 227:3, eff. Sept. 13, 2013.

### Section 21-L:16

 **21-L:16 Railroad Appeals Board; Composition; Compensation;
Removal; Powers and Duties. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a railroad appeals board of 3 members which
shall hear all appeals of decisions of the commissioner relative to
common carriers by rail. One member shall be a recognized expert on
railroad matters, one member shall be admitted to the practice of law in
this state, and one member shall be a person knowledgeable about
railroad matters who shall represent the general public. There shall
also be 2 alternate board members who shall be similarly qualified. Each
board member and alternate board member shall be appointed by the
governor with the consent of the council to a term of 3 years, except
that of the initial appointments under this section one member shall be
appointed to a term of one year, one member to a term of 2 years, and
one member to a term of 3 years. Vacancies shall be filled in a like
manner for the unexpired term. The governor shall designate one member
to serve as board chairman, and the board shall elect a member to serve
as vice-chairman. In the event of illness or disqualification of a
member as set forth in RSA 673:14, the chairman shall designate one of
the alternate board members to act in the absent member's place.
                                             
 II. Members shall be paid a per diem set by the governor and council
out of any available department funds for each day devoted to the work
of the board and shall be reimbursed for necessary travel and expenses.
                                             
 III. Members of the board shall be removed only as provided in RSA
4:1.
                                             
 IV. The board shall hear and decide appeals from any decision of the
commissioner relating to any matters concerning common carriers by
rail.
                                             
 V. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for its appeals process
under RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1. 1995, 226:8, eff. Aug. 13, 1995.

### Section 21-L:17

 **21-L:17 Administrative Support. –** The commissioner shall provide
all necessary and reasonable clerical support requested by the appeals
board. At a minimum the commissioner shall:
                                             
 I. Provide all necessary clerical and support personnel and services
in order to:
                                             
 (a) Prepare notices and other documents required under RSA 541-A
as directed by the appeals board and distribute such notices and
documents upon the approval of the appeals board;
                                             
 (b) Schedule the conduct of all appeals board proceedings, with
the approval of the appeals board, so as to insure timely and efficient
conduct of such proceedings;
                                             
 (c) Prepare and maintain the record, required by RSA 541-A, of
all adjudicative proceedings conducted by the appeals board.
                                             
 II. Provide comfortable and adequate space for the use of the
appeals board in performing its official duties.
                                             
 III. Prepare, maintain as a public record, and continuously update a
document which shall summarize the findings and decisions of the appeals
board.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 21-L:18

 **21-L:18 Status as Rehearing. –** An appeal under this subdivision
shall be considered a rehearing for purposes of RSA 541 and any other
provision of law requiring a rehearing in the department prior to taking
an appeal to any court.

**Source.** 1985, 402:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

State Infrastructure Bank
-------------------------

### Section 21-L:19


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-L:19 effective as provided in 2014, 290:4.
                                             ]

 **21-L:19 State Infrastructure Bank; Purpose. –**
                                             
 The general court recognizes the importance of a sound
transportation infrastructure system for public safety and the state's
economic vitality. It is hereby declared to be in the public interest to
promote the surface transportation infrastructure system by providing a
financial vehicle to enable state and local transportation projects to
proceed.

**Source.** 2014, 290:1, eff. as provided in 2014, 290:4.

### Section 21-L:20


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-L:20 effective as provided in 2014, 290:4.
                                             ]

 **21-L:20 State Infrastructure Bank. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a state infrastructure bank (SIB), in
accordance with 23 U.S.C. section 610, to advance the surface
transportation system by serving as a revolving loan program to finance
eligible surface transportation projects within the state of New
Hampshire, in order to advance projects at an accelerated rate with
favorable repayment terms. The loan repayments shall create a stream of
revenue that the SIB will use to support new projects geared towards
surface transportation infrastructure that leverages economic
development opportunities. The purpose of the SIB is to leverage state
and federal funds, accelerate priority projects, and advance economic
development and local transportation needs.
                                             
 II. The SIB shall be used to encourage completion of public or
private surface transportation projects that contribute to multi-modal
and intermodal transportation with loans and other financial assistance
for all or part of the cost of an eligible project relating to surface
transportation.
                                             
 III. The SIB shall be used to encourage private and local
participation in financing toward eligible surface transportation
projects.

**Source.** 2014, 290:1, eff. as provided in 2014, 290:4.

### Section 21-L:21


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-L:21 effective as provided in 2014, 290:4.
                                             ]

 **21-L:21 State Infrastructure Bank Fund Established. –**
                                             
 There is hereby established the state infrastructure bank fund. The
fund shall consist of federal and state funds, issuance of bonds for
revenue, or other revenue received for the purposes of this subdivision.
The fund shall be managed by the state treasurer, shall be nonlapsing,
and shall be continually appropriated for the purposes of this
subdivision.

**Source.** 2014, 290:1, eff. as provided in 2014, 290:4.

### Section 21-L:22


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-L:22 effective as provided in 2014, 290:4.
                                             ]

 **21-L:22 Administration. –**
                                             
 I. The SIB shall be administered by the department of
transportation. The department is authorized to contract with a third
party for administration of the SIB fund.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of the department of transportation shall adopt
rules establishing guidelines for the SIB to exercise its authority
under this subdivision, including rules for eligibility, application,
evaluation, and selection of projects to receive financial assistance,
and such rules shall be exempt from the rulemaking process pursuant to
RSA 541-A:21.

**Source.** 2014, 290:1, eff. as provided in 2014, 290:4.

### Section 21-L:23


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-L:23 effective as provided in 2014, 290:4.
                                             ]

 **21-L:23 Authorization. –**
                                             
 I. The SIB is authorized to make loans or provide other financial
assistance to private or public entities towards all or part of the cost
of an eligible project relating to surface transportation.
                                             
 II. The SIB is authorized to provide bond or debt financing
instrument security, other forms of debt financing, and methods of
leveraging funds.
                                             
 III. Any federal money specifically designated to capitalize the SIB
shall be approved by the fiscal committee of the general court. The SIB
is otherwise authorized to use the following to capitalize the revolving
fund: state funds, other federal funds, funds from public or private
entities, proceeds from the issuance of bonds, and other lawful sources
provided each capitalization, regardless of amount or source, is
approved by a majority vote of both the house of representatives and the
senate. Such funds, as part of a revolving fund, shall remain available
until expended and continually appropriated to the SIB. Eligibility of
projects shall be determined under the provisions of the statewide
transportation improvement program in RSA 228:99 and state 10-year
transportation improvement plan in RSA 240.
                                             
 IV. The SIB is authorized to establish accounts as required by
federal or state programs, or as it deems necessary.
                                             
 V. The SIB is authorized to take all action necessary or useful to
perform its functions, including but not limited to:
                                             
 (a) Adopting, amending, and repealing bylaws necessary for the
administration of the SIB's affairs.
                                             
 (b) Filing suit and being sued in the name of the SIB.
                                             
 (c) Making loans or providing financial assistance to qualified
borrowers for eligible surface transportation projects.
                                             
 (d) Entering into contracts or agreements with qualified
borrowers and others that are necessary to process, service, or finalize
financing agreements.
                                             
 (e) Entering into contracts with federal or state government
agencies in order to fulfill its purpose of providing financial
assistance to eligible projects.
                                             
 (f) Establishing policies and procedures for administering loans
or financial assistance, accounting procedures for proper accounting,
and reporting as required.
                                             
 (g) Establishing interest rates, repayment terms, loan
origination fees, and service fees in keeping with any agreement with
bond holders and in compliance with federal requirements.
                                             
 (h) Leveraging funds through issuance of bonds and other
indebtedness.
                                             
 (i) Expending funds for administration and other costs related to
the SIB, including but not limited to staff, accounting, legal,
consulting, or other professional services.
                                             
 (j) Establishing advisory committees, as appropriate.
                                             
 (k) Collecting fees and other charges related to loans and
financial assistance.
                                             
 (l) Applying for and accepting any legal source of money, grants,
aid, property, or service to effectuate the purpose of the SIB.
                                             
 (m) Investing funds on behalf of the SIB.
                                             
 (n) All things necessary or reasonable to implement the purpose
of the SIB.
                                             
 VI. The SIB shall not be a bank under the jurisdiction of the New
Hampshire banking commission or the Treasury Department of the United
States or subject to the provisions of any federal or state securities
law.
                                             
 VII. The department of transportation shall submit an annual report
to the governor, state treasurer, senate president, speaker of the house
of representatives, chair of the senate finance committee, chair of
senate transportation committee, chair of house of representatives
finance committee, chair of house of representatives public works and
highways committee, and chair of the fiscal committee of the general
court.

**Source.** 2014, 290:1, eff. as provided in 2014, 290:4.
