---
title: 'CHAPTER 21-M DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 21-M
                                             
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
---------------------

### Section 21-M:1

 **21-M:1 Findings; Intent. –** The general court finds that, despite
the highly skilled work performed and the excellent reputation attained
by the office of the attorney general over the years, there is a need
for more opportunities for career advancement within the office. It
further finds an ever-increasing need for greater emphasis on newer
fields of endeavor such as consumer protection and environmental
protection, in addition to a steadily rising demand on the office in the
areas of criminal justice and assistance to other state departments.
Further, the general court finds the attorney general is in great need
of assistance in the administration of the functions of the office by
the establishment of intermediate levels of supervision.

**Source.** 1985, 300:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 21-M:2

 **21-M:2 Establishment; General Functions. –**
                                             
 I. There is established the department of justice, an agency of the
state, under the executive direction of the attorney general.
                                             
 II. The department of justice, through its officials, shall have all
the powers and duties enumerated by statute and implied from the common
law and shall be responsible for the following general functions:
                                             
 (a) Advising and representing the state and its executive branch
agencies in all civil legal matters.
                                             
 (b) Supervising and conducting criminal investigations and
prosecutions.
                                             
 (c) Enforcing the various consumer protection and antitrust laws
of the state.
                                             
 (d) Assisting and advising those agencies charged with protecting
the environment and enforcing the environmental laws of the state.

**Source.** 1985, 300:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 21-M:3

 **21-M:3 Attorney General; Deputy; Associates; Assistants. –**
                                             
 I. The attorney general shall be appointed as provided by the
constitution. He shall serve for a term of 4 years. He shall have been
admitted to the practice of law in New Hampshire. He shall also be
qualified by reason of education and experience.
                                             
 II. The attorney general shall nominate the deputy attorney general
for appointment by the governor, with the consent of the council. The
deputy attorney general shall serve for a term to expire on March 31,
1987, and thereafter for a fixed term of 4 years. The deputy attorney
general shall have been admitted to the practice of law in New Hampshire
and be qualified by reason of education and experience.
                                             
 III. (a) The attorney general, subject to the approval of the
governor and council, may appoint assistant attorneys general within the
limits of the appropriation made for the appointments, each of whom
shall hold office for a term of 5 years. Any vacancy in such office may
be filled for the unexpired term. An assistant attorney general may be
removed only as provided by RSA 4:1.
                                             
 (b) The attorney general may, in his or her discretion, designate
to serve without compensation, current assistant United States
Attorneys, with prior authorization from the United States Attorney, or
assistant county attorneys, with prior authorization from the county
attorney, to assist with state cases.
                                             
 IV. The attorney general may designate senior assistant attorneys
general. Senior assistant attorneys general may serve as bureau chiefs
and in such other positions as the attorney general may determine.
Senior assistants shall serve in that capacity at the pleasure of the
attorney general. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the
positions in this section shall be funded within appropriations made to
the department of justice for each biennium and through the salary
adjustment fund, as needed.
                                             
 V. The attorney general may designate associate attorneys general.
Associate attorneys general may serve as directors of the divisions of
public protection and legal counsel and shall serve in that capacity at
the pleasure of the attorney general.
                                             
 VI. The attorney general shall nominate, subject to confirmation by
the governor and council, an unclassified director of administration for
the office of attorney general, within the limits of the appropriation
made for the appointment, who shall serve for a 5-year term. The
director of administration may be removed only as provided by RSA 4:1.
                                             
 VII. The attorney general may nominate, subject to confirmation by
the governor and council, criminal justice investigators and consumer
protection investigators within the limits of the appropriations made
for the appointments, each of whom shall have statewide law enforcement
authority, shall be a peace officer as defined by RSA 594:1, III, and
shall serve for a 5-year term. Any person nominated for such a position
shall be certified or eligible for certification as a police officer
pursuant to RSA 188-F:26. A criminal justice investigator or a consumer
protection investigator shall be removed if he or she fails to achieve
certification or if he or she is decertified by the police standards and
training council, otherwise a criminal justice investigator or a
consumer protection investigator may be removed only as provided by RSA
4:1.
                                             
 VIII. The attorney general shall appoint qualified applicants to
serve as a hearing officer for appeals to any of the councils
established under RSA 21-O. The attorney general and the commissioner of
the department of environmental services may enter into a memorandum of
understanding to transfer funds sufficient to fund the hearing officer
position and related expenses. Such individual or individuals shall:
                                             
 (a) Be qualified by education and experience in the conduct of
administrative adjudicative hearings and the application of law to
facts; and
                                             
 (b) Be fully screened by the attorney general from the outset of
any such appeal from any attorney representing the department.
                                             
 IX. When designated as the hearing officer for a particular appeal,
the hearing officer shall:
                                             
 (a) Regulate all procedural aspects of a proceeding, including
presiding over the hearing and any prehearing conferences;
                                             
 (b) Subject to RSA 21-O:14, at the first prehearing conference
order the parties and any persons who have been allowed to intervene to
participate in mediation if the hearing officer concludes that it is
reasonably possible that mediation will result in the resolution of the
issues in dispute in the proceeding. No order to mediate shall stay the
appeal proceeding;
                                             
 (c) Adopt all findings of fact made by the council except to the
extent any such finding is without evidentiary support in the record;
                                             
 (d) Deliberate with the council before reaching conclusions on
mixed questions of law and fact;
                                             
 (e) Decide all questions of law presented during the pendency of
the appeal; and
                                             
 (f) Prepare and issue written decisions on all motions and on the
merits of the appeal within 90 days of the conclusion of the hearing on
the merits. The hearing officer shall provide the council with a
proposed written decision on the merits within 45 days of the conclusion
of the hearing on the merits. If requested to do so by the members of
the council participating in the discussion, the hearing officer shall
meet with those members within the 90 day period to discuss the
decision.
                                             
 X. The hearing officer may issue a subpoena, upon the request of any
party to an appeal filed after the effective date of this paragraph, and
only to the extent the information or testimony sought is reasonably
necessary for the determination of matters within the council's
jurisdiction. A subpoena may be requested for purposes of discovery as
may be allowed by the council's rules or to provide testimony at any
hearing conducted in the proceeding, or both. All costs associated with
the issuance of any subpoena issued by the hearing officer shall be paid
by the party requesting the subpoena.

**Source.** 1985, 300:1; 410:12, 13. 1986, 135:5. 1990, 266:4. 2001,
158:104. 2002, 276:3. 2007, 235:2. 2009, 40:1. 2010, 354:1, eff. Sept.
18, 2010. 2012, 246:1, 16, eff. June 18, 2012.

### Section 21-M:3-a

 **21-M:3-a Authority to Organize and Assign Investigatory Resources.
–** Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the attorney general
is authorized to organize and assign the criminal justice investigators,
consumer protection investigators, financial analysts, investigatory
paralegals, and such other investigators that the department of justice
is authorized to employ in the manner that the attorney general deems
most effective and efficient for fulfilling all the duties assigned to
the department of justice. The attorney general may assign leadership or
supervisory duties relative to any or all investigatory personnel to any
unclassified investigator on a temporary or permanent basis.

**Source.** 2007, 235:3, eff. Aug. 24, 2007.

### Section 21-M:3-b

 **21-M:3-b Law Enforcement Officers Assigned to the Attorney
General. –** The attorney general, as the chief law enforcement officer
for the state, shall have authority to vest with statewide law
enforcement authority any municipal or state law enforcement officer
assigned by the employing authority to work under the guidance and
direction of the attorney general for the purpose of conducting or
assisting with criminal law investigations being conducted by the
attorney general's office, including, but not limited to, service on the
attorney general's drug task force. The grant of authority shall be
valid only for the duration of the officer's assignment to the
department of justice. Any law enforcement officer vested with statewide
law enforcement authority pursuant to this section shall be a state
official for the purposes of being entitled to defense and
indemnification under RSA 99-D:2, in accordance with the terms of any
written agreement between the attorney general and the employing
authority and subject to any limitations set forth in such written
agreement.

**Source.** 2007, 235:3, eff. Aug. 24, 2007.

### Section 21-M:4

 **21-M:4 Compensation. –** The annual salary of the attorney
general, the deputy attorney general, the associate attorneys general,
the senior assistant attorneys general, each assistant attorney general,
each criminal justice investigator, and each consumer protection
investigator shall be that prescribed by RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 1985, 300:1. 1986, 135:6, eff. May 27, 1986.

### Section 21-M:5

 **21-M:5 Duties of the Attorney General. –** In addition to the
powers, duties and functions otherwise vested by law, including RSA 7,
in the attorney general, he shall:
                                             
 I. Represent the public interest in the administration of the
department of justice and be responsible to the governor, the general
court, and the public for such administration.
                                             
 II. Exercise all of the powers and duties vested in commissioners by
RSA 21-G.
                                             
 III. Have the authority to establish a unit within his office to
provide for internal department administrative functions, which
functions shall include:
                                             
 (a) Accounting, purchasing, and budget control procedures;
                                             
 (b) Personnel management;
                                             
 (c) Property, contracts, and grants management;
                                             
 (d) Data processing and statistical analysis as provided for by
RSA 7:40;
                                             
 (e) Assisting the attorney general with short and long range
department level planning activities.
                                             
 IV. Have the authority to adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
necessary to assure the continuation or granting of federal funds or
other assistance not otherwise provided for by law.
                                             
 V. Supervise the operations of the office of chief medical examiner
established in RSA 611-B, which shall be part of the department of
justice.
                                             
 VI. Submit annually 60 days after the close of each fiscal year to
the fiscal committee of the general court a report detailing each
expenditure approved under RSA 7:12.

**Source.** 1985, 300:1. 1992, 289:29. 2007, 324:10, eff. Sept. 14,
2007. 2012, 247:13, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 21-M:6

 **21-M:6 Division of Public Protection. –**
                                             
 I. There is established within the department a division of public
protection. The division shall be supervised by a division director who
shall be an associate attorney general appointed under RSA 21-M:3.
                                             
 II. The division shall include the following units:
                                             
 (a) A bureau of criminal justice.
                                             
 (b) A bureau of consumer protection and antitrust.
                                             
 (c) A bureau of environmental protection.

**Source.** 1985, 300:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 21-M:7

 **21-M:7 Division of Legal Counsel. –**
                                             
 I. There is established within the department a division of legal
counsel. The division shall be supervised by an associate attorney
general appointed under RSA 21-M:3.
                                             
 II. The division of legal counsel shall consist of the following
units:
                                             
 (a) A bureau of civil law.
                                             
 (b) A transportation and construction bureau.
                                             
 III. The division shall also be responsible for administering the
duties assigned to the attorney general regarding charitable trusts
under RSA 7:19 through 32-a.

**Source.** 1985, 300:1. 1987, 406:3, eff. July 25, 1987.

### Section 21-M:8

 **21-M:8 Criminal Justice Bureau. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established within the division of public
protection a criminal justice bureau. The bureau shall be supervised by
a senior assistant attorney general who shall be appointed by the
attorney general in accordance with the provisions of RSA 21-M:3 and who
shall carry out the duties imposed by this section under the supervision
of the attorney general and do such other work as the attorney general
may assign. The attorney general shall appoint such other assistant
attorneys general pursuant to the provisions of RSA 21-M:3 and such
additional investigative, clerical, stenographic, and other staff as may
be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section within the
limits of the appropriations made for the bureau.
                                             
 II. The duties of the bureau shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
                                             
 (a) Investigating and prosecuting major crimes as directed by the
attorney general.
                                             
 (b) Representing the state in all criminal appeals to the New
Hampshire supreme court or federal courts.
                                             
 (c) Investigating and prosecuting such other criminal matters as
the attorney general shall determine.
                                             
 (d) Investigating and prosecuting medicaid fraud as directed by
the attorney general.
                                             
 (e) Representing the state in all post-conviction insanity
proceedings.

**Source.** 1985, 300:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 21-M:8-a

 **21-M:8-a Medicaid Fraud Control Unit. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established within the criminal justice bureau of
the department of justice, a medicaid fraud control unit. The unit shall
be supervised by an assistant attorney general who shall be appointed by
the attorney general in accordance with the provisions of RSA 21-M:3 and
who shall carry out the duties imposed by this section under the
supervision of the attorney general. The attorney general shall appoint
such other assistant attorneys general pursuant to the provisions of RSA
21-M:3 and such additional investigative, clerical, stenographic and
other staff as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this
section within the limits of the appropriations made for the unit.
                                             
 II. The duties of the unit shall include, but not be limited to, the
investigation and prosecution of violations of all applicable state laws
pertaining to fraud in the
                                             
 (a) Administration of the medicaid program;
                                             
 (b) Provision of medical assistance under the state medicaid
program;
                                             
 (c) Activities of providers of medical assistance under the state
medicaid program.
                                             
 The unit shall also review complaints alleging abuse or neglect of
patients in any health care facilities receiving payments under the
state medicaid program and may review complaints of the misappropriation
of patients' private funds in such facilities.
                                             
 III. The department of health and human services shall cooperate
with the medicaid fraud control unit in conducting such investigations
and prosecutions and shall provide such information for those purposes
as may be requested by the attorney general or his authorized
representative.

**Source.** 1987, 207:1, eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 21-M:8-b

 **21-M:8-b Office of Victim/Witness Assistance. –**
                                             
 I. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Victim'' means a person who suffers direct or threatened
physical, emotional or psychological harm as the result of the
commission or the attempted commission of a crime. "Victim'' also
includes the immediate family of any victim who is a minor or who is
incompetent, or the immediate family of a homicide victim, or the
surviving partner in a civil union.
                                             
 (b) "Witness'' means any person who has been or is expected to be
summoned to testify for the state in a criminal case or who by reason of
having relevant information is subject to call or likely to be called as
a witness for the state, whether or not any action or proceeding has yet
been commenced.
                                             
 II. There is hereby established within the criminal justice bureau
of the department of justice, the office of victim/witness assistance.
The office shall provide information and services to victims and
witnesses in criminal cases prosecuted by the attorney general and shall
develop and coordinate a statewide victim/witness rights information
program. The victim/witness rights information program shall:
                                             
 (a) Provide victims or their representatives with information
about the availability of social and medical services, especially
emergency and social services available in the victim's immediate
geographical area.
                                             
 (b) Provide victims or their representatives with information
about how to contact the appropriate county office of victim/witness
assistance and the appropriate state or county prosecutor's office.
                                             
 (c) Gather information from victim/witness assistance programs
throughout the country and make that information available to county
offices of victim/witness assistance, police departments, hospitals,
prosecutor's offices, the courts, and other agencies that provide
assistance to victims of crime.
                                             
 (d) Sponsor conferences to bring together personnel working in
the field of victim/witness assistance to exchange methods and
procedures for improving and expanding services to victims.
                                             
 (e) Provide victims or their representatives with information
about the availability of and access to restorative justice programs
including victim-initiated victim-offender dialogue programs offered
through the department of corrections.
                                             
 III. The office of victim/witness assistance shall seek to
coordinate efforts with the county attorneys and the various law
enforcement agencies in the provision of information and services to
victims and witnesses.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding RSA 9:17-c, salary and benefits moneys from any
existing vacancy in the department of justice may be used to fund the
positions in the office of victim/witness assistance.

**Source.** 1987, 310:1. 2003, 319:37. 2009, 283:3, 5, eff. Sept. 27,
2009.

### Section 21-M:8-c

 **21-M:8-c Victim of Alleged Sexual Offense. –** If a physician or a
hospital provides any physical examination of a victim of an alleged
sexual offense to gather information and evidence of the alleged crime,
these services shall be provided without charge to the individual. Upon
submission of appropriate documentation, the physician or hospital shall
be reimbursed for the cost of such examination by the department of
justice to the extent such costs are not the responsibility of a third
party under a health insurance policy or similar third party obligation.
The bill for the medical examination of a sexual assault victim shall
not be sent or given to the victim or the family of the victim. The
privacy of the victim shall be maintained to the extent possible during
third party billings. Billing forms shall be subject to the same
principles of confidentiality applicable to any other medical record
under RSA 151:13. Where such forms are released for statistical or
accounting services, all personal identifying information shall be
deleted from the forms prior to release.

**Source.** 1988, 184:1, eff. April 26, 1988.

### Section 21-M:8-d

 **21-M:8-d Standardized Rape Protocol and Kit and Domestic Violence
Protocol. –** The department of justice shall adopt, pursuant to RSA
541-A, and implement rules establishing a standardized rape protocol and
kit and a domestic violence protocol to be used by all physicians or
hospitals in this state when providing physical examinations of victims
of alleged sexual offenses and alleged domestic abuse, as defined in RSA
173-B:1.

**Source.** 1988, 184:1. 1993, 95:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 21-M:8-e

 **21-M:8-e Administration of Victims' Assistance Fund. –**

                                             [Repealed 1989, 417:6, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.
                                             ]

### Section 21-M:8-f

 **21-M:8-f Victims' Assistance Program; Administration. –** There is
established a victims' assistance program to be administered by the
department of justice.

**Source.** 1989, 417:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 21-M:8-g

 **21-M:8-g Victims' Assistance Commission. –**
                                             
 I. A victims' assistance commission is hereby established to review
and award victims' claims for compensation. The attorney general shall
nominate not fewer than 3 nor more than 5 persons to serve as members of
this commission. Appointments shall be effective when the nominations
are approved by the governor and council.
                                             
 II. The commission may accept private donations and contributions to
be used to compensate victims under RSA 21-M:8-h. Any money received by
the commission pursuant to this paragraph shall be deposited to the
account of the commission and shall not lapse.
                                             
 III. The commission shall review claims from victims for
compensation and make compensation awards from the victims' assistance
fund and from private donations and contributions received under
paragraph II.
                                             
 IV. No later than September 15, 2010, and annually thereafter, the
commission shall submit a written report detailing the number of claims
for compensation made from the victims' assistance fund and the total
amount of compensation granted from the fund for the preceding fiscal
year, and the balance of the fund as of the end of the preceding fiscal
year, to the chairpersons of the house and senate ways and means
committees, the house criminal justice and public safety committee, and
the senate judiciary committee.

**Source.** 1989, 417:2. 2010, 154:2, eff. Aug. 13, 2010.

### Section 21-M:8-h

 **21-M:8-h Claimant Eligibility; Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Victims eligible for compensation are:
                                             
 (1) Any person who sustains personal injury as a result of a
felony or misdemeanor;
                                             
 (2) Any person who sustains personal injury caused by a person
driving under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances;
                                             
 (3) Any person who is a victim of sexual abuse and is under
the age of 18 at the time the claim is filed;


                                             [Paragraph I(a)(4) effective until July 1, 2023; see also paragraph
I(a)(4) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 (4) Any person who is a victim of human trafficking and has
been tattooed with an identifying mark of human trafficking by a person
who has forced him or her into trafficking.


                                             [Paragraph I(a)(4) effective July 1, 2023; see also paragraph I(a)(4)
set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 (4) Any person who is a victim of human trafficking and has
been tattooed with an identifying mark of human trafficking by a person
who has forced him or her into trafficking;


                                             [Paragraph I(a)(5) effective July 1, 2023.
                                             ]


                                             
 (5) Victims of the FRM fraud.
                                             
 (b) In the case of a child victim, the claimant, guardian ad
litem, advocate or parent may claim compensation in the victim's stead.
If the victim is incompetent or in the case of a victim's death as a
direct result of the crime, the immediate family of the victim is
eligible to claim compensation. In this section, immediate family of the
victim shall include the surviving partner in a civil union. In the case
of a victim's disability as a direct result of the crime, the victim's
legal representative may claim compensation in the victim's stead.
                                             
 (c) A family member of a law enforcement officer, an inmate at a
state or county correctional facility, and an individual who is not a
citizen of the United States or who is not a legal alien shall be
considered victims eligible for compensation under this section.
                                             
 II. The claimant, guardian ad litem or child advocate, or parent may
file a claim for compensation within 2 years of the crime, unless good
cause is shown.
                                             
 III. A claimant shall not be deemed ineligible for compensation
based solely upon failure to apprehend the offender, or based solely
upon failure of the state to obtain a conviction against the offender,
providing there is reasonable evidence to sustain the claim that a crime
had been committed which resulted in injury to the victim.
                                             
 IV. The commission may consider the finding of innocence or guilt of
the alleged offender in arriving at their determination of eligibility
of the claimant. In determining eligibility and the amount of
compensation to be awarded, the commission shall consider the
contributory fault of the victim in causing his injury. If compensation
is paid to members of the accused's immediate family, or persons who
reside with or who have maintained a continuous relationship with the
accused, the accused shall receive no benefit or enrichment as a result
of payment of such compensation.
                                             
 V. The claimant may be reimbursed for reasonable out-of-pocket
expenses, medical expenses, funeral expenses, counseling expenses,
rehabilitative expenses, expenses associated with the victim's
participation in post-conviction proceedings and victim-offender
dialogue programs or other restorative justice programs, and lost wages
directly resulting from the crime. Claimants eligible under subparagraph
I(a)(4) may be reimbursed for the costs of removing the tattoo with an
identifying mark. No reimbursement shall be paid unless the claimant has
incurred reimbursable expenses of at least 
                                             $100. There shall be a

                                             $30,000 maximum recovery per claimant per incident. If expenses paid
through the victims' assistance program fund are later covered by
insurance settlements, civil suit settlements, or restitution, or
through any other source, the claimant shall reimburse the fund for the
amount of expenses recovered.
                                             
 V-a. Notwithstanding any right by a victim to claim restitution or a
court order for restitution under RSA 651:62-67, a victim shall be
eligible for compensation under this section.
                                             
 VI, VII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VIII. Any person who was a victim of a crime under investigation by
the cold case homicide unit as established in New Hampshire Laws 2009,
269:1 shall be eligible for victim's compensation regardless of the date
of the crime. Compensation under this paragraph shall be limited to
counseling expenses and expenses associated with the victim's
participation in pre- and post-conviction proceedings incurred after the
effective date of this paragraph.
                                             
 IX. Notwithstanding paragraph II, any person who was a victim of a
crime for which the person convicted of the crime has filed a petition
for post-conviction DNA testing under RSA 651-D shall be eligible for
victim's compensation regardless of the date of the crime. Compensation
under this paragraph shall be limited to qualified expenses incurred
after the post-conviction DNA testing petition is filed.
                                             
 X. (a) No person that has received notice of a claim filed pursuant
to this section shall collect a debt or attempt to collect a debt
resulting from a crime-related expense against a claimant under this
section until an award is made to the claimant or the claim is
determined to be noncompensable. The statute of limitations for the
collection of such debts shall be tolled during the period of this
prohibition.
                                             
 (b) Any person who violates the provisions of this paragraph
shall be liable to the claimant pursuant to the provisions of RSA
358-C:4.
                                             
 (c) In this paragraph, "person'' shall have the same meaning as
in RSA 358-C:1, X.
                                             
 XI. With the approval of the fiscal committee of the general court
and the governor and council, the attorney general may request
additional funds to pay claims for compensation to victims pursuant to
RSA 21-M:8-h, on the warrant of the governor, out of any money in the
treasury not otherwise appropriated.

**Source.** 1989, 417:2, 8. 1992, 220:6, I. 1993, 131:1. 1994, 394:1.
1996, 286:1-3. 2009, 240:1, 2. 2010, 154:1, eff. Aug. 13, 2010; 299:5,
eff. Sept. 11, 2010. 2014, 257:6, 7, eff. Oct. 23, 2014. 2015, 201:1, 2,
eff. Sept. 4, 2015. 2016, 293:4, eff. July 1, 2023.

### Section 21-M:8-i

 **21-M:8-i Administration of Fund. –**
                                             
 I. Subject to the availability of money in the victims' assistance
fund, the attorney general shall make grants for the establishment and
maintenance of victim assistance programs.
                                             
 II. A victim assistance program is eligible to receive grants under
this section if such program:
                                             
 (a) Is within the office of a county attorney; or
                                             
 (b) Is operated by a public agency or a private nonprofit
organization or a combination of such agencies or organizations and
provides services to victims of crime, and demonstrates:
                                             
 (1) a record of providing effective services to victims of
crime and financial support from sources other than the fund; or
                                             
 (2) substantial financial support from sources other than the
fund; or
                                             
 (c) Is a program approved by the attorney general and provides
services to victims of sexual assault.
                                             
 III. A victim assistance program shall expend sums received under
this section only for providing services to victims of crime.
                                             
 IV. No more than 15 percent of the money in the victims' assistance
fund shall be used by the attorney general for the costs of
administration of the victims' assistance fund and the administrative
costs of the victims' assistance commission.
                                             
 V. The remainder of the money in the victims' assistance fund shall
be used by the attorney general for the compensation of victims in
accordance with RSA 21-M:8-h.

**Source.** 1989, 417:2. 1999, 261:2. 2002, 176:2, 3, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 21-M:8-j

 **21-M:8-j Rulemaking. –** The attorney general shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The application procedure for victims' assistance claims.
                                             
 II. The standards which the victims' assistance commission shall
apply in making a determination on each claim.
                                             
 III. The qualifications, nomination procedures, and terms for
victims' assistance commission members.
                                             
 IV. The reimbursement of funds awarded to persons compensated by the
victims' assistance fund who later receive compensation for injuries or
expenses from other sources.
                                             
 V. Procedures for payment of compensation when paid to members of
the accused's immediate family or persons who reside with or have
maintained a continuous relationship with the accused, which will
prevent the accused from receiving any benefit or enrichment from such
compensation.

**Source.** 1989, 417:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 21-M:8-k

 **21-M:8-k Rights of Crime Victims. –**
                                             
 I. As used in this section:
                                             
 (a) "Victim'' means a person who suffers direct or threatened
physical, emotional, psychological or financial harm as a result of the
commission or the attempted commission of a crime. "Victim'' also
includes the immediate family of any victim who is a minor or who is
incompetent, or the immediate family of a homicide victim, or the
surviving partner in a civil union.
                                             
 (b) "Crime'' means a violation of a penal law of this state for
which the offender, upon conviction, may be punished by imprisonment for
more than one year or an offense expressly designated by law to be a
felony.
                                             
 II. To the extent that they can be reasonably guaranteed by the
courts and by law enforcement and correctional authorities, and are not
inconsistent with the constitutional or statutory rights of the accused,
crime victims are entitled to the following rights:
                                             
 (a) The right to be treated with fairness and respect for their
dignity and privacy throughout the criminal justice process.
                                             
 (b) The right to be informed about the criminal justice process
and how it progresses.
                                             
 (c) The right to be free from intimidation and to be reasonably
protected from the accused throughout the criminal justice process.
                                             
 (d) The right to be notified of all court proceedings.
                                             
 (e) The right to attend trial and all other court proceedings the
accused has the right to attend.
                                             
 (f) The right to confer with the prosecution and to be consulted
about the disposition of the case, including plea bargaining.
                                             
 (g) The right to have inconveniences associated with
participation in the criminal justice process minimized.
                                             
 (h) The right to be notified if presence in court is not
required.
                                             
 (i) The right to be informed about available resources, financial
assistance, and social services.
                                             
 (j) The right to restitution, as granted under RSA 651:62-67 or
any other applicable state law, or victim's compensation, under RSA
21-M:8-h or any other applicable state law, for their losses.
                                             
 (k) The right to be provided a secure, but not necessarily
separate, waiting area during court proceedings.
                                             
 (l) The right to be advised of case progress and final
disposition.
                                             
 (m) The right of confidentiality of the victim's address, place
of employment, and other personal information.
                                             
 (n) The right to the prompt return of property when no longer
needed as evidence.
                                             
 (o) The right to have input in the probation presentence report
impact statement.
                                             
 (p) The right to appear and make a written or oral victim impact
statement at the sentencing of the defendant or, in the case of a plea
bargain, prior to any plea bargain agreement. No victim shall be subject
to questioning by counsel when giving an impact statement.
                                             
 (q) The right to be notified of an appeal, an explanation of the
appeal process, the time, place and result of the appeal, and the right
to attend the appeal hearing.
                                             
 (r) The right to be notified of, to attend, and to make a written
or oral victim impact statement at the sentence review hearings and
sentence reduction hearings. No victim shall be subject to questioning
by counsel when giving an impact statement.
                                             
 (s) The right to be notified of any change of status such as
prison release, permanent interstate transfer, or escape, and the date
of the parole board hearing, when requested by the victim through the
victim advocate.
                                             
 (t) The right to address or submit a written statement for
consideration by the parole board on the defendant's release and to be
notified of the decision of the board, when requested by the victim
through the victim advocate.
                                             
 (u) The right to all federal and state constitutional rights
guaranteed to all victims of crime on an equal basis, and
notwithstanding the provisions of any laws on capital punishment, the
right not to be discriminated against or have their rights as a victim
denied, diminished, expanded, or enhanced on the basis of the victim's
support for, opposition to, or neutrality on the death penalty.
                                             
 (v) The right to access to restorative justice programs,
including victim-initiated victim-offender dialogue programs offered
through the department of corrections.
                                             
 (w) The right to be informed of the filing of a petition for
post-conviction DNA testing under RSA 651-D.
                                             
 II-a. (a) In any case where the victim informs the court that he or
she requires assistance in making an oral or written impact statement
permitted under this section, the court shall allow the victim to
designate a representative to write or speak on the victim's behalf.
                                             
 (b) The victim's impact statement shall not be limited to the
injuries, harm, or damages noted in the information or indictment, but
may include all injuries, harm, and damages suffered as a result of the
commission or attempted commission of the crime whether or not the
injuries, harm, or damages were fully determined or discovered at the
time the information or indictment was filed.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this section shall be construed as creating a cause
of action against the state, a county or municipality, or any of their
agencies, instrumentalities, or employees. Nothing in this section shall
be construed as creating any new cause of action or new remedy or right
for a criminal defendant.

**Source.** 1991, 39:2. 1993, 356:2. 2003, 259:1. 2007, 225:1, 2. 2009,
283:4, 6; 312:1. 2010, 299:4, eff. Sept. 11, 2010.

### Section 21-M:8-l

 **21-M:8-l Restitution to the Victims' Assistance Fund. –**
Notwithstanding RSA 651:63, a court may order restitution to the
victims' assistance fund as a part of a sentence, to the extent that
moneys were awarded to the victim of the crime from the victims'
assistance fund, if the court finds that:
                                             
 I. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. Restitution shall replenish the victims' assistance fund.
                                             
 III. The victims' assistance fund has not been reimbursed for the
moneys expended from another source.

**Source.** 1993, 42:1. 1996, 286:21, I, eff. July 1, 1997.

### Section 21-M:8-m

 **21-M:8-m Cold Case Homicide Unit. –**
                                             
 I. The attorney general and the commissioner of the department of
safety shall collaborate to establish a cold case homicide unit to work
exclusively on unsolved murders in the state. The unit shall consist of
such personnel from the division of state police and the department of
justice as the commissioner of the department of safety and the attorney
general shall determine. The commissioner and the attorney general, or
their designees, shall develop procedures for the operation of the
unit.
                                             
 II. The departments of justice and safety shall jointly provide
administrative support as may be necessary to the cold case unit.
                                             
 III. There is established in the office of the state treasurer a
nonlapsing fund to be known as the cold case homicide unit fund which
shall be administered by the attorney general and which shall be kept
distinct and separate from all other funds. All moneys in the cold case
homicide unit fund shall be continually appropriated to the attorney
general and may be expended for the purposes of this section. The
treasurer shall deposit all grants, donations, or other funds received
from any source pursuant to this section in the cold case homicide unit
fund.
                                             
 IV. The attorney general shall apply for, accept, and expend funds
from federal, private, or any other source for the purposes of this
section. Funding for the state police and department of justice
personnel for the cold case unit established in paragraph I shall be
contingent upon the receipt of grants or federal funds for such purpose,
including but not limited to, funds received pursuant to the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, Public Law 111-5, 111th Cong.
(2009).
                                             
 V. The commissioner of the department of safety and the attorney
general, or their designees, shall jointly issue a report on the
activities and results of the cold case unit no later than December 1 of
each year to the governor, the speaker of the house of representatives,
the president of the senate, and the state librarian.

**Source.** 2012, 200:1, eff. Aug. 12, 2012.

### Section 21-M:9

 **21-M:9 Consumer Protection and Antitrust Bureau. –**
                                             
 I. There is established in the division of public protection a
consumer protection and antitrust bureau. The bureau shall be supervised
by a senior assistant attorney general who shall be appointed by the
attorney general in accordance with the provisions of RSA 21-M:3 and who
shall carry out the provisions of this section under the supervision of
the attorney general and do such other work as the attorney general may
assign. The attorney general shall also appoint an investigator and such
other staff as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this
section within the limits of the appropriations for the bureau.
                                             
 II. The duties of the bureau shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
                                             
 (a) Receiving, investigating, and attempting to resolve
complaints by individual consumers of unfair or deceptive business
practices.
                                             
 (b) Bringing civil and criminal actions in the name of the state
to redress unfair or deceptive trade or business practices.
                                             
 (c) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (d) Administering and enforcing the provisions of the land sales
full disclosure act, RSA 356-A.
                                             
 (e) Administering and enforcing the provisions of the condominium
act, RSA 356-B.
                                             
 (f) Administering the provisions of RSA 356-C, relative to
protection of tenants in conversion of rental units.
                                             
 (g) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (h) Administering and enforcing the provisions of RSA 358-A,
relative to regulation of business practices for consumer protection.
                                             
 (i) Administering and enforcing the provisions of RSA 358-B,
relative to chain distributor schemes.
                                             
 (j) Administering and enforcing the provisions of RSA 358-C,
relative to unfair, deceptive, or unreasonable collection practices.
                                             
 (k) Administering and enforcing the provisions of RSA 358-D,
relative to regulation of motor vehicle repair facilities.
                                             
 (l) Administering and enforcing the provisions of RSA 358-E,
relative to distributorship disclosure.
                                             
 (m) Administering and enforcing the provisions of RSA 358-F,
relative to sale of unsafe used motor vehicles.
                                             
 (n) Administering and enforcing the provisions of RSA 358-G,
relative to regulation of auctions.
                                             
 (o) Administering and enforcing the provisions of RSA 358-H,
relative to regulation of rental referral agencies.
                                             
 (p) Administering and enforcing the provisions of RSA 358-I,
relative to regulation of health clubs.
                                             
 (q) Administering and enforcing the provisions of RSA 358-J,
relative to regulation of buying clubs.
                                             
 (r) Administering and enforcing the provisions of RSA 359-B,
relative to consumer credit reporting.
                                             
 (s) Administering and enforcing antitrust laws, including the
provisions of RSA 356, relative to combinations and monopolies.
                                             
 (t) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (u) Investigating and prosecuting disciplinary proceedings before
state professional licensing boards.
                                             
 III. The bureau may disclose to the public the number and type of
complaints or inquiries filed by consumers against a particular person,
as defined by RSA 358-A:1, I; provided, however, that no such disclosure
shall abridge the confidentiality of consumer complaints or inquiries.

**Source.** 1985, 300:1. 1987, 406:7, 11. 1992, 272:4. 1994, 306:9.
1996, 263:10, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 21-M:10

 **21-M:10 Environmental Protection Bureau. –**
                                             
 I. There is established in the division of public protection an
environmental protection bureau. The bureau shall be supervised by a
senior assistant attorney general who shall be appointed by the attorney
general in accordance with the provisions of RSA 21-M:3 and who shall
carry out the duties imposed by this section under the supervision of
the attorney general and do such other work as the attorney general may
assign. The attorney general shall appoint such other assistant
attorneys general pursuant to the provisions of RSA 21-M:3 and such
additional clerical, stenographic, and other staff as may be necessary
to carry out the provisions of this section within the limits of the
appropriations made for the bureau.
                                             
 II. The environmental protection bureau shall have the following
duties and functions:
                                             
 (a) Enforcing statutes pertaining to environmental protection,
control, and preservation.
                                             
 (b) Counseling state agencies and commissions given
responsibility over environmental concerns, including, but not limited
to, the department of environmental services and the pesticides control
board.
                                             
 (c) Exercising the common law powers of the attorney general to
protect the environment.
                                             
 (d) Bringing public nuisance and other actions in superior court
in the name of the state upon complaint by private citizens when in the
opinion of the attorney general the activity or activities complained of
may have a substantial impact upon the environment of the state.
                                             
 III. The environmental protection bureau is hereby authorized to
call upon any other state department, agency, commission, authority, or
institution for whatever help or assistance the senior assistant
attorney general deems necessary to investigate and prosecute cases
involving environmental damage and such other departments, agencies,
commissions, authorities, and institutions are hereby required to
immediately cooperate with and assist the division without charge.

**Source.** 1985, 300:1. 1986, 202:6, I(a). 1996, 228:3, eff. July 1,
1996.

### Section 21-M:11

 **21-M:11 Bureau of Civil Law. –**
                                             
 I. There is established within the division of legal counsel a
bureau of civil law. The bureau shall be supervised by a senior
assistant attorney general who shall be appointed by the attorney
general in accordance with the provisions of RSA 21-M:3 and who shall
carry out the duties imposed by this section under the supervision of
the attorney general and do such other work as the attorney general may
assign. The attorney general shall appoint such other assistant
attorneys general pursuant to the provisions of RSA 21-M:3 and such
additional clerical, stenographic, and other staff as may be necessary
to carry out the provisions of this section within the limits of the
appropriations made for the bureau.
                                             
 II. The duties of the bureau shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
                                             
 (a) Providing advice and legal representation in civil matters
for all executive branch agencies;
                                             
 (b) Providing advice and legal representation for the state in
land acquisition matters;
                                             
 (c) Regulating charitable trusts, as provided for by RSA 7:19
through 7:32-a.
                                             
 III. The department of justice shall have the authority to hire a
full-time attorney assigned to the bureau, who shall act as legal
counsel for state executive agencies in the procurement, negotiation,
and development of contracts as determined by the attorney general. Each
agency shall notify the department of justice of its intent to procure a
contract or enter into any agreement that may materially impact the
state, according to criteria established by the department of justice,
including but not limited to, contract value, complexity, and
performance obligations.

**Source.** 1985, 300:1, eff. July 1, 1985. 2015, 276:19, eff. July 1,
2015.

### Section 21-M:12

 **21-M:12 Transportation and Construction Bureau. –**
                                             
 I. There is established in the division of legal counsel a bureau of
transportation and construction. The bureau shall be supervised by a
senior assistant attorney general who shall be appointed by the attorney
general in accordance with the provisions of RSA 21-M:3 and who shall
carry out the duties imposed by this section under the supervision of
the attorney general and do such other work as the attorney general may
assign. The attorney general shall appoint such other assistant
attorneys general pursuant to the provisions of RSA 21-M:3 and such
additional clerical, stenographic, and other staff as may be necessary
to carry out the provisions of this section within the limits of the
appropriations made for the bureau.
                                             
 II. The duties of the bureau shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
                                             
 (a) Advising any department, division, bureau, or agency of the
state whenever it contemplates the taking of or takes private property.
                                             
 (b) Representing any department, division, bureau or agency of
the state in the taking of any interest in private property.

**Source.** 1985, 300:1. 1987, 406:4, eff. July 25, 1987.

### Section 21-M:13

 **21-M:13 Unemployment Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. The attorney general shall appoint no more than 2 assistant
attorneys general pursuant to the provisions of RSA 21-M:3 and a
stenographer. These personnel shall be paid by the department of
employment security but shall be under the administrative direction and
control of the attorney general.
                                             
 II. Any assistant attorney general appointed pursuant to RSA
21-M:13, I shall be a member of the civil bureau of the division of
legal counsel and shall be responsible for representing the department
of employment security for all civil and criminal matters in any court
arising under RSA 282-A or the rules adopted under it.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of the department of employment security and
all employees of that department shall give the office of the attorney
general such aid and assistance as it deems necessary to investigate,
prosecute and defend matters arising under RSA 282-A or the rules
adopted under it.

**Source.** 1985, 300:1, eff. July 1, 1985; 410:14, eff. July 2, 1985,
at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 21-M:14

 **21-M:14 Agency Attorneys. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 410:11, eff. July
2, 1985 at 12:01 a.m.
                                             ]

### Section 21-M:15

 **21-M:15 Rulemaking. –** The attorney general shall, in accordance
with the provisions of RSA 541-A, adopt rules required of him by RSA
21-G to properly carry out the functions of the department.

**Source.** 1985, 300:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 21-M:16

 **21-M:16 Incapacitated and Vulnerable Adult Fatality Review
Committee Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established the incapacitated and vulnerable
adult fatality review committee (committee) which shall be
administratively attached, under RSA 21-G:10, to the department of
justice.
                                             
 II. The attorney general shall appoint members and alternate members
to the committee. The members of the committee shall include individuals
representing the health care field, organizations with expertise in
services provided to incapacitated and vulnerable adults, law
enforcement, organizations or individuals who advocate for or provide
legal representation for incapacitated and vulnerable adults, and such
other members as the attorney general determines will assist the
committee in fulfilling its objectives. The terms of the members shall
be 3 years; provided, that the initial members shall be appointed to
staggered terms. Members shall serve at the pleasure of the attorney
general.
                                             
 III. The committee shall:
                                             
 (a) Recommend policies, practices, and services that will promote
collaboration among service providers for, and reduce preventable
fatalities among, incapacitated and vulnerable adults.
                                             
 (b) Evaluate policies, practices, interventions and responses to
fatalities among incapacitated and vulnerable adults and offer
recommendations for any improvements in those interventions and
responses.
                                             
 (c) Determine and report on trends and patterns of incapacitated
and vulnerable adult deaths in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (d) Evaluate and report on high risk factors, current practices,
gaps in systematic responses, and barriers to safety and well-being for
incapacitated and vulnerable adults in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (e) Educate the public, policy makers, and budget authorities
about fatalities involving covered incapacitated and vulnerable adults.
                                             
 (f) Recommend improvements in the sources of data relative to
preventing fatalities among incapacitated and vulnerable adults.
                                             
 (g) Identify and evaluate the prevalence of risk factors for
preventable deaths in the population of incapacitated and vulnerable
adults.
                                             
 IV. For the purposes of this section, "incapacitated adult'' means:
                                             
 (a) Adults who are clients of the area agency system pursuant to
RSA 171-A or RSA 137-K at the time of the person's death or within one
year of the person's death.
                                             
 (b) Adults who are patients at the New Hampshire hospital or any
other designated receiving facility or whose death occurs within 90 days
following discharge, who are on conditional discharge, or who are
applicants for or clients of the community mental health center system
under RSA 135-C:13 and RSA 135-C:14 at the time of death or within one
year of death.
                                             
 (c) Adults who are receiving services pursuant to RSA 161-E and
RSA 161-I.
                                             
 (d) Adults who are participants in programs or residents of
facilities specified in RSA 151:2, I(a), (b), (d), (e), or paragraph
IV-a, or RSA 161-J, or within 90 days of discharge from such a
facility.
                                             
 (e) Adults who were in need of any of the services defined in
subparagraphs (a)- (d) and paragraph IV-a at the time of their death.
                                             
 IV-a. For the purposes of this section, "vulnerable adult'' means an
adult who was the reported victim of abuse, neglect, self-neglect, or
exploitation which was reported to the department of health and human
services pursuant to RSA 161-F:46, where the report was determined to be
unfounded and was filed within 6 months prior to death, where the report
was determined to be founded and was filed within 3 years prior to
death, or where the report was pending at the time of death.
                                             
 V. The committee shall adopt a protocol defining which deaths shall
be reported to the committee and subject to review, and which deaths may
be screened out for review, such as deaths where the cause is natural,
expected, and non-preventable. The committee shall also determine
whether it is appropriate to have different types of review, such as
comprehensive or more limited reviews depending on the incident under
review or the purpose of the review. The protocol shall also define the
character of the contents of the committee's annual report, required
under paragraph VII.
                                             
 VI. The committee's review of a case shall not be initiated until
such time as any related criminal action has been finally adjudicated at
the trial court level. Records of the committee, including testimony by
persons participating in or appearing before the committee and
deliberations by committee members relating to the review of any death,
shall be confidential and privileged and shall be protected from direct
or indirect means of discovery, subpoena, or admission into evidence in
any judicial or administrative proceeding. However, information,
documents, or records otherwise available from original sources shall
not be construed as immune from discovery from the original sources or
used in any such civil or administrative action merely because they were
presented to the committee, and any person who appears before the
committee or supplies information as part of a committee review, or who
is a member of the committee, may not be prevented from testifying as to
matters within his or her knowledge, but such witness may not be asked
about his or her statements before the committee, participation as a
member of the committee, or opinions formed by him or her or any other
member of the committee, as a result of participation in a review
conducted by the committee.
                                             
 VII. The committee shall make an annual report, on or before the
first day of November each year, beginning on November 1, 2008, to the
speaker of the house of representatives, the president of the senate,
and the governor describing any trends and patterns of deaths or serious
injuries or risk factors, together with any recommendations for changes
in law, policy, and practice that will prevent deaths and related
serious occurrences. The committee may also issue special reports when
doing so is necessary to alert authorities or the public to the need for
prompt corrective action.
                                             
 VIII. The meetings and records of the committee shall be exempt from
the provisions of RSA 91-A. The committee's reports shall not include
any private or privileged information. Members of the committee may be
required to sign a confidentiality agreement that prohibits any
unauthorized dissemination of information beyond the purpose of the
review process as a condition of membership.

**Source.** 2007, 256:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2008. 2016, 59:7, eff. July 4,
2016.
