---
title: 'CHAPTER 21-N DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 21-N
                                             
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
-----------------------

### Section 21-N:1

 **21-N:1 Findings; Policy Statement. –**
                                             
 I. The general court finds that the students, parents, general
citizenry, local school teachers and administrators, local governments,
local school boards, school administrative units, and state government
have a joint and shared responsibility for the quality of education
delivered through the public education system in the state of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 II. In order to provide general guidance to the state department of
education established by this chapter, the general court declares the
following to be the policy of the state of New Hampshire:
                                             
 (a) The department shall have the dual role of providing
regulatory direction and instructional assistance to public elementary
and secondary schools.
                                             
 (b) The department shall be mindful of the need to balance these
dual roles so that they are given equal consideration in planning
department activities and expenditures and so that the consequences and
implications of regulatory decisions are fully considered in light of
the need to provide services to assist the local schools in complying
with such regulatory direction.
                                             
 (c) The paramount goal of the state shall be to provide an
adequate education for all school-age children in the state, consistent
with RSA 193-E.
                                             
 (d) The department shall continually strive to develop creative
and innovative methods to assist local schools to achieve the highest
possible degree of effective educational programming and teaching
techniques.
                                             
 (e) In accordance with RSA 193-E, the department shall work to
establish credible processes for measuring and rating schools.

**Source.** 1986, 41:1. 1996, 271:1. 1998, 389:5, 6. 2005, 257:15. 2007,
270:3, eff. June 29, 2007.

### Section 21-N:2

 **21-N:2 Establishment; General Functions. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established the department of education, an
agency of the state under the executive direction of a commissioner of
education.
                                             
 II. The department of education, through its officials, shall be
responsible for the following general functions:
                                             
 (a) Providing general supervision for elementary and secondary
schools, teachers and administrators.
                                             
 (b) Providing a variety of educational services to schools and
particular groups.
                                             
 (c) Providing vocational rehabilitation and social security
disability determination services for persons with disabilities.

**Source.** 1986, 41:1. 1990, 140:2, IV. 1994, 379:1, eff. June 9, 1994.

### Section 21-N:3

 **21-N:3 Commissioner; Deputy Commissioner; Directors; Compensation.
–**
                                             
 I. The governor, after consultation with the board of education,
shall appoint the commissioner and the deputy commissioner of the
department of education with the consent of council. Each shall serve
for a term of 4 years. The commissioner and the deputy commissioner may
succeed himself or herself, if reappointed. The commissioner and deputy
commissioner shall be qualified to hold their positions by reason of
education and experience.
                                             
 II. The commissioner, after consultation with the board of
education, shall nominate each division director for appointment by the
governor and council. The division directors shall serve for a term of 4
years. They may succeed themselves, if reappointed. The directors shall
be qualified to hold their respective positions by reason of education
and experience.
                                             
 III. The deputy commissioner and the directors shall serve staggered
terms.
                                             
 IV. The salaries of the commissioner, the deputy commissioner and
each division director shall be as specified in RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 1986, 41:1. 1994, 379:1. 2004, 257:41, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 21-N:4

 **21-N:4 Duties of Commissioner. –** In addition to the powers,
duties and functions otherwise vested by law in the commissioner of the
department of education, the office of the commissioner shall:
                                             
 I. Establish the organizational goals of the department and
represent the public interest in the administration of the functions of
the department of education and be responsible to the governor, the
general court, and the public for such administration.
                                             
 II. Have the authority, subject to the approval of the governor and
council, to accept gifts, contributions, and bequests of unrestricted
funds from individuals, foundations, corporations, and other
organizations or institutions for the purpose of furthering the policy
objectives of the department of education as set forth in RSA 21-N:1 and
except as prohibited by any other provision of law.
                                             
 III. Provide for a fair hearings unit within the commissioner's
office which shall, when not inconsistent with federal law, conduct all
hearings required under the provisions of RSA 186-C or any state or
federal law or regulation. Such hearings shall be conducted as
adjudicative proceedings as provided in RSA 541-A. The hearing officer,
when appropriate and when not inconsistent with state or federal law,
shall present proposed findings and recommendations to the commissioner
who shall, upon review of the record, issue a final decision in the
matter.
                                             
 IV. Represent the department on boards, commissions, committees, and
professional associations, or shall designate a designee.
                                             
 V. Establish procedures to provide school administrative units with
professional staff services, including direct services to school
administrative units in improving the effectiveness and efficiency of
administrative and instructional services. Such services shall include,
but not be limited to, assistance in addressing problems, resolving
disputes, and planning for internal reorganization; development of
clearer role definitions for superintendents, assistant and associate
superintendents, and school boards; and provision of resources and
programs for board training and community education regarding school
administrative unit functions and board and staff roles and
responsibilities.
                                             
 VI. Plan and apply for federal and other grants on a department-wide
basis.
                                             
 VII. Promote the application of educational research.
                                             
 VIII. Administer the provisions of RSA 193-C relative to the
statewide educational improvement and assessment program and RSA 193-E.
                                             
 IX. Oversee audit and financial monitoring functions which shall:
                                             
 (a) Provide analytical reports of examinations conducted of the
department's various divisions, bureaus, sections, programs and
functions. Examinations shall be conducted and reports prepared in
accordance with standards of governmental auditing and program
evaluation specified by authoritative national standard setting bodies.
Reports shall contain analyses, appraisals, comments, and
recommendations relating to the accuracy and competence of accounting,
financial, and management procedures in use.
                                             
 (b) Insure compliance with federal grant requirements and review
grantee and subgrantee compliance with all department grant
requirements.
                                             
 (c) Not assume any managerial, supervisory, or operational
function, or direct action initiated as a result of the unit's
recommendations.
                                             
 X. Review, on an ongoing basis, the development and administration
of standards.
                                             
 XI. Provide to the secretary of state in August of each year a list
or lists of all colleges, universities, and career schools approved or
licensed to operate in New Hampshire, all public high schools, and all
nonpublic high schools in New Hampshire accredited by a private school
accrediting agency recognized by the department of education.


                                             [Paragraph XII effective July 1, 2017.
                                             ]


                                             
 XII. No later than October 1, 2017, establish a chartered public
school program officer position which shall be a classified position.
The commissioner shall include a new classified chartered public school
program officer classified position in its efficiency expenditure
request pursuant to RSA 9:4 for the biennium ending June 30, 2019 and
every biennium thereafter. The chartered public school program officer
shall:
                                             
 (a) Answer inquiries regarding charter public schools.
                                             
 (b) Act as a liaison between chartered public schools and the
department of education.
                                             
 (c) Ensure that a chartered public school is implementing its
charter mission.
                                             
 (d) Provide training for interested parties on the governance of
chartered public schools and the development of chartered public school
policy.
                                             
 (e) Assist the chartered public school in identifying and
securing alternative funding sources.
                                             
 (f) Receive and evaluate progress reports from chartered public
schools, identify best practices for instruction and management in
chartered public schools, and develop a process to share such best
practices with other public schools.
                                             
 (g) Act as the liaison between chartered public schools and the
United States Department of Education.
                                             
 (h) Act as the liaison between chartered public school advocacy
groups and interested parties.
                                             
 (i) Act as the liaison between chartered public schools and other
public schools in the chartered public school's geographic region.
                                             
 (j) Work closely with the resident school districts and chartered
public schools to assure appropriate support for students with
disabilities.

**Source.** 1986, 41:1. 1989, 49:1, 2. 1994, 379:1. 1998, 389:7, eff.
Oct. 1, 1998. 2013, 278:1, eff. July 24, 2013. 2016, 272:2, eff. July 1,
2017.

### Section 21-N:5

 **21-N:5 Duties of Deputy Commissioner. –** The deputy commissioner
shall, in accordance with applicable laws:
                                             
 I. Provide for the following functions:
                                             
 (a) Implementing the organizational goals, managing the work of
the department, and directing the division directors in carrying out
state and federal obligations.
                                             
 (b) Assuring that the division directors comply with the
procedures established by the commissioner relative to support for local
schools under RSA 21-N:4, V.
                                             
 (c) Personnel management.
                                             
 (d) Developing and maintaining a system of accounting records and
budget control procedures which meet all state and applicable federal
accounting, purchasing, and reporting requirements.
                                             
 (e) Property and contracts.
                                             
 (f) Requiring and approving the development of short- and
long-range division level plans and their implementation.
                                             
 (g) Rate setting, as specified under RSA 186-C:7, III. Such rate
setting shall be accomplished in consultation with the department of
health and human services and the department of administrative
services.
                                             
 (h) Administering finance and operations.
                                             
 (i) Fiscal management of all federal and other grants.
                                             
 II. Exercise, subject to the supervision of the commissioner,
superior authority over the directors of the divisions of the department
relative to areas of responsibility specified in this section.

**Source.** 1986, 41:1. 1987, 345:2. 1988, 214:2. 1989, 49:3. 1994,
379:1, eff. June 9, 1994.

### Section 21-N:6

 **21-N:6 Division of Educational Improvement. –** There is hereby
established within the department the division of educational
improvement, under the supervision of an unclassified director of
educational improvement who shall be responsible for the following
functions, in accordance with applicable laws:
                                             
 I. Providing technical and consulting services in both academic and
support areas to public elementary and secondary schools.
                                             
 II. Administering the provisions of RSA 186-C relative to special
education.
                                             
 III. Administering federal and state programs designed to assist the
education of students and teachers.
                                             
 IV. Developing and administering standards governing the
professional development of educators from pre-service preparation
through ongoing professional growth.
                                             
 V. Administering standards for approving elementary and secondary
schools in accordance with rules adopted by the board under RSA 21-N:9,
I.
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1986, 41:1. 1987, 345:3. 1989, 49:4; 127:1. 1990, 140:2, X.
1994, 379:1. 2011, 224:7, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 21-N:7

 **21-N:7 Division of Program Support. –** There is hereby
established within the department the division of program support, under
the supervision of an unclassified director of program support who shall
be responsible for the following functions, in accordance with
applicable laws:
                                             
 I. Administering standards for certifying and recertifying
educational personnel, including monitoring local staff development
efforts.
                                             
 II. Assuring compliance with all federal equal opportunity and
access requirements, including, but not limited to, those requirements
concerning awareness and elimination of discrimination on the basis of
sex, race, language, national origin, or disability.
                                             
 III. Providing school building construction services and
administering the school building aid program.
                                             
 IV. Administering department responsibilities for nutrition programs
and services.
                                             
 V. Administering department responsibilities for information
services.
                                             
 VI. Collecting, compiling, analyzing, and reporting on education
data.

**Source.** 1986, 41:1. 1987, 168:4. 1988, 179:3. 1989, 49:6. 1990,
140:2, XI. 1994, 379:1, eff. June 9, 1994.

### Section 21-N:8

 **21-N:8 Division of Career Technology and Adult Learning. –** There
is hereby established within the department the division of career
technology and adult learning, under the supervision of an unclassified
director of career technology and adult learning who shall be
responsible for the following functions, in accordance with applicable
laws:
                                             
 I. Administering career technology and adult learning programs.
                                             
 II. Overseeing the administration of the provisions of RSA 200-C.
                                             
 III. Overseeing the administration of federal social security
disability determinations as authorized by the Social Security
Administration.
                                             
 IV. Overseeing the administration of the provisions of RSA 186-B
relative to services to the blind.
                                             
 V. Establishing regional vocational rehabilitation offices necessary
for the administration of this section.
                                             
 VI. Providing technical and consulting services to assist secondary
vocational education efforts.
                                             
 VII. Administering the provisions of RSA 186:61 and RSA 186:62,
relative to adult basic education, except functions assigned exclusively
to the deputy commissioner, as provided by RSA 21-N:5.

**Source.** 1986, 41:1. 1992, 60:1. 1994, 379:1, eff. June 9, 1994.

### Section 21-N:8-a

 **21-N:8-a Division of Higher Education. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established within the department the division of
higher education, under the supervision of an unclassified director of
higher education who shall be responsible for providing support to the
higher education commission established in paragraph II.
                                             
 II. (a) There is hereby established a higher education commission
which shall consist of the following members:
                                             
 (1) The president of the university of New Hampshire, the
president of Keene state college, the president of Plymouth state
university, and the president of Granite State college.
                                             
 (2) Two presidents from institutions within the community
college system of New Hampshire, to be chosen by the board of trustees
of the community college system.
                                             
 (3) The chancellor of the university system of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (4) The chancellor of the community college system of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 (5) The commissioner of the department of education.
                                             
 (6) Six representatives of the private 4-year colleges in New
Hampshire appointed by the governor and council on recommendation by the
New Hampshire College and University Council, with no more than one
representative from any one college.
                                             
 (7) One member to be appointed by the governor and council as
a representative from a for-profit college or university not a member of
the New Hampshire College and University Council.
                                             
 (8) Four members to be appointed by the governor and council
who shall be residents of the state and of the lay public, having no
official connection with any college, university, or private
postsecondary career school as an employee, trustee, or member on a
board of directors.
                                             
 (9) Two members to be appointed by the governor and council,
on recommendation by the American Council for Professional Education and
Training, who shall be residents of the state and shall represent
private postsecondary career schools.
                                             
 (b) The terms of appointed members, except as otherwise indicated
above, shall be for 5 years and until a successor is appointed and
qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
                                             
 (c) Commission appointments shall be made in such a way as to
preserve broad and equitable representation on the basis of gender,
ethnicity, and socioeconomic groups in the state.
                                             
 (d) The members of the commission shall serve without
compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual travel and other expenses
incurred in the performance of their duties on the commission from funds
appropriated to the department of education specifically for this
purpose.
                                             
 (e) The commission shall:
                                             
 (1) Regulate institutions of higher education pursuant to RSA
292:8-b through RSA 292:8-kk. The commission may accept accreditation by
a recognized accrediting association in place of its own independent
evaluation.
                                             
 (2) Regulate private postsecondary career schools pursuant to
RSA 188-G.
                                             
 (3) Administer financial aid programs as provided in state and
federal law for students attending higher education institutions, except
as otherwise provided by law.
                                             
 (4) Apply for, accept, and expend state, federal, or other
grants.
                                             
 (5) Oversee the functions of the Veterans Education Services
as authorized by Congress.
                                             
 (6) Establish and collect reasonable annual fees related to
the performance of statutory duties.
                                             
 (7) Enter into cooperative interstate or international
agreements to further operating efficiencies, student access, and
educational opportunities.
                                             
 (8) Be the designee for the integrated postsecondary education
data system as developed by the United States Department of Education.
                                             
 (9) Adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 (A) Organization and operation of the higher education
commission established in this section.
                                             
 (B) Approval and regulation of institutions of higher
education pursuant to RSA 292:8-b through RSA 292:8-kk.
                                             
 (C) Approval and regulation of private postsecondary career
schools pursuant to RSA 188-G.
                                             
 (D) Administration of financial aid programs for
institutions of higher education, except as otherwise provided by law.
                                             
 (E) Establishment and collection of reasonable fees for
functions performed by the division of higher education and the higher
education commission as required in this section.
                                             
 (10) Assume other responsibilities as may be provided in state
or federal law.
                                             
 III. There is hereby established in the office of the treasury the
higher education fund to be administered by the higher education
commission. The fund shall be nonlapsing and continually appropriated to
the higher education commission for the purposes established in this
chapter. All fees collected by the commission relative to the
performance of its duties shall be deposited into the fund.

**Source.** 2011, 224:126, eff. July 1, 2011. 2013, 164:1, eff. June 28,
2013. 2014, 132:1, eff. June 16, 2014. 2016, 43:1, eff. July 2, 2016.

### Section 21-N:8-b

 **21-N:8-b Higher Education; Military Academic Credit. –**
                                             
 I. The division of higher education shall develop and adopt a
written policy requiring each public institution of higher education to
develop a set of written policies and procedures governing the
evaluation of a student's military occupation, military training,
coursework, and experience, to determine whether academic credit shall
be awarded by the institution for the evaluated occupation, experience,
training, and coursework. The division's policy may require that the
occupation, training, experience, or courses meet the standards of the
American Council on Education or equivalent standards for awarding
academic credit. The division may also develop and adopt a written
policy requiring each public institution of higher education to develop
a set of written policies and procedures to standardize credit-by-exam
equivalencies for exams funded through the Department of Defense. The
educational credit shall be awarded based upon each institution's
admissions standards and shall be consistent with the mission of the
state's system of public higher education. Each public institution of
higher education shall designate a single point of contact for a student
who is enrolled in such an institution and who is also a veteran, as
defined in RSA 21:50, I, to conduct such an evaluation and
determination.
                                             
 II. The division shall consult with the chief executive officers of
each public institution of higher education in implementing the policy
set forth in paragraph I and the policy adopted by the division shall,
to the greatest extent possible, provide for consistent application by
all of the state's public institutions of higher education and promote
accurate and complete academic counseling.

**Source.** 2013, 53:1, eff. Aug. 3, 2013.

### Section 21-N:9

 **21-N:9 Rulemaking. –**
                                             
 I. The board of education shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to minimum standards for:
                                             
 (a) High schools, as authorized by RSA 186:8.
                                             
 (b) Junior high schools, as authorized by RSA 186:8.
                                             
 (c) Elementary schools, as authorized by RSA 186:8 and 189:25.
                                             
 II. The board of education shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 (a) The organization of school administrative units.
                                             
 (b) The duties of school boards.
                                             
 (c) Standards for school building construction.
                                             
 (d) School health policies.
                                             
 (e) Child benefit services grants.
                                             
 (f) Nonpublic school advisory councils.
                                             
 (g) Home study.
                                             
 (h) Dual enrollment, as authorized by RSA 193:1-b.
                                             
 (i) High school equivalency programs, as authorized by RSA
186:61.
                                             
 (j) Adult basic education programs, as authorized by RSA 186:61
and 186:62.
                                             
 (k) Vocational rehabilitation services, as authorized by RSA
186:6 and 200-C.
                                             
 (l) Special education programs affecting all children with
disabilities, as authorized by RSA 186-C:5, 186-C:16 and 186-C:18, V.
                                             
 (m) Standards for approval of regional career and technical
education centers, as authorized by RSA 188-E:3.
                                             
 (n) Vocational technical education, as authorized by RSA 186:6.
                                             
 (o) Standards for approval of nonpublic schools, as authorized by
RSA 186:11, XXIX.
                                             
 (p) Qualifications and duties of school superintendents and
principals, as authorized by RSA 186:8.
                                             
 (q) Qualifications and duties of school administrative unit
professional employees, as authorized by RSA 186:8.
                                             
 (r) Professional preparation standards and approval of
professional preparation programs for educating teachers in
post-secondary institutions, as authorized by RSA 186:11, X.
                                             
 (s) Certification standards for educational personnel, and
educator certification fees for granting credentials to educational
personnel, including teachers, paraprofessionals, superintendents,
assistant superintendents, special education administrators, business
administrators, principals, vocational directors, coordinators of
comprehensive health education and services, directors of pupil
personnel services, guidance directors, guidance counselors, school
psychologists, associate school psychologists, speech-language
specialists, social workers, health educators, physical education
teachers, consumer and family science teachers, elementary teachers,
specialists in assessment of intellectual functioning, media
supervisors, media generalists, and master teachers as authorized by RSA
186:8 and RSA 186:11, X, professional credentials including beginning
educator credentials, experienced educator credentials, and intern
licenses, and other classifications of educators, administrators,
specialists, and paraprofessionals necessary to address educational
needs as determined by the state board upon the recommendation of the
professional standards board pursuant to RSA 186:60.
                                             
 (t) Administering the provisions of RSA 193:27 through 193:30
regarding placement of children, as authorized by RSA 193:30.
                                             
 (u) Guidelines for uniform evaluation programs among local school
districts.
                                             
 (v) Administering the literacy education and dropout prevention
program established in RSA 189:52-58.
                                             
 (w) The exemption of certain students from participation in the
statewide education assessment.
                                             
 (x) Safe school zones, as provided in RSA 193-D:2.
                                             
 (y) School bus safety, as provided in RSA 189:6-a.
                                             
 (z) Local master plan for staff development and recertification.
                                             
 (aa) Establishing requirements for teachers and teacher
preparation programs to ensure that all teachers are prepared to teach
to a broad range of students' needs, including, but not limited to, the
needs of exceptional learners, using a variety of methods, materials,
and instructional techniques.
                                             
 (bb) Establishing the educational credential of master teacher as
provided in RSA 189:14-f.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1986, 41:1. 1987, 168:3. 1988, 274:2. 1989, 49:5. 1990,
140:2, X. 1992, 48:5. 1993, 290:1. 1994, 355:1. 1996, 19:3; 271:2. 1998,
174:1, 2; 314:1. 1999, 82:1. 2008, 274:31. 2011, 224:127, eff. July 1,
2011. 2013, 164:7, I, eff. June 28, 2013. 2015, 252:11, eff. July 1,
2015.

### Section 21-N:10

 **21-N:10 State Board of Education. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established the state board of education
consisting of 7 members who shall serve without pay and shall not be
technical educators or professionally engaged in school work. The
members shall be paid for actual expenses incurred in the performance of
their duties out of moneys appropriated for the department of
education.
                                             
 II. The education committee of the house of representatives or the
education committee of the senate may, by majority vote of its members,
propose areas of study to the board, which shall be put on the agenda of
the next meeting of the board for its consideration and response.
                                             
 III. The governor and council shall appoint the members of the
board. Five of the members shall be selected one each from the 5
executive councilor districts and 2 members shall be selected from the
public at large. Terms of office of members shall be for 4 years from
the January 31 on which the terms of their predecessors expired.
Annually, on or before January 31, the governor shall name a member of
the board who shall serve as chairperson for one year and until a
successor is appointed. No member of the board shall serve more than 3
consecutive full terms.
                                             
 IV. The governor and council may, after notice and hearing, remove a
member of the board for incompetency, failure to discharge the member's
duties, malfeasance, immorality, or other cause inimical to the welfare
of the public schools, and in case of such removal, or of a vacancy
arising from any other cause, they shall make another appointment for
the unexpired term.
                                             
 V. The state shall provide an office for the board. The board shall
hold at least 6 regular meetings each year, and such special meetings as
may be required. The time and places for regular meetings shall be fixed
by the board, and the chairperson shall call a special meeting upon the
written request of any 2 members, or on the chairperson's own motion.

**Source.** 1986, 41:1. 1989, 94:1; 301:5. 1996, 271:3. 1999, 45:1, eff.
July 20, 1999.

### Section 21-N:11

 **21-N:11 Duties of Board. –** The state board of education
established by RSA 21-N:10 shall:
                                             
 I. Regularly review all programs and activities of the department of
education and make recommendations to the commissioner of education with
regard to such programs and activities.
                                             
 II. Advise the commissioner of education with regard to department
goals, information gathering and any other aspect of elementary and
secondary education within the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 III. Hear appeals and issue decisions, which shall be considered
final decisions of the department of education for purposes of RSA 541,
of any dispute between individuals and school systems or the department
of education, except those disputes governed by the provisions of RSA
21-N:4, III.
                                             
 IV. Appoint members of the professional standards board and other
advisory bodies as provided by law.
                                             
 V. Adopt rules as provided in 21-N:9.

**Source.** 1986, 41:1, eff. July 1, 1986.
