---
title: 'CHAPTER 21-O DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 21-O
                                             
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES
------------------------------------

### Section 21-O:1

 **21-O:1 Establishment; General Functions. –**
                                             
 I. There is established the department of environmental services, an
agency of the state under the executive direction of the commissioner of
environmental services.
                                             
 II. The department of environmental services, through its officials,
shall be responsible for the following general functions:
                                             
 (a) Water pollution control.
                                             
 (b) Water supply protection.
                                             
 (c) Regulation of waste disposal generally, and as it affects
water quality.
                                             
 (d) Maintenance of state owned dams.
                                             
 (e) Inspection of dams.
                                             
 (f) Flood control.
                                             
 (g) Air pollution control.

**Source.** 1986, 202:1, eff. July 1, 1986.

### Section 21-O:1-a

 **21-O:1-a Revolving Fund. –** In order to enhance its ability to
provide education and training assistance to municipalities, regional
agencies, persons subject to regulation by the department, and the
public a nonlapsing revolving fund, which shall not exceed 
                                             $30,000 on
June 30 of each year, shall be established in the department of
environmental services. Any amounts in excess of 
                                             $30,000 on June 30 of
each year shall be deposited in the general fund as unrestricted
revenue. The moneys in this fund shall be used for the purposes of:
                                             
 I. Producing materials for distribution. A reasonable charge shall
be established for each copy of a document. This charge shall be only in
the amount necessary to pay the cost of creating and producing such
document.
                                             
 II. Providing training and educational materials to local and
regional officials, and persons subject to regulation by the department.
A reasonable charge shall be established for such training. This charge
shall be fixed to reflect the cost of payments to experts to provide the
training, the cost of written training material, rental of facilities,
and advertising and other associated costs. Such training shall be
conducted in a geographically dispersed manner and scheduled with the
convenience of part-time officials in mind.
                                             
 III. Implementing training courses for and administering tests for
certification of solid waste operators, as provided under RSA 149-M:6,
XIII.
                                             
 IV. Producing geologic and other publications in electronic media
format. A reasonable charge shall be established for electronic
publications.
                                             
 V. Providing educational materials to the general public that
promote an awareness and understanding of issues critical to improving
and protecting public health and a healthy environment.
                                             
 VI. Cooperative efforts with the private sector for the purpose of
bulk brochure distribution, familiarization tours, promotional programs,
trade shows, and other projects generally recognized as beneficial to
protecting and restoring the environment and public health in New
Hampshire. All income received from participation in cooperative
promotional programs, familiarization tours, trade shows, brochure
distribution projects, and other promotional opportunities which become
available shall be deposited into the fund.

**Source.** 1990, 215:1. 1991, 360:5, 6. 1996, 251:5. 2005, 220:1;
288:2. 2009, 167:1, eff. June 30, 2009.

### Section 21-O:2

 **21-O:2 Commissioner; Assistant Commissioner; Directors; Chief
Operations Officer; Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department of environmental services
shall be appointed by the governor, with the consent of the council, and
shall serve for a term of 4 years. The commissioner shall be qualified
to hold that position by reason of education and experience.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of environmental services shall nominate an
assistant commissioner for appointment by the governor, with the consent
of the council, who shall serve for a term of 4 years. The assistant
commissioner shall be qualified to hold that position by reason of
education and experience. The assistant commissioner shall have overall
responsibility for all planning functions of the department and shall
perform such other duties as the commissioner may assign. The assistant
commissioner shall perform the duties of the commissioner if for any
reason the commissioner is unable to do so.
                                             
 III. Division directors shall be appointed to terms of 4 years.
                                             
 (a) The commissioner shall, after consulting with the water
council, nominate for appointment by the governor and council a director
of the division of water. The nominee shall have a baccalaureate or
master's degree from an accredited college or university, hold a valid
license or certificate of registration to practice civil, sanitary, or
environmental engineering issued by the lawfully constituted
registration board of any state of the United States, and shall have a
minimum of 5 years' responsible experience in the administration of
sanitary or environmental engineering programs in the public or private
sector.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner shall, after consulting with the air
resources council, nominate for appointment by the governor and council
a director of air resources. Each nominee shall hold a baccalaureate or
master's degree from a recognized college or university with a major
study in environmental sciences, chemistry, engineering, public health,
public administration, or a related field, and have 5 years' experience
in a high supervisory or administrative position in a public or private
agency engaged in air quality, air pollution control, environmental
planning, engineering project management, or a related discipline.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner shall, after consulting with the waste
management council, nominate for appointment by the governor and council
a director of waste management. Each nominee shall hold a master's
degree from a recognized college or university with major study in
environmental sciences, chemistry, civil engineering, public health,
public administration, or a related field, and have 5 years' experience
in a high level supervisory or administrative position in a public or
private agency engaged in waste management, environmental health, or a
related discipline.
                                             
 III-a. The commissioner shall nominate for appointment by the
governor and council a chief operations officer of the commissioner's
office who shall serve for a term of 4 years. The chief operations
officer shall oversee and coordinate the activities of the
administrative services, geology, public information and permitting, and
laboratory services units, and shall be responsible for the following
functions:
                                             
 (a) Preparing agency budget requests.
                                             
 (b) Developing and implementing procedures for assuring smooth
operation of the various units within the commissioner's office.
                                             
 (c) Ensuring compliance with directives and procedures by the
governor and general court.
                                             
 (d) Implementing audit recommendations concerning the
commissioner's office units.
                                             
 (e) Carrying out the directives of the commissioner and assistant
commissioner.
                                             
 IV. The salaries of the commissioner, the assistant commissioner,
the chief operations officer and each division director shall be as
specified in RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 1986, 202:1. 1990, 112:1. 1991, 355:8-10. 1996, 228:4, 113,
I. 2004, 257:19, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 21-O:3

 **21-O:3 Duties of Commissioner. –** In addition to the powers,
duties, and functions otherwise vested by law in the commissioner of the
department of environmental services, including RSA 21-G, the
commissioner, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall:
                                             
 I. Represent the public interest in the administration of the
functions of the department of environmental services and be responsible
to the governor, the general court, and the public for such
administration.
                                             
 II. Provide for, in consultation with the commissioner of the
department of administrative services and the state treasurer, a system
of accounts and reports which will ensure the integrity and lawful use
of all fees, funds, and revenues collected by the department, the use of
which is restricted by state or federal law.
                                             
 III. Have the authority to receive, administer, and internally audit
all present and future federal and state water-related, air pollution
control, and waste grant programs.
                                             
 IV. Have the authority to adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
necessary to assure the continuance or granting of federal funds or
other assistance intended to promote the administration of this chapter,
not otherwise provided for by law, and to adopt all rules necessary to
implement the specific statutes administered by the department or by any
division or unit within the department, whether the rulemaking authority
delegated by the legislature is granted to the commissioner, the
department, or any administrative unit or subordinate official of the
department. The water well board and the state board for the licensing
and regulation of plumbers shall be exempt from the rulemaking
provisions described in this section.
                                             
 IV-a. Have the authority to reorganize rules of the department to
conform to the requirements of RSA 541-A and the uniform drafting and
numbering system adopted by the division of administrative rules, office
of legislative services. Reference changes shall be limited to title,
chapter, part, and section designations and numbers and substitution of
terms reflecting reorganization of the department to the existing
statutory structure, and shall be made subject to review by the division
of administrative rules, office of legislative services for consistency
and accuracy of such changes. Such reference changes shall be integrated
into the rules and such amendments to the rules shall become effective
when notice of these reference changes is published by the director of
legislative services in the rulemaking register. Reference changes made
prior to January 1, 1992, shall be exempt from the procedures and
requirements of RSA 541-A. Changes authorized under this section shall
not affect the adoption or expiration date of rules changed under this
section.
                                             
 V. Collect and account for all fees, funds, taxes, or assessments
levied upon any person subject to the jurisdiction of the department of
environmental services.
                                             
 VI. Establish a water resources assessment program which shall,
among other things, collect and manage data on water resources and water
use within the state. The commissioner shall be authorized to use
federal funds for such program.
                                             
 VII. Contract with, subject to approval by the governor and council,
regional planning commissions in the development of regional plans and
ensure that local plans are consistent with regional management plans
for entire watershed areas.
                                             
 VIII. Provide all necessary clerical and technical support to any
council established by this chapter. At a minimum, the commissioner
shall:
                                             
 (a) For any appeal from a department decision before any such
council provide all necessary clerical and support personnel and
services in order to:
                                             
 (1) Prepare notices and other documents required under RSA
541-A and distribute such notices and documents as directed by the
hearing officer appointed under RSA 21-M:3, VIII;
                                             
 (2) Schedule the conduct of all council administrative appeal
proceedings, as directed by the hearing officer appointed under RSA
21-M:3, VIII so as to ensure timely and efficient conduct of such
proceedings;
                                             
 (3) Prepare and maintain the record, required by RSA 541-A, of
all such appeals, which shall include the decisions issued in such
proceedings.
                                             
 (b) Provide comfortable and adequate space for the use of all
councils in performing their official duties; and
                                             
 (c) Provide all necessary clerical and support personnel and
services in order to:
                                             
 (1) Prepare and distribute notices and other documents
required under RSA 91-A for council meetings; and
                                             
 (2) Prepare and maintain as public records the official
minutes of the meetings of all councils supported by the department.
                                             
 IX. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 X. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1986, 202:1. 1989, 346:4. 1990, 230:1; 261:4. 1996, 296:3.
1997, 295:2, 3. 2010, 354:2. 2011, 224:117, III, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 21-O:4

 **21-O:4 Division of Water Resources. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1996, 228:113,
eff. July 1, 1996.
                                             ]

### Section 21-O:5

 **21-O:5 Water Resources Council. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2009, 112:13, I,
eff. Aug. 14, 2009.
                                             ]

### Section 21-O:5-a

 **21-O:5-a Wetlands Council. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a wetlands council for the purpose of
implementing the provisions of law conferring on the department
authority to decide matters relative to resources of the state,
including, but not limited to, excavating, dredging, and filling waters
of the state as well as activities occurring within the state's
regulated shoreland under RSA 483-B. Appointees and officials shall have
voting rights as members of the wetlands council; provided, however,
that nothing in this section shall be construed as affecting other
duties of the department with reference to dams, water levels, and
administration of the department of environmental services. The wetlands
council shall be composed of the following:
                                             
 (a) The executive director of the department of fish and game or
designee.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner of transportation or designee.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of resources and economic development or
designee.
                                             
 (d) The director of the office of energy and planning or
designee.
                                             
 (e) The commissioner of the department of agriculture, markets,
and food, or designee.
                                             
 (f) Eight members of the public appointed by the governor and
council for a term of 3 years or until a successor is chosen. One of
these shall be a member of a municipal conservation commission at the
time of appointment, and be one of 3 nominees submitted by the New
Hampshire Association of Conservation Commissions; one shall be a
supervisor, associate supervisor, former associate supervisor, or former
supervisor, of a conservation district at the time of appointment, and
be one of 3 nominees submitted by the New Hampshire Association of
Conservation Districts; one shall be a municipal official other than a
member of the conservation commission at the time of appointment, and be
nominated by the New Hampshire Municipal Association; one shall be a
natural resource scientist and be one of 3 nominees submitted by the New
Hampshire Association of Natural Resource Scientists; one shall be a
member of the construction industry and be one of 3 nominees submitted
by the Associated General Contractors of New Hampshire; one shall be a
member of the marine industry and be one of 3 nominees submitted by the
New Hampshire Marine Trades Association; one shall have experience in
environmental protection and resource management at the time of
appointment and be one of 4 nominees submitted, 2 each, by the New
Hampshire Audubon Society and the Society for the Protection of New
Hampshire Forests; and one shall be a farm or forest landowner and be
one of 2 nominees submitted, one each, by the New Hampshire Farm Bureau
Federation and the New Hampshire Timberland Owners Association. One
member of the council shall be elected annually as chairperson by the
members of the council.
                                             
 II. The 8 members appointed under subparagraph I(f) shall be
entitled to expenses and 
                                             $50 compensation per diem. The other members
of the council shall receive no additional compensation for their
service as members of the council, other than their regular salaries
from their respective state departments, but shall receive mileage and
other expenses paid at the rate set for state employees.
                                             
 III. The wetlands council shall receive administrative support from
the department.
                                             
 IV. The council shall consult with and advise the commissioner of
the department of environmental services, on a continuing basis with
respect to the policy, programs, goals, and operations of the department
as they relate to wetlands and protected shorelands with particular
emphasis on long-range planning for the department and on education of
the public relative to the functions of the department. In order to
accomplish these purposes, the council shall meet with the commissioner
not less frequently than quarterly, or at the call of the chairperson or
3 council members. The council shall file annually a report of its
deliberations and recommendations with the commissioner of the
department of environmental services and the governor and council.
                                             
 V. The wetlands council shall hear all administrative appeals from
department decisions made under RSA 482-A relative to wetlands, or under
RSA 483-B relative to shoreland protection and shall decide all disputed
issues of fact in such appeals, in accordance with RSA 21-O:14.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner of the department of environmental services
shall present all proposed rules relative to wetlands and protected
shorelands to the wetlands council for consideration prior to filing a
notice of proposed rule under RSA 541-A:6. The council shall present any
objections to proposed rules to the commissioner in writing within 15
days. The commissioner may adopt a rule to which the council has
objected only after presenting a written reply to the council detailing
the reasons for adopting the rule over the objections of the council.
                                             
 VII. The council shall adopt rules in accordance with the rulemaking
provisions of RSA 541-A to govern its proceedings. The council shall be
subject to the requirements of RSA 541-A:36, notwithstanding RSA
21-O:14.
                                             
 VIII. The council shall approve disbursements of the aquatic
resource compensatory mitigation fund established under RSA 482-A:29.

**Source.** 1996, 296:35. 2002, 210:1. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44. 2006,
313:3. 2007, 209:1. 2008, 171:3, 4. 2010, 354:3, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.
2015, 67:1, eff. Aug. 1, 2015.

### Section 21-O:6

 **21-O:6 Division of Water. –** There is established within the
department the division of water, under the supervision of an
unclassified director of the division of water. The division, through
its officials, shall be responsible for the former functions, duties,
and responsibilities of the water supply and pollution control
commission. The director shall be responsible for collecting and
recording data on matters relevant to the functional responsibilities of
the division and providing such data to the administrative services unit
in the office of the commissioner for inclusion in the department data
base.

**Source.** 1986, 202:1. 1996, 228:5, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 21-O:7

 **21-O:7 Water Council. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a water council which shall consist of 15
members:
                                             
 (a) Thirteen of the members shall be public members appointed by
the governor, with the consent of the council, who shall serve for terms
of 4 years. Of these members, 2 shall represent the industrial interests
of the state; one shall represent the vacation home or private
recreational interests of the state; one shall represent the
agricultural interests of the state; one shall be an employee of any
municipal or privately-owned waterworks in the state; one shall be a
representative of the septage hauling industry, nominated by the New
Hampshire Association of Septage Haulers; one shall be a member of a
statewide nonprofit conservation or environmental organization; one
shall be a treatment plant operator; one shall be a designer or
installer of septic systems, nominated by the Granite State Designers
and Installers Association; one shall represent New Hampshire rivers,
nominated by the New Hampshire Rivers Council, and one shall represent
New Hampshire lakes, nominated by the New Hampshire Lakes Association.
The 2 remaining members shall be appointed and commissioned respectively
as the chairman and vice chairman of the council;
                                             
 (b) The remaining 2 members shall include:
                                             
 (1) The executive director of fish and game, or designee; and
                                             
 (2) The director of parks and recreation, or designee.
                                             
 (c) Each member of the council, before entering upon his or her
duties, shall take an oath to administer the duties of office faithfully
and impartially, and such oath shall be filed in the office of the
secretary of state.
                                             
 II. Appointive members shall receive no compensation except for
mileage and other expenses incurred while performing council business.
The other members of the council shall receive no additional
compensation for their service as members of the council other than
their regular salaries from their respective state departments, but
shall receive mileage and other expenses incurred while performing
council business. Mileage shall be paid at the rate set for state
employees.
                                             
 III. The council shall consult with and advise the director of the
division of water with respect to the policy, programs, goals, and
operations of the division other than those relating to wetlands under
RSA 482-A, with particular emphasis on long-range planning for the
division and on education of the public relative to the functions of the
division, on a continuing basis. In order to accomplish said purposes,
the council shall meet with the director not less frequently than
quarterly, or at the call of the chairman or 3 council members. The
council shall file annually a report of its deliberations and
recommendations with the commissioner of the department of environmental
services and the governor and council.
                                             
 IV. The water council shall hear all administrative appeals from
department decisions relative to the functions and responsibilities of
the division of water other than department decisions made under RSA
482-A relative to wetlands and RSA 483-B relative to shoreland
protection, and shall decide all disputed issues of fact in such
appeals, in accordance with RSA 21-O:14.
                                             
 V. The director of the division of water shall present all rules
proposed to be implemented by the water division, other than rules
implementing RSA 482-A relative to wetlands, and RSA 483-B relative to
shoreland protection, to the water council for consideration prior to
filing a notice of proposed rule under RSA 541-A:6. The council shall
present any objections to proposed rules to the director of the division
of water and to the commissioner in writing within 15 days. The
commissioner may adopt a rule to which the council has objected only
after presenting a written reply to the council detailing the reasons
for adopting the rule over the objections of the council.

**Source.** 1986, 202:1. 1987, 283:4. 1990, 252:1. 1994, 412:8. 1995,
226:10; 310:182. 1996, 228:6, 7. 2000, 44:1. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44.
2008, 171:1, 2. 2010, 354:4, eff. Sept. 18, 2010. 2012, 246:2, eff. June
18, 2012. 2015, 67:2, eff. Aug. 1, 2015.

### Section 21-O:8

 **21-O:8 Division of Waste Management. –** There is established
within the department the division of waste management, under the
supervision of an unclassified director of waste management. The
division, through its officials, shall be responsible for the former
functions, duties, and responsibilities of the office of waste
management of the division of public health services and the former
functions, duties, and responsibilities of the solid waste management
board. The director shall be responsible for collecting and recording
data on matters relevant to the functional responsibilities of the
division and providing such data to the administrative services unit in
the office of the commissioner for inclusion in the department data
base.

**Source.** 1986, 202:1, eff. July 1, 1986.

### Section 21-O:9

 **21-O:9 Waste Management Council. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a waste management council consisting of the
following, appointed by the governor and council, each of whom shall
serve a 4-year term:
                                             
 (a) A chairman, representing the public interest;
                                             
 (b) Three municipal officials, at least 2 of whom shall be
elected officials, representing the public interest, nominated by the
New Hampshire Municipal Association;
                                             
 (c) An expert in public health, representing the public
interest;
                                             
 (d) A local conservation commission member, representing the
public interest, nominated by the New Hampshire Association of
Conservation Commissions;
                                             
 (e) A professor or assistant professor of environmental science
or sanitary engineering, representing the public interest;
                                             
 (f) A representative of the private waste management industries;
                                             
 (g) A licensed sanitary or environmental engineer from private
industry;
                                             
 (h) A representative of the municipal public works field;
                                             
 (i) A representative of the business or financial communities;
                                             
 (j) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (k) A representative of communities which recycle or recover
solid waste, representing the public interest, nominated by the New
Hampshire Resources Recovery Association; and
                                             
 (l) A representative of private industries that generate
hazardous waste.
                                             
 II. One member of the council shall be elected vice chairman by the
members of the council. All members shall be New Hampshire residents.
The members representing the public interest shall not have any official
or contractual relationship with, or receive any significant portion of
their income from, any person subject to division of waste management
permits or enforcement orders. Members shall disclose all potential
conflicts of interest, and shall not vote on matters in which they have
a direct interest. The council may elect other officers.
                                             
 III. Council members shall receive no compensation except for
mileage and other expenses incurred while performing council business.
Mileage shall be paid at the rate set for state employees.
                                             
 IV. The council shall consult with and advise the director of the
division of waste management with respect to the policy, programs, goals
and operations of the division, regarding its solid and hazardous waste
management functions and responsibilities, with particular emphasis on
long-range planning for the division regarding solid and hazardous waste
management and on education of the public relative to the functions of
the division regarding solid and hazardous waste management, on a
continuing basis. In order to accomplish said purposes, the council
shall meet with the director not less frequently than quarterly, or at
the call of the chairman or 3 council members. The council shall file
annually a report of its deliberations and recommendations with the
commissioner of the department of environmental services and the
governor and council.
                                             
 V. The waste management council shall hear all administrative
appeals from department decisions relative to the functions and
responsibilities of the division of waste management, and shall decide
all disputed issues of fact in such appeals, in accordance with RSA
21-O:14.
                                             
 VI. The director of waste management shall present all rules
proposed to be implemented by the division of waste management to the
waste management council for consideration prior to filing a notice of
proposed rule under RSA 541-A:6. The council shall present any
objections to proposed rules to the director of waste management and to
the commissioner in writing within 15 days. The commissioner may adopt a
rule to which the council has objected only after presenting a written
reply to the council detailing the reasons for adopting the rule over
the objections of the council.
                                             
 VII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1986, 202:1. 1989, 341:1-4; 418:3. 1990, 195:5; 252:16, I.
1994, 412:9. 1995, 226:11. 1996, 228:8; 251:26. 2010, 354:5, eff. Sept.
18, 2010.

### Section 21-O:10

 **21-O:10 Division of Air Resources. –** There is established within
the department the division of air resources, under the supervision of
an unclassified director of air resources. The division, through its
officials, shall be responsible for the former functions, duties, and
responsibilities of the air resources agency and the air resources
commission. The director shall be responsible for collecting and
recording data on matters relevant to the functional responsibilities of
the division and providing such data to the administrative services unit
in the office of the commissioner for inclusion in the department data
base.

**Source.** 1986, 202:1, eff. July 1, 1986.

### Section 21-O:11

 **21-O:11 Air Resources Council. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established an air resources council which shall
be composed of 11 members, including one representing the steam power
generating industry; one representing the oil industry; one representing
the natural gas industry; one representing the manufacturing component
of industry; one representing the field of municipal government; and 6
members appointed at large who shall represent the public interest, one
of whom shall be a licensed practicing physician or other health care
professional possessing expertise in the field of public health and the
health-related impacts of air pollution, one of whom shall represent the
field of recreation, and at least one of whom shall represent
environmental interests. The council members who shall represent the
public interest may not derive any significant portion of their income
from persons subject to permits or enforcement orders, and may not serve
as attorney for, act as consultant for, serve as officer or director of,
or hold any other official or contractual relationship with any person
subject to permits or enforcement orders. All potential conflicts of
interest shall be adequately disclosed. The members shall be residents
of the state and shall be appointed by the governor with the consent of
the executive council. Each member shall serve for a term of 4 years.
                                             
 II. The council members shall receive no compensation except for
mileage and other expenses incurred while performing council business.
Mileage shall be paid at the rate set for state employees. The governor
and council shall annually select a chairman from the membership at
large and one of the council members to serve as vice-chairman. When the
chairman is absent, it shall be the duty of the vice-chairman to assume
and administer the duties of the chairman.
                                             
 III. The council shall consult with and advise the director of the
division of air resources with respect to the policy, programs, goals
and operations of the division, with particular emphasis on long-range
planning for the division and on education of the public relative to the
functions of the division, on a continuing basis. In order to accomplish
said purposes, the council shall meet with the director not less
frequently than quarterly, or at the call of the chairman or 3 council
members. The council shall file annually a report of its deliberations
and recommendations with the commissioner of the department of
environmental services and the governor and council.
                                             
 IV. The air resources council shall hear all administrative appeals
from department decisions relative to the functions and responsibilities
of the division of air resources and shall decide all disputed issues of
fact in such appeals, in accordance with RSA 21-O:14.
                                             
 V. The director of air resources shall present all rules proposed to
be implemented by the air resources division to the air resources
council for consideration prior to filing a notice of proposed rule
under RSA 541-A:6. The council shall present any objections to the
proposed rule to the director of air resources and to the commissioner
in writing within 15 days. The commissioner may adopt a rule to which
the council has objected only after presenting a written reply to the
council detailing the reasons for adopting the rule over the objections
of the council.

**Source.** 1986, 202:1. 1994, 412:10. 1995, 226:12; 262:1. 2006, 62:1.
2010, 354:6, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 21-O:12

 **21-O:12 Office of the Commissioner. –** The commissioner of
environmental services shall establish units within his office to be
responsible for: administrative services, geology, planning, public
information and permitting, risk analysis and management, and laboratory
services, which shall include the following functions and such other
functions as may be assigned by the commissioner:
                                             
 I. Administrative services shall include the following services to
all divisions, to the greatest extent possible:
                                             
 (a) Accounting, purchasing, and budget control.
                                             
 (b) Personnel management.
                                             
 (c) Property, contracts, and grants management.
                                             
 (d) Data processing.
                                             
 (e) Compiling, indexing, and managing data collected by all
divisions, which shall be used to establish a departmental data base for
use by all divisions of the department, and which shall be a public
record.
                                             
 II. Geology shall be under the direction of the state geologist, who
shall be the director of the New Hampshire geological survey. The
geological survey shall collect data and perform research on the land,
mineral, and water resources of the state, and disseminate the findings
of such research to the public through maps, reports, and other
publications. The state geologist shall: consult with the commissioner
of the department of resources and economic development relative to the
issuance of mining permits under RSA 12-E; assist the directors of the
divisions of water and waste management as necessary; and perform such
other duties as may be assigned by the commissioner. The state geologist
and all members of the New Hampshire geological survey shall be staff
members of the commissioner's office. The state geologist shall advise
the department, and all other branches of state and local government,
concerning the geologic character of the state and its implications for
both economic and scientific needs in conjunction with all existing and
future environmental factors relating to the geology of the state. The
state geologist shall maintain liaison with federal and other state
geologic agencies and with the state university. The state geologist
shall also serve as a voting member of the board of professional
geologists.
                                             
 III. Planning shall be under the direct supervision of the assistant
commissioner and shall include all department-level short- and
long-range planning activities and the coordination and compilation of
all division-level planning activities.
                                             
 IV. Public information and permitting shall include all initial
public contact relative to permits and applications; furnishing members
of the general public with all permit applications and information
needed for any project which comes under the jurisdiction of the
department, as well as information as to federal or local permits which
may be required; assisting members of the general public, whenever
possible, to fill out permit applications by directing them to the
appropriate person within the relevant division of the department; and
generally providing members of the general public with all of the
information necessary for meeting permit requirements, including
information as to where to find the relevant federal laws and
regulations, rules, and municipal ordinances.
                                             
 V. The risk analysis and management function shall be the direct
responsibility of the assistant commissioner, in accordance with RSA
125-H:7. The commissioner may call on any personnel from any division or
any other state department to assist the assistant commissioner in the
event of a crisis, disaster, or other occurrence or condition requiring
analysis and management of an actual or suspected risk of damage to the
environment. The unit, once assembled by the commissioner in the event
of a crisis, disaster, occurrence, or condition, shall work closely with
the risk assessment bureau in the department of health and human
services under the direction of the assistant commissioner to:
                                             
 (a) Make assessments of potential or actual risk of harm to the
environment or, in cooperation with the risk assessment bureau of the
department of health and human services, to persons.
                                             
 (b) Manage environmental risk hazards using the results of the
assessment described above or any other available information to develop
and evaluate regulatory options, within a statutory framework, to reduce
or eliminate the risk of harm to the environment.
                                             
 VI. Laboratory services shall include such expert assistants and
such facilities as are necessary to support the investigatory,
analytical, and enforcement functions of the department of environmental
services. The commissioner shall provide the commissioner of the
department of health and human services with direct access to all raw
data, test results, and other information and samples received or
generated by the laboratories in the department deemed necessary by the
commissioner of the department of health and human services in order to
carry out his or her responsibilities to protect the public health.

**Source.** 1986, 202:1. 1995, 310:67. 1996, 228:9. 2001, 75:1. 2004,
15:1. 2011, 224:98, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 21-O:13

 **21-O:13 Rulemaking Authority. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1990, 230:2, eff.
June 26, 1990.
                                             ]

### Section 21-O:14

 **21-O:14 Administrative Appeals. –**
                                             
 I. (a) For purposes of this chapter, "department permitting
decision'' means the department's final action to grant in whole or in
part, with or without conditions, or to deny an application or other
request for a license as defined in RSA 541-A:1, VIII, whether the
action is taken by the commissioner or by the department official who
has statutory authority to take such final action or to whom the
commissioner has properly delegated the authority to take such final
action.
                                             
 (b) For purposes of this section, "department enforcement
decision'' means:
                                             
 (1) The issuance of an administrative order issued under
specific statutory authority for such an order, whether described as an
order, an administrative order, a cease and desist order, a notice of
violation and order of abatement, or other similar name, which specifies
the facts and law that support the department's determination that one
or more violations are occurring or have occurred and orders the
recipient to cease on-going violations and to take such remediation
actions as are necessary to come into compliance with applicable
requirements.
                                             
 (2) The revocation of or the refusal to renew a license as
defined in RSA 541-A:1, VIII based on the permit holder's non-compliance
with the statute, rules, or terms and conditions of the license or on
other good or just cause as defined in rules adopted relative to the
license.
                                             
 (c) "Department decision'' means a department permitting
decision, a department enforcement decision, and any other decision made
by the department that is expressly appealable to a council under the
statute granting authority to the department to make the decision. The
term does not include rulemaking or an agency declaratory ruling as
provided for in RSA 541-A.
                                             
 I-a. Any person aggrieved by a department decision may, in addition
to any other remedy provided by law, appeal to the council having
jurisdiction over the subject matter of the appeal within 30 days of the
date of the decision and shall set forth fully in a notice of appeal
every ground upon which it is claimed that the decision complained of is
unlawful or unreasonable. Only those grounds set forth in the notice of
appeal shall be considered by the council. On any such appeal, the
council shall determine whether the department decision was unlawful or
unreasonable by reviewing the administrative record together with any
evidence and testimony the parties to the appeal may present.
                                             
 I-b. As an alternative to filing an appeal under paragraph I-a and
in addition to any other remedy provided by law, any person aggrieved by
a department permitting decision may, within 30 days of the date of the
decision, file with the council having jurisdiction over the subject
matter of the appeal a preliminary notice of appeal and an offer to
enter into settlement discussions. Filings made under this paragraph
shall be made on forms maintained by the department and shall be
governed by the following:
                                             
 (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law prescribing the
contents of a notice of appeal, a preliminary notice of appeal shall
contain only information identifying the appellant, the decision being
appealed, and a list of every ground on which the appellant claims that
the decision is unlawful or unreasonable.
                                             
 (b) The preliminary notice of appeal and offer to enter into
settlement discussions shall be served on the commissioner and, if not
filed by the applicant, on the applicant on the same day as they are
filed with the council.
                                             
 (c) The offer to enter into settlement discussions shall propose
mediated settlement discussions, unmediated settlement discussions, or
both.
                                             
 (d) The department and, if applicable, the applicant shall notify
the appellant in writing within 7 days whether they accept the offer to
enter into settlement discussions. Any such notification accepting the
offer shall propose dates within the ensuing 30 days on which to hold
the settlement discussions, and if the appellant's offer proposed both
mediated and unmediated settlement discussions the notification shall
elect one or the other.
                                             
 (e) A notice of appeal that complies fully with the council's
rules shall be filed no later than 45 days after the preliminary notice
of appeal was filed by the appellant under this paragraph. No notice of
appeal shall raise grounds for appeal beyond those contained in the
preliminary notice of appeal.
                                             
 (f) If the department and, if applicable, the applicant accept
the offer to enter into settlement discussions the appeal shall be
stayed until a notice of appeal is filed under subparagraph (e).
                                             
 (g) If the parties enter into mediated settlement discussions
under this paragraph, the provisions of paragraph I-c(a), (b), and (d)
shall apply.
                                             
 I-c. For all mediations ordered pursuant to RSA 21-M:3, IX(b):
                                             
 (a) The mediator shall be selected by the participants.
                                             
 (b) The cost of the mediation shall be borne equally by the
participants unless the department elects not to pay its share of the
cost of the mediation, in which case the appellant and any person who
has been allowed to intervene may either agree to bear the cost of the
mediation or be excused from the obligation to mediate.
                                             
 (c) The pre-hearing order issued by the hearing officer shall
specify a time period not to exceed 45 days within which the parties
shall mediate. The parties may jointly request a specific amount of
additional time if they have not reached a complete agreement within the
time period specified by the hearing officer but believe a complete
agreement can be reached within the additional time.
                                             
 (d) If the parties and any intervenors reach agreement as a
result of mediation and the agreement includes the issuance of a new or
revised permit, only persons who did not participate in the mediation
and who are aggrieved by the new or revised permit shall be entitled to
appeal the issuance of such permit.
                                             
 I-d. In any appeal of a department enforcement decision filed
pursuant to paragraph I-a, the hearing officer shall not order the
department to participate in mediation pursuant to RSA 21-M:3, IX(b).
The department may participate in mediation in such cases in its sole
discretion.
                                             
 II. Appeal hearings before any council established by this chapter
shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of RSA 541-A
governing adjudicative proceedings by an administrative hearing officer
assigned by the department of justice, under RSA 21-M:3, VIII. All
issues shall be determined as specified in RSA 21-M:3, IX.
                                             
 III. Persons aggrieved by the disposition of administrative appeals
before any council established by this chapter may appeal such results
in accordance with RSA 541.
                                             
 IV. The councils established under this chapter shall adopt rules
under RSA 541-A to govern the conduct of administrative appeals under
this section. To the extent possible, the rules of the councils shall be
consistent with each other.

**Source.** 1986, 202:1. 1987, 304:5. 1989, 339:7. 1996, 296:7. 2008,
171:5. 2010, 354:7, eff. Sept. 18, 2010. 2012, 246:3-5, eff. June 18,
2012.

Pollution Prevention
--------------------

### Section 21-O:15


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-O:15 repealed effective July 1, 2020; see history notes
following this section.
                                             ]

 **21-O:15 Pollution Prevention Policy. –**
                                             
 The department shall promote pollution prevention actions in all
sectors of the state, including, but not limited, to the department
itself, other state agencies, local governmental entities, the regulated
communities, and homeowners, as the preferred option for meeting
established environmental quality goals. In any case where pollution
prevention options have been explored and found not to be feasible,
recycling, treatment, and disposal shall be examined, in that order.
Department decisions which do not contribute to efforts to prevent
pollution at the source of generation or release shall be periodically
reexamined in order to continually strive toward pollution prevention
objectives.

**Source.** 1996, 8:3, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 21-O:16


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-O:16 repealed effective July 1, 2020; see history notes
following this section.
                                             ]

 **21-O:16 Pollution Prevention Coordinator. –**
                                             
 There is established in the office of the commissioner, department
of environmental services, the position of state pollution prevention
coordinator. The coordinator shall be a classified employee qualified by
reason of education and experience. It is the intent of the legislature
that coordination of pollution prevention efforts shall complement and
reinforce existing state, federal, local, and private pollution
prevention efforts.

**Source.** 1996, 8:3, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 21-O:17


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-O:17 repealed effective July 1, 2020; see history notes
following this section.
                                             ]

 **21-O:17 Definitions. –**
                                             
 In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of environmental
services.
                                             
 II. "Coordinator'' means the state pollution prevention
coordinator.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 IV. "Pollution prevention'' means the use of materials, processes,
or practices which reduce or eliminate the creation of pollutants or
wastes at the source, or minimize their release into the environment
prior to recycling, treatment, or disposal. When being practiced, it
includes avoiding or minimizing the transfer of pollutant or waste
generation and later disposal from one medium, such as air, water, or
land, to another. It also includes:
                                             
 (a) Practices that reduce the use of hazardous materials, energy,
or water or other resources;
                                             
 (b) Practices that protect natural resources and human health
through conservation, more efficient use, or effective release
minimization; and
                                             
 (c) Preferring actions that result in a greater net pollution
prevention benefit, recognizing that improving one aspect of a process
or activity may have other environmental effects, both positive and
negative.
                                             
 V. "Small business'' means a business which employs 20 or fewer
employees and is independently owned and operated, or "small business''
as defined in the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, 42 U.S.C. 7401 et
seq., for purposes of complying with that act.

**Source.** 1996, 8:3, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 21-O:18


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-O:18 repealed effective July 1, 2020; see history notes
following this section.
                                             ]

 **21-O:18 Duties of Coordinator. –**
                                             
 The coordinator shall:
                                             
 I. Recommend to the commissioner methods to incorporate pollution
prevention into all the department's programs, based upon
recommendations from each of the department's relevant bureaus and
divisions.
                                             
 II. Develop and lead implementation of a strategy to integrate
pollution prevention within the department.
                                             
 III. Identify opportunities for all other state and local government
entities as well as the regulated community and homeowners to practice
pollution prevention, and assist these entities to implement pollution
prevention.
                                             
 IV. Recommend to the commissioner the establishment of advisory
committees or work groups as necessary to meet the pollution prevention
goal.
                                             
 V. Actively disseminate useful pollution prevention information to
local planning boards and zoning boards of adjustment.
                                             
 VI. Prepare a biennial report to the governor and council, the
legislature and the committee on environment and agriculture on the
department's efforts to integrate and promote pollution prevention
concepts, the fiscal aspects of such efforts, and specific cases of
successful and unsuccessful pollution prevention resulting from the
implementation of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1996, 8:3, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 21-O:19


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-O:19 repealed effective July 1, 2020; see history notes
following this section.
                                             ]

 **21-O:19 Small Business Technical Assistance. –**
                                             
 I. To exercise practical pollution prevention in the field and
provide environmental technical assistance to small regulated sources,
the department shall:
                                             
 (a) Develop a comprehensive small business technical assistance
program with the following goals:
                                             
 (1) Identify all existing technical assistance programs
relating to energy and environmental assistance to small business.
                                             
 (2) Develop outreach programs to assist small business
identified under subparagraph II(b), to comply with current and proposed
environmental regulations.
                                             
 (3) Develop and co-develop technical assistance programs for
cost effective and environmentally sound pollution prevention and
regulatory compliance programs, in conjunction with private initiatives
when appropriate.
                                             
 (4) Prepare literature on rights and responsibilities
pertaining to environmental rules and regulations under state and
federal law.
                                             
 (5) Provide direction and guidance, in consultation with the
department's public information and permitting office, on preparing
environmental permit applications.
                                             
 (6) Review and evaluate all department recordkeeping and
reporting requirements imposed on small businesses in order to eliminate
duplication where possible, and to streamline duplicative reporting
requirements.
                                             
 (7) Create and make available a technical resource library for
pollution control equipment, pollution prevention techniques and
equipment, energy conservation material, and financial assistance.
                                             
 (b) Work with appropriate private and public organizations,
including, but not limited to, the university system of New Hampshire,
the department of resources and economic development, the public
utilities commission, and the governor's office of energy and community
services, to:
                                             
 (1) Identify and categorize the technical and financial
resources available to small business.
                                             
 (2) Identify, prioritize, and target small businesses needing
assistance from a state-supported program.
                                             
 (3) Develop technical assistance programs for cost-effective
energy reduction.
                                             
 (4) Identify all financial assistance programs available for
implementing energy and environmental process improvements.
                                             
 (c) Consolidate appropriate technical assistance functions into a
cohesive whole, utilizing available employee skills as needed to
accomplish the goals stated in paragraph I.
                                             
 (d) Employ a classified pollution prevention specialist who shall
be qualified by reason of education and experience to advance pollution
prevention through outreach and assistance.
                                             
 (e) Provide small business advocacy and representation on
environmentally related activities within the department.
                                             
 (f) Provide for the review of department outreach, education, and
technical assistance activities for small businesses.
                                             
 II. The following provisions shall apply in any instance where a
small business subject to regulation under any program implemented by
the department voluntarily requests any technical assistance available
under this section, provided the small business making the request is
not the subject of an active enforcement action and has not been
notified of an impending regulatory inspection at the time the request
is made:
                                             
 (a) Department employees or agents providing such technical
assistance shall not make available to any department regulatory program
or any other regulatory or enforcement agency, information obtained in
the course of providing such technical assistance unless:
                                             
 (1) The person requesting such technical assistance agrees
that such information may be made available to department or other
regulatory or enforcement programs;
                                             
 (2) The information is public record under RSA 91-A;
                                             
 (3) The information pertains to an imminent threat to human
life, or to the environment;
                                             
 (4) The information reveals evidence of a knowing criminal
violation; or
                                             
 (5) The information is presented in aggregate form with no
identification of individual entities in order to develop pollution
prevention and technical assistance activities.
                                             
 (b) Nothing in this paragraph shall relieve any person of any
obligation to provide notice, information, or a report required by any
statute, rule, permit, or order.
                                             
 (c) The department shall notify any person requesting technical
assistance of the provisions of this paragraph.

**Source.** 1996, 8:3. 2005, 254:1-3, eff. Sept. 12, 2005.

### Section 21-O:20


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-O:20 repealed effective July 1, 2020; see history notes
following this section.
                                             ]

 **21-O:20 State Agency Cooperation. –**
                                             
 State agencies shall cooperate with and assist in the development
and implementation of pollution prevention measures to be practiced by
state government.

**Source.** 1996, 8:3, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 21-O:21


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-O:21 repealed effective July 1, 2020; see history notes
following this section.
                                             ]

 **21-O:21 Partnerships. –**
                                             
 In developing and implementing pollution prevention, the
department's efforts shall complement existing public and private
actions, including the development of innovative public-private
partnerships with business, nongovernmental organizations, academic
groups, and other appropriate groups.

**Source.** 1996, 8:3, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 21-O:22


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-O:22 repealed effective July 1, 2020; see history notes
following this section.
                                             ]

 **21-O:22 Acceptance and Expenditure of Funds. –**
                                             
 I. For purposes of implementing this subdivision, the commissioner
may apply for and accept gifts, donations of money, grants, and any
other funds or assistance from federal, state, local, private, or any
other sources.
                                             
 II. The pollution prevention coordinator, with the approval of the
commissioner, may expend any funds received under paragraph I for the
purposes of this subdivision, and such funds are hereby continually
appropriated to a nonlapsing revolving fund.

**Source.** 1996, 8:3, eff. July 1, 1996.

Participation in Low Carbon Fuel Standards Programs
---------------------------------------------------

### Section 21-O:23

 **21-O:23 Low Carbon Fuel Standards Programs; State Participation.
–**
                                             
 I. The state of New Hampshire shall not join, implement, or
participate in any state, regional, or national low carbon fuel
standards program or any similar program that requires quotas, caps, or
mandates on any fuels used for transportation, industrial purposes, or
home heating without seeking and receiving prior legislative approval.
                                             
 II. The department of environmental services may engage in regional
and national discussions of such programs.
                                             
 III. The department of environmental services shall report all
expenses resulting from its discussions to the fiscal committee of the
general court on a semi-annual basis.

**Source.** 2012, 280:1, eff. June 21, 2012.

### Section 21-O:24

 **21-O:24 Applicability. –** Nothing in this subdivision shall be
construed to affect or modify the provisions of RSA 125-J or RSA 125-O.

**Source.** 2012, 280:1, eff. June 21, 2012.
