---
title: 'CHAPTER 21-P DEPARTMENT OF SAFETY'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 21-P
                                             
DEPARTMENT OF SAFETY
--------------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 21-P:1

 **21-P:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to improve the
administration of state government by consolidating and providing
unified direction of procedures, programs, and related functions in the
field of public safety, in order to help assure the security and
physical safety of the citizens of New Hampshire. It is the intent of
the general court that this consolidation result in improved integration
of state public safety functions and increased efficiency and
effectiveness in the administration of these programs.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1, eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 21-P:2

 **21-P:2 Establishment; General Functions. –**
                                             
 I. There is established the department of safety, an agency of the
state, under the executive direction of a commissioner of safety.
                                             
 II. The department of safety, through its officials, shall be
responsible for the following general functions:
                                             
 (a) Enforcing the criminal law.
                                             
 (b) Administering and enforcing laws relative to motor vehicles
and drivers.
                                             
 (c) Assuring fire, building, and equipment safety.
                                             
 (d) Promoting vehicle and highway safety.
                                             
 (e) Administering and enforcing laws relative to emergency
medical services.
                                             
 (f) Administration and enforcement of the motor vehicle road toll
laws.
                                             
 (g) Homeland security and emergency management.
                                             
 (h) Statewide enhanced 911 and emergency telecommunications
services.
                                             
 (i) Operation of the fire academy and firefighter training
programs.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1. 1999, 345:2. 2008, 358:2, eff. Sept. 9, 2008.

### Section 21-P:3

 **21-P:3 Commissioner; Directors; Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department shall be appointed by the
governor, with the consent of the council, and shall serve for a term of
4 years, provided that the first term shall expire on March 31, 1991.
The commissioner shall be qualified to hold that position by reason of
education and experience. A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired
term.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall nominate each division director for
appointment by the governor, with the consent of the council. Each
division director shall serve for a term of 4 years. Vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term. The directors shall be qualified to hold
their respective positions by reason of education and experience. The
director of state police shall be a citizen of the United States and
shall have had experience in the investigation of crime, criminal
prosecution, and in the enforcement of traffic laws at the time of his
appointment.
                                             
 III. The salaries of the commissioner and the division directors
shall be as specified in RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1, eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 21-P:4

 **21-P:4 Duties of Commissioner. –** In addition to the powers,
duties, and functions otherwise vested by law, including but not limited
to those enumerated in RSA 21-G:9, the commissioner of the department of
safety shall:
                                             
 I. Represent the public interest in the administration of the
department of safety and be responsible to the governor, the general
court, and the public for such administration.
                                             
 II. Require the director of the division of administration, in
consultation with the commissioner of administrative services and the
treasurer, to provide for a system of accounts and reports in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, which will insure the
integrity and lawful use of all revenues collected by the department,
the use of which is restricted by state or federal law.
                                             
 III. Have authority to adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, necessary to
assure the continuation or granting of federal funds or other assistance
not otherwise provided for by law.
                                             
 IV. Have discretion to grant to highway enforcement officers within
his department certain police powers as follows:
                                             
 (a) Power to serve criminal and habitual offender process, make
arrests, and enforce all criminal laws and motor vehicle laws and rules
of the state.
                                             
 (b) Power to inspect motor vehicles transporting hazardous
materials in accordance with RSA 21-P:17.
                                             
 (c) Power to enforce the provisions of RSA 375-A and 376.
                                             
 V. Have discretion to grant to the state fire marshal and any deputy
fire marshal or fire investigator within the division of public safety
the authority to detain and make arrests as a peace officer pursuant to
RSA 594, to serve criminal processes, to enforce the rules adopted under
RSA 153:4-a and RSA 153:5, and to enforce RSA 154:7-a in order to
promote the efficient discharge of such persons' lawful duties. Except
for fire investigators under RSA 154:7-a, the commissioner shall assure
in granting the authority provided in this paragraph that any person so
designated has received appropriate law enforcement training through a
program approved by the police standards and training council. Whenever
persons authorized as peace officers under this paragraph are involved
in the investigation of felonies or cases involving death due to fires,
or whenever an arrest is to be made, such persons shall as soon as
practicable notify a law enforcement agency having jurisdiction in the
geographical area where the arrest or investigation is to take place.
                                             
 VI. Have the discretion to grant to bingo and lucky 7 inspectors
within the lottery commission certain limited police powers as follows:
                                             
 (a) Power to serve criminal process.
                                             
 (b) Power to make arrests for violations of RSA 287-E or any
other laws or rules governing bingo and lucky 7 and to enforce and make
arrests for violations of any criminal laws which they uncover incident
to their enforcement of the bingo and lucky 7 law.
                                             
 (c) Power to inspect premises that conduct bingo or lucky 7 or
any records pertaining to bingo or lucky 7.
                                             
 VII. Have the discretion to grant authority to issue a citation for
violations of fire safety rules adopted under RSA 153:4-a, RSA 153:5,
and RSA 160-C and to unlicensed persons who perform actions that require
a license under RSA 153:28, RSA 153:29-a, RSA 319-C, or RSA 329-A to the
state fire marshal or his or her designee, or to any fire chief, fire
investigator, fire inspector or fire prevention officer who meets the
qualifications established pursuant to RSA 21-P:14, II(s). A citation
for violations under this paragraph shall carry the penalty set forth
under RSA 153:24. A building official or code enforcement officer may
also be granted authority under RSA 21-P:14, II(s) to issue a citation
to any unlicensed person who performs actions requiring a license under
RSA 153:28, RSA 153:29-a, RSA 319-C, or RSA 329-A.
                                             
 VIII. Have the discretion to grant authority to act as an
appropriate law enforcement authority for service of orders under RSA
153:14 to the state fire marshal or his designee.
                                             
 IX. Have the authority to cooperate with other states in the
exchange of information, on a reciprocal basis, relative to law
enforcement matters; including but not limited to, motor vehicle
violations involving alcohol or drug-related offenses, criminal matters,
missing persons, stolen motor vehicles, and other police-related
information. The commissioner shall make such information obtained from
other states available to the law enforcement community.
                                             
 X. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XI. Have the discretion to grant to security officers of the New
Hampshire hospital security force such titles, ranks, and police powers
as the commissioner deems necessary up to and including that of ex
officio constables including the power of arrest for violations of the
criminal and motor vehicle laws and the power to serve criminal process,
and may limit such powers as deemed necessary. They shall have general
police powers on the state office campus and New Hampshire hospital
grounds and when in hot pursuit of a person who has committed a crime on
the campus or escaped from the hospital, and when acting to transport a
patient to or from the hospital, the court, or another mental health
facility.
                                             
 XII. Establish an easily accessible mechanism for citizens to file
complaints with the department relating to on-board diagnostic system
testing required by RSA 266:59-b. The complaint mechanism shall include
either a telephone number reserved exclusively for such complaints or an
Internet site for such complaints that may be accessed through links
prominently displayed on Internet sites operated by the department or
the state.
                                             
 XIII. Establish a program to waive the repair requirements of the
OBD II testing program. Waivers shall be granted based on indigency or
other urgent financial need. The waiver program required by this
paragraph shall be consistent with the recommendations of the OBD II
testing advisory committee established in RSA 266:59-b, VII and shall be
implemented no later than February 1, 2007.
                                             
 XIV. Have authority, on behalf of the state of New Hampshire:
                                             
 (a) To participate in the Uniform Carrier Registration System as
authorized by section 4305 of the federal Unified Carrier Registration
Act of 2005, 49 U.S.C. section 14504a, as amended.
                                             
 (b) To enter into a multistate agreement or federal program for
the purpose of administering the Uniform Carrier Registration Act of
2005, 49 U.S.C. section 14504a, as amended.
                                             
 (c) To administer the Unified Carrier Registration System of
2005, 49 U.S.C. section 14504a, as amended.
                                             
 (d) To adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, as are necessary for the
proper administration and enforcement of this paragraph. Such rules may
include, without limitation, rules establishing registration fees and
other fees sufficient to cover the direct and indirect costs of
administration and enforcement of this section. All fees collected under
this section shall be deposited into the highway fund to promote motor
carrier safety programs and enforcement, and to administer costs
associated with the administration of the Unified Carrier Registration
System.
                                             
 XV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XVI. Implement the state highway safety program as provided in RSA
21-P:55 through RSA 21-P:63.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1; 356:1, 2. 1988, 84:1; 288:1, 14. 1992, 154:1.
2003, 319:84. 2004, 257:1, 49. 2005, 296:1. 2006, 222:1. 2007, 263:167.
2008, 25:1. 2009, 52:3. 2011, 74:1, eff. July 1, 2011; 210:1, eff. Jan.
1, 2012. 2013, 30:1, eff. May 16, 2013; 100:7, eff. Aug. 23, 2013. 2015,
176:1, eff. June 26, 2015; 276:127, 158, eff. July 1, 2015. 2016,
147:12, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 21-P:5

 **21-P:5 Assistant Commissioner. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of safety shall nominate 2 assistant
commissioners for appointment by the governor, with the consent of the
council. Each assistant commissioner shall serve a term of 4 years,
coincident with that of the commissioner, and may be reappointed. The
assistant commissioner shall be qualified to hold that position by
reason of education and experience.
                                             
 II. Each assistant commissioner shall perform such duties as are
assigned by the commissioner. In the event that the commissioner is
unable for any reason to perform his or her duties, the assistant
commissioner who has served in that capacity longer shall assume the
duties of the commissioner, unless otherwise designated by the
commissioner. The assistant commissioners shall be responsible for the
operations of the bureau of hearings, and shall, subject to the
supervision of the commissioner, exercise authority as required to
ensure that the divisions and their directors are implementing the
organizational goals and managing the work of the department in an
effective manner.
                                             
 III. The salary of the assistant commissioner shall be as specified
in RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1. 1994, 389:7. 2002, 220:13. 2003, 319:101. 2004,
171:23, eff. July 24, 2004. 2015, 276:36, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 21-P:5-a

 **21-P:5-a Director of Homeland Security and Emergency Management.
–**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 21-G and RSA 21-P:3, the
commissioner, after consultation with the governor, shall nominate for
appointment by the governor and council, a director of homeland security
and emergency management, who shall serve for a term of 3 years. The
director of homeland security and emergency management shall be
qualified by education and experience and shall receive the salary
provided in RSA 94:1-a.
                                             
 II. The director of homeland security and emergency management,
under the supervision of the commissioner and the governor, shall devote
full time and attention to overseeing the state-level planning,
preparation, exercise, response to and mitigation of terrorist threats
and incidents and natural and human-caused disasters. He or she shall
serve as the state's primary contact with the federal Department of
Homeland Security, and shall have authority to oversee and coordinate
planning, response, and recovery efforts of all state agencies to
terrorist events and natural and human-caused disasters and wide-scale
threats to public safety. He or she shall collaborate with the
department of health and human services and shall coordinate the efforts
of other state agencies in preventing and responding to epidemics and
other significant threats to the public health. All state agencies shall
and are authorized to cooperate with the director in carrying out his or
her duties as enumerated in this section.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. The director of homeland security and emergency management shall
keep the president of the senate and speaker of the house of
representatives or their designees promptly informed of any impending or
actual emergencies that require coordinated action with the legislative
branch.
                                             
 V. During service as director, the director of the division of
homeland security and emergency management may elect not to become a
member of the retirement system, however if he or she becomes a member
he or she shall be eligible to be a group II member if he or she was a
group II member or receiving a group II retirement allowance prior to
appointment.

**Source.** 2006, 290:12, eff. July 1, 2006. 2012, 226:4, II, eff. June
16, 2012. 2013, 196:3, 5, eff. July 9, 2013.

### Section 21-P:5-b

 **21-P:5-b Chief of Policy and Planning. –** The commissioner of
safety shall nominate a chief of policy and planning for appointment by
the governor, with the consent of the council. The chief of policy and
planning shall serve at the pleasure of the commissioner and shall be
qualified to hold that position by reason of education and experience
and shall perform such duties as are assigned.

**Source.** 2007, 263:89, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 21-P:6

 **21-P:6 Division of Administration. –** There is established within
the department the division of administration under the supervision of
an unclassified director of administration who shall, in accordance with
applicable laws, be responsible for the following functions:
                                             
 I. Accounting, purchasing, and budget control.
                                             
 II. Personnel management.
                                             
 III. Property, contracts, and grants management.
                                             
 IV. Data processing.
                                             
 V. Assistance to the commissioner with short and long range
department level planning activities.
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VIII. Collection of fuel taxes and administration of road tolls, the
international fuel tax agreement, and the audit functions of the
international registration plan under RSA 260.
                                             
 IX. Appointment, with the approval of the commissioner, of a road
toll administrator who shall be a classified employee and who shall,
under the supervision of the director of administration, be responsible
for administration of the motor vehicle road toll law and the fuel tax
agreement. The director of administration may delegate to the
administrator authority to sign and execute any documents pertaining to
the director's work and such documents so signed by the road toll
administrator shall have the same effect as though signed by the
director.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1. 1992, 165:3. 1993, 231:5, I. 2011, 11:1, 6, I,
eff. April 25, 2011. 2013, 100:11, eff. Aug. 23, 2013.

### Section 21-P:7

 **21-P:7 Division of State Police. –**
                                             
 I. There is established within the department the division of state
police under the supervision of an unclassified director of state police
who shall be responsible for the following functions, in accordance with
applicable laws:
                                             
 (a) Enforcing state criminal and motor vehicle laws, public
safety laws, and laws relative to hazardous waste, hazardous materials
transportation, and truck weight enforcement.
                                             
 (b) Issuing nonresident pistol permits in accordance with RSA
159:6.
                                             
 (c) Carrying out the duties specified in RSA 106-B.
                                             
 (d) Regulation of detective agencies and security services under
RSA 106-F.
                                             
 (e) Forensic science laboratory services, including expert
assistants and such facilities as are necessary to support the
investigatory, analytical, and enforcement functions of the state
criminal, motor vehicle, hazardous waste, and other public safety laws.
                                             
 (f) Approving professional standards of conduct and standard
operating procedures of the division of state police.
                                             
 (g) Carrying out the duties assigned to the marine patrol
bureau.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the provisions of
RSA 106-B:4 shall continue to apply to the division of state police. The
division shall be authorized to continue to use the nomenclature
designating the units and personnel of the division in use on the
effective date of this chapter.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1987, 124:1. 2002, 220:9. 2003, 319:85. 2004, 257:15, I.
2007, 263:106. 2011, 11:2, eff. April 25, 2011; 224:230, eff. July 1,
2011.

### Section 21-P:7-a

 **21-P:7-a Deputy Director of State Police. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008,
358:16, II, eff. Sept. 9, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 21-P:7-b

 **21-P:7-b New Hampshire Hospital Security Force. –** The
commissioner of safety is authorized to organize a hospital security
force for the purpose of patrolling the hospital's buildings, roads, and
grounds of the campus of the state office park south and providing for
general security on the campus. The hospital security force shall be
under the immediate control of and responsible to the commissioner of
safety or his or her designee.

**Source.** 2004, 257:50, eff. Jan. 1, 2005.

### Section 21-P:7-c

 **21-P:7-c Authority of Hospital Security Force Officers; Memorandum
of Understanding; Funding. –**
                                             
 I. All security officers of the hospital security force shall
possess such police powers as are granted to them by the commissioner of
safety pursuant to RSA 21-P:4, XI. All officers of the hospital security
force hired after the effective date of this paragraph shall be required
to meet the training standards required generally of police offers by
the police standards and training council pursuant to RSA 188-F and in
addition shall receive additional training in dealing with persons with
mental illness as specified by the commissioner of safety after
consultation with the chief executive officer of the New Hampshire
hospital.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of the department of health and human services
shall enter into a memorandum of understanding with the commissioner of
safety for the purposes of delineating the functions, duties, and
responsibilities of the department of safety in regard to the provision
of security and dispatch services to the New Hampshire hospital. The
memorandum of understanding shall include, but not be limited to:
responding to emergencies within New Hampshire hospital, maintaining the
security of the hospital buildings, insuring the safety of patients,
staff, and visitors, apprehending involuntarily committed persons who
leave the hospital without authorization, accepting custody of
involuntary admissions, transporting patients for medical, legal, and
other purposes, investigating cases of abuse, neglect, sexual assault,
and other criminal conduct, providing training, and conducting searches
and seizures of contraband. In addition, the department of safety shall
provide dispatch services including, but not limited to: monitoring
hospital access between 8 p.m. and 8 a.m., operating and monitoring
video security systems, receiving incoming communications, assessing the
priority of the call and dispatching appropriate assistance,
coordinating emergency preparedness procedures, receiving incoming fire
calls and alarms, and operating the switchboard between 8 p.m. and 8
a.m. and at other times as needed.
                                             
 III. Within the limits of funds budgeted for hospital security force
positions, the department of health and human services shall maintain
the funding for the hospital security force and pay the department of
safety for providing these services.

**Source.** 2004, 257:50. 2008, 61:4, eff. May 21, 2008.

### Section 21-P:8

 **21-P:8 Division of Motor Vehicles. –** There is established within
the department the division of motor vehicles under the supervision of
an unclassified director of motor vehicles who shall be responsible for
the following functions, in accordance with applicable law:
                                             
 I. Motor vehicle and driver regulation, including, but not limited
to, driver licensing, vehicle registration, financial responsibility
compliance, and title issuance.
                                             
 II. Registration of commercial and private boats, as provided in RSA
270-E:3.
                                             
 III. Administration of the motor vehicle laws under RSA 260, except
for road toll administration under RSA 260:30 through RSA 260:65-a and
the fuel tax agreement under RSA 260:65-b through RSA 260:65-e, which
shall be administered by the division of administration.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1987, 124:1. 1990, 229:16. 2002, 220:11. 2011, 11:3, 6, II,
eff. April 25, 2011. 2013, 100:12, eff. Aug. 23, 2013.

### Section 21-P:9

 **21-P:9 Assistant to the Director; Financial Responsibility
Supervisor. –** The director of motor vehicles, with the approval of the
commissioner, shall appoint the following assistants, who shall be
classified employees:
                                             
 I. An assistant to the director of motor vehicles, who shall carry
out such duties as may be assigned to him or her by the director.
                                             
 II. A financial responsibility supervisor who shall assume, under
the control of the director of motor vehicles, the responsibility of the
administration of the motor vehicle financial responsibility law. The
director may delegate to said supervisor authority to sign and execute
any documents pertaining to his or her work and such documents so signed
by the supervisor shall have the same effect as though signed by the
director.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1; 356:3. 2005, 203:1, 2. 2011, 11:4, eff. April
25, 2011.

### Section 21-P:10

 **21-P:10 Division of Safety Services. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 224:274,
I, eff. July 1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 21-P:10-a

 **21-P:10-a Director of Safety Services; Retirement System. –**

                                             [Repealed 2011, 224:274, II, eff. July 1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 21-P:10-b

 **21-P:10-b Report and Budget. –**
                                             
 I. The department of safety shall submit as part of the annual
report required under RSA 20:7, a report on the revenue generated from
safe boater education certificates.
                                             
 II. In conjunction with the operating budget of the department of
safety, the department shall submit a budget for the biennium beginning
July 1, 2003, and for each biennium thereafter, which shall include the
revenue generated from safe boater education certificates and all
revenues and expenditures of the navigation safety fund established in
RSA 270-E:6-a.

**Source.** 2002, 272:9. 2008, 358:3. 2011, 224:236, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 21-P:11

 **21-P:11 Division of Enforcement. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2002, 220:14, I,
eff. July 1, 2002.
                                             ]

### Section 21-P:11-a

 **21-P:11-a Deputy Director of Motor Vehicles. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of safety shall nominate a deputy director of
motor vehicles for appointment by the governor, with the consent of the
council. The deputy director of motor vehicles shall serve a term of 4
years, and may be reappointed. The deputy director of motor vehicles
shall be qualified to hold that position by reason of education and
experience.
                                             
 II. The deputy director of motor vehicles shall perform such duties
as are assigned by the director of motor vehicles. The deputy director
of motor vehicles shall assume the duties of the director of motor
vehicles in the event that the director of motor vehicles is unable for
any reason to perform such duties.
                                             
 III. The salary of the deputy director of motor vehicles shall be as
specified in RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 1999, 225:23, eff. July 1, 1999.

### Section 21-P:12

 **21-P:12 Division of Fire Safety. –** There is established within
the department a division of fire safety. Such division shall be under
the supervision of an unclassified director who shall be known as the
state fire marshal. The state fire marshal shall be nominated by the
commissioner of safety, after consultation with the state advisory board
of fire control, for appointment by the governor, with the consent of
the council, and shall serve a term of 4 years until a successor is
appointed. If no successor has been appointed with the consent of the
council within 6 months of the expiration of the term, the governor
shall appoint a successor with the consent of the council. The state
fire marshal shall be academically and technically qualified to hold the
position. The state fire marshal shall be a citizen of this state or
become a citizen of this state within one year of his or her
appointment. He or she shall devote his or her entire time to the duties
of the division of fire safety and shall receive the salary specified in
RSA 94:1-a for the state fire marshal. The state fire marshal shall be
responsible for the following functions, in accordance with applicable
law:
                                             
 I. Investigation of the causes and circumstances of fires.
                                             
 II. Fire safety regulations and education.
                                             
 III. Coordination of state agency response to accidents involving
hazardous materials, and regulation of liquid propane gas pipelines
safety, except propane gas pipelines regulated by the public utilities
commission pursuant to RSA 362. The director, with the approval of the
commissioner, shall appoint a hazardous materials incident response
coordinator who shall assist local incident commanders with command,
logistics, and resources, coordinate the training and procedures of the
state's regional hazardous materials response teams in all areas of the
state, oversee the preparedness of the hazardous materials response
teams and assist local communities in their efforts to obtain
reimbursement for emergency responses pursuant to RSA 154:8-a, II-a.
                                             
 III-a. Administration of the modular building standards program
under RSA 205-C.
                                             
 IV. Carrying out all other functions assigned to him in RSA 153 or
any other provision of law.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VII. Administration, supervision, and enforcement of RSA 153:27-38.
There is hereby established within the department of safety a bureau of
building safety and construction under the supervision of the state fire
marshal, which shall include the mechanical safety staff.
                                             
 VIII. Provision of clerical support for the state advisory board of
fire control.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1. 1989, 388:1, 11. 1994, 389:8. 2002, 220:1;
257:1, 5. 2003, 319:102, 131, III. 2004, 171:24. 2005, 122:1; 177:104,
105. 2006, 206:1. 2011, 11:5, eff. April 25, 2011. 2012, 237:7, II, eff.
June 4, 2013. 2013, 275:1, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 21-P:12-a

 **21-P:12-a Division of Fire Standards and Training and Emergency
Medical Services; Disposition of Funds. –**
                                             
 I. There is established within the department a division of fire
standards and training and emergency medical services, under the
supervision of an unclassified director of fire standards and training
and emergency medical services who shall administer and supervise a fire
and emergency medical service training and research program throughout
the state. The director of fire standards and training and emergency
medical services shall be nominated by the commissioner of safety, after
consultation with the fire standards and training commission and the
emergency medical and trauma services coordinating board, for
appointment by the governor, with consent of the council, and shall
serve a term of 4 years until a successor is appointed. The commission
shall take a recorded vote regarding its concurrence or non-concurrence
in the commissioner's nomination decision. If the commission votes not
to concur in the decision, it shall submit a letter to the commissioner
so stating, and the commissioner shall in turn submit that letter to the
governor and council. The director of fire standards and training and
emergency medical services shall be academically and technically
qualified to hold the position, and shall receive the salary specified
in RSA 94:1-a.
                                             
 II. The director shall:
                                             
 (a) Be responsible for the day-to-day operations of the division
of fire standards and training and emergency medical services, the
operations of the fire academy, including establishing training programs
and offering instruction in methods of determining and dealing with the
causes of fire and the prevention of fire, techniques in firefighting,
emergency medical services, and rescue, research and techniques in
firefighting and fire protection, the administration and management of
fire departments and emergency medical services units, and the
provisions of RSA 21-P:12-b.
                                             
 (b) Establish fees to be collected for tuition, licenses, and
services. Such fees shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner
of the department of safety. The commissioner may for good cause waive
any fees charged under this subparagraph and may authorize tuition
reimbursement from the fire standards and training and emergency medical
services fund.
                                             
 (c) Establish, maintain, approve, and certify programs, courses,
institutions, and facilities for study for all fire service and
emergency medical services personnel and recruits according to accepted
curricula.
                                             
 (d) Develop and administer the provision of professional
instruction and training for all fire, rescue, and emergency medical
services.
                                             
 (e) Develop and promote new methods and practices of
firefighting, delivery of emergency medical services, rescue operations,
injury prevention, fire prevention, and fire and emergency medical
services administration.
                                             
 (f) Disseminate information relative to fire and rescues,
techniques of firefighting and rescuing, fire prevention, fire
administration, emergency medical services, and other related subjects
to all interested agencies and individuals throughout the state.
                                             
 (g) Be authorized to employ part-time instructors or assistants
and compensate them for organizing, developing, and conducting approved
fire training, emergency medical services, and rescue courses or other
work as directed at an hourly rate established by the commissioner and
for mileage and expenses incurred in performing their official duties.
                                             
 (h) With the approval of the commissioner, accept in the name of
the state any and all donations, fees for tuition, rents, services and
any and all moneys and grants from any governmental unit, public agency,
institution, person, firm, or corporation and receive, utilize, expend,
and dispose of such funds subject to budgetary provisions, consistent
with the rules of the department of safety and the purposes or
conditions of the donations or grant.
                                             
 III. The receipt of a donation or grant under subparagraph II(h)
shall be noted in the biennial report of the department of safety, which
will also identify the nature of the donation or grant and the
conditions of the donation or grant, if any. Any moneys received by the
division pursuant to subparagraph II(h) shall be deposited in the state
treasury to the account of the department of safety and shall not lapse.
In addition, the division may receive, hold, and use gifts, bequests,
and devises either outright or in trust for purposes consistent with
this chapter.

**Source.** 1994, 389:9. 1997, 135:1. 1998, 321:3. 2001, 91:15. 2004,
171:26, eff. July 24, 2004.

### Section 21-P:12-b

 **21-P:12-b Bureau of Emergency Medical Services. –**
                                             
 I. There is established within the division of fire standards and
training and emergency medical services a bureau of emergency medical
services under the supervision of a classified chief of the bureau of
emergency medical services reporting to the division director.
                                             
 II. The bureau chief, under the supervision of the director of the
division of fire standards and training and emergency medical services,
shall:
                                             
 (a) Be responsible for the day-to-day operations of the bureau of
emergency medical services.
                                             
 (b) Plan and provide operational resources as available, for the
coordination of emergency medical and adult and pediatric trauma
services recommended throughout the state with and between private units
and local, county, and state agencies. Such a plan shall include
provisions for response to mass casualty incidents. The plan shall be
tested by exercises from time to time in coordination with other
appropriate local and state agencies.
                                             
 (c) Carry out public information and education relative to the
availability and appropriate use of the emergency medical and trauma
services system.
                                             
 (d) Facilitate the establishment and maintenance of a
communications network that addresses citizen access to the emergency
medical and trauma services system and communications among emergency
medical service units, health care facilities, and other local, county,
and state agencies involved in the care or transportation of persons in
need of appropriate medical attention.
                                             
 (e) Provide for the training and for the written and practical
testing of emergency medical care providers, in accordance with RSA
153-A:11.
                                             
 (f) License emergency medical care providers, emergency medical
service units, emergency medical service instructor/coordinators,
emergency medical service training agencies, emergency medical services
dispatchers, and emergency medical service vehicles, including
wheelchair vans for hire.
                                             
 (g) Establish a data collection and analysis capability that
provides for the evaluation of the emergency medical and trauma services
system and for modifications to the system based on identified gaps and
shortfalls in the delivery of emergency medical and trauma services. The
data and resulting analysis shall be provided to the bodies established
under this chapter, provided that such use does not violate the
confidentiality of recipients of emergency medical care. The provisions
of RSA 126 shall be followed with regard to other uses of this data for
research and evaluation purposes, and for protecting the confidentiality
of data in those uses. All analyses shall be public documents, provided
that the identity of the recipients of emergency medical care are
protected from disclosure either directly or indirectly.
                                             
 (h) Carry out investigations as provided under RSA 153-A:14.
                                             
 (i) Provide administrative support, within the limits of
available funding, to the coordinating board, emergency medical services
medical control board, trauma medical review committee, and the
councils.
                                             
 (j) With the approval of the commissioner, be authorized to
employ part-time instructors, evaluators, and practical skill
examination aides for the purpose of delivering training and written and
practical examinations.
                                             
 (k) Prepare budgets and grant requests for funds needed to
maintain an effective emergency medical and trauma services system, and
plan initiatives related to improving the general health of the public.
                                             
 (l) With the approval of the commissioner, accept in the name of
the state any and all donations, fees for tuition, rents, services, and
any and all money and grants from any governmental unit, public agency,
institution, person, firm, or corporation and receive, utilize, expend,
and dispose of such funds subject to budgetary provisions, consistent
with the rules of the department of safety and the purposes or
conditions of the donation or grant.
                                             
 (m) With the approval of the commissioner, establish fees to be
collected for tuition, services, and licenses. The commissioner may for
good cause waive any fees charged under this subparagraph and may
authorize tuition reimbursement from the fire standards and training and
emergency medical services fund.
                                             
 (n) Develop and implement a plan for individuals possessing a New
Hampshire emergency services license to provide non-emergency services
at social or sporting events. Such plan shall be developed and
implemented by July 1, 2013. The plan shall be distributed to the
commissioner of safety, the director of the division of fire standards
and training and emergency medical services, and the chair of the
emergency medical and trauma services coordination board.
                                             
 III. The receipt of a donation or grant under subparagraph II(l)
shall be noted in the annual report of the department of safety, which
will also identify the nature of the donation or grant and the
conditions of the donation or grant, if any. Any moneys received by the
division pursuant to subparagraph II(l) shall be deposited in the state
treasury to the account of the department of safety and shall not lapse.
In addition, the division may receive, hold, and use gifts, bequests,
and devises either outright or in trust for purposes consistent with
this chapter.

**Source.** 1999, 345:3. 2001, 91:3. 2004, 171:26. 2011, 169:1, eff.
Jan. 1, 2012. 2012, 216:1, eff. June 13, 2012.

### Section 21-P:12-c

 **21-P:12-c Liability Limited; State Certified Fire Instructors.
–**
                                             
 I. Any person who is a state certified fire instructor employed by a
nonprofit fire department or emergency medical service unit shall be
immune from civil liability in any action brought on the basis of any
act or omission during training which results in damage or injury to any
person if:
                                             
 (a) The instructor had prior written approval from the division,
to teach a curriculum approved by the fire standards and training
commission;
                                             
 (b) The instructor was acting in good faith and within the scope
of the instructor's official functions and duties as an instructor; and
                                             
 (c) The damage or injury was not caused by willful, wanton, or
grossly negligent misconduct by the instructor.
                                             
 II. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Damage or injury'' includes physical, nonphysical, economic
and noneconomic damage and property damage.
                                             
 (b) "Nonprofit fire department'' shall include, but not be
limited to, not for profit fire service organizations exempt from
taxation under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
organized or incorporated in this state.
                                             
 (c) "State certified fire instructor'' means a person who has
completed the requirements to hold such certification as approved by the
New Hampshire fire standards and training commission.

**Source.** 2000, 196:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 21-P:12-d

 **21-P:12-d Fire Standards and Training and Emergency Medical
Services Fund. –** There is established in the office of the state
treasurer a separate, nonlapsing fund to be known as the fire standards
and training and emergency medical services fund from which the state
treasurer shall pay expenses incurred in the administration of the
division of fire standards and training and emergency medical services,
under RSA 21-P:12-a, the division of fire safety, under RSA 21-P:12, the
division of homeland security and emergency management, and the position
of fireworks inspector, under RSA 160-C:17. If the expenditure of
additional funds over budget estimates was unanticipated and is
necessary for the proper functioning of the division of fire standards
and training and emergency medical services, the division of fire
safety, or the division of homeland security and emergency management,
the commissioner of the department of safety may transfer funds, with
the prior approval of the fiscal committee of the general court, from
this fund to the department of safety for such purposes.

**Source.** 2001, 91:4. 2003, 248:1. 2004, 171:27. 2008, 192:4, eff.
June 11, 2008; 361:16, eff. June 11, 2008 at 12:01 a.m. 2012, 247:14,
eff. Aug. 17, 2012. 2013, 144:69, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 21-P:12-e

 **21-P:12-e Fire Standards and Training, Emergency Medical Services,
and Fire Safety Report and Budget. –**
                                             
 I. The department of safety shall submit as part of the annual
report required under RSA 20:7, a report on the training and educational
programs offered or contracted by the division of fire standards and
training and emergency medical services and the activities of the
division of fire safety, the development of the technological
advancements in division programs, the revenue generated from the sale
of motor vehicle records, the budget and revenue projections of the 2
divisions, the degree of coordination with municipal fire and emergency
medical services departments, and the extent of direct aid to
municipalities and mutual aid associations.
                                             
 II. In conjunction with the operating budget of the department of
safety, the department shall submit a budget for the biennium beginning
July 1, 2003, and for each biennium thereafter, which shall include
financial responsibility for and the costs of all programs offered or
contracted by the division of fire standards and training and emergency
medical services and the division of fire safety, the development of
technological advancements in division programs, the revenue generated
from the sale of motor vehicle records, the extent of direct aid to
municipalities and mutual aid associations, and all revenues and
expenditures of the dedicated fund established in RSA 21-P:12-d.

**Source.** 2001, 91:4. 2003, 248:3. 2004, 171:27. 2008, 358:4, eff.
Sept. 9, 2008.

### Section 21-P:12-f

 **21-P:12-f Division of Information Technology. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008,
335:7, II, eff. Sept. 5, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 21-P:13

 **21-P:13 Bureau of Hearings. –**
                                             
 I. There is established within the department the bureau of hearings
under the supervision of an administrator of hearings, who shall be
directly responsible to the assistant commissioner, and who shall be a
classified employee.
                                             
 II. The bureau of hearings shall be responsible for holding all
adjudicative hearings on behalf of the commissioner of safety or any
division of the department. The bureau of hearings shall have authority
to take disciplinary action in the name of such division against any
holder of a license, permit, or registration issued by such division in
accordance with law.
                                             
 II-a. Unless otherwise provided by law, all appeals of a decision of
the commissioner of safety or the bureau of hearings shall be pursuant
to RSA 541.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of safety or designee is authorized, whenever
the commissioner deems it feasible, upon giving timely written notice to
the parties, to provide to the parties to an administrative hearing the
opportunity to hold the hearing and take testimony by video
teleconference, provided that testimony is limited to the matters
relating to hearings that are open to the public in accordance with RSA
541-A. Either party shall have an opportunity to file a timely written
objection to the introduction of testimony by video teleconference,
stating its reasons for the objection, and the commissioner or designee,
upon determining that one or more of the parties would be substantially
disadvantaged in presenting their case by video teleconference, may
order live testimony. For purposes of this section, "video
teleconference'' includes the use of any technology that provides live,
interactive aural and visual communication.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1. 2011, 220:1, eff. Aug. 27, 2011. 2013, 125:1,
eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 21-P:14

 **21-P:14 Rulemaking Authority; Commissioner of Safety. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of safety shall develop and adopt rules, under
RSA 541-A, relating to driver education courses to be given in the
secondary schools of the state and motor vehicle drivers' schools
licensed under the provisions of RSA 263:44, and relating to the
licensing of the schools and of their teachers and instructors, which
rules shall cover the subjects of:
                                             
 (a) Facilities and equipment.
                                             
 (b) The educational background and other qualifications of
teachers and instructors.
                                             
 (c) Curriculum and hours during which instruction may be given.
                                             
 (d) Amounts of insurance with respect to training vehicles and
other facilities of the school, which may be in addition to any other
insurance coverage required by law.
                                             
 (e) Admission and advertising practices, together with terms of
enrollment, of schools licensed under the provisions of RSA 263:44.
                                             
 (f) Uniform classifications for certification of driver education
instructors, including the same types of certification levels and the
same qualifications required for each level for both private and public
school instructors, and a system of fees for certification.
                                             
 (g) Any other subject which in the judgment of the commissioner
requires rulemaking to promote the effectiveness of driver education
courses.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of safety shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 (a) Regulation of hazardous materials and wastes and low-level
radioactive waste, as authorized by RSA 21-P:17, I.
                                             
 (b) The administration of the division of state police and fees
for criminal record and fingerprint checks, as authorized by RSA
106-B:7.
                                             
 (c) Gathering information and maintaining records on criminals,
as authorized by RSA 106-B:14, I.


                                             [Paragraph II(d) effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph
II(d) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 (d) Licensing detective agencies and security guard services, as
authorized by RSA 106-F:3.


                                             [Paragraph II(d) effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph II(d)
set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 (d) Licensing private investigative agencies, security guard
services, and bail recovery agents, as authorized by RSA 106-F:3.
                                             
 (e) The sale, storage, handling and transportation of explosives,
as authorized by RSA 158:9-f.
                                             
 (f) Nonresident pistol permits, as authorized by RSA 159:6.
                                             
 (g) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (h) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (i) Regulation of boats and boaters, as authorized by RSA
270:11.
                                             
 (j) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (k) Noise level testing and certification, as authorized by RSA
270:39.
                                             
 (l) Regulation of rafting of boats, as authorized by RSA 270:43.
                                             
 (m) Regulation of carnival and amusement rides, as authorized by
RSA 321-A:2.
                                             
 (n) Registration fees for carnival or amusement operators, as
authorized by RSA 321-A:5, I.
                                             
 (o) Self-dialing alarm systems, as authorized by RSA 370-A:2.
                                             
 (p) Railroad police, as authorized by RSA 381:11.
                                             
 (q) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (r) Qualifications of persons to receive the authority of peace
officers under RSA 21-P:4, V.
                                             
 (s) Qualification for a person to receive the authority granted
pursuant to RSA 21-P:4, VII.
                                             
 (t) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (u) Application for and issuance of household goods carrier
certificates, including all necessary forms, as authorized by RSA
375-A:3 and 375-A:5, IV-V.
                                             
 (v) Annual reporting requirements, as authorized by RSA
375-A:13.
                                             
 (w) Regulating household goods carriers, as authorized by RSA
375-A:14.
                                             
 (x) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (y) Regulation of common and contract carriers of passengers by
motor vehicle, as authorized by RSA 376:21.
                                             
 (z) The establishment of training criteria for hazardous
materials incident responders and for the implementation of a statewide
hazardous material command system. Such rules shall be in addition to
rules adopted under RSA 21-P:14, II(a) and shall be adopted after
consultation with the fire standards and training commission. No rule
shall infringe on the authority of the governor or the office of
emergency management under this chapter or RSA 4.
                                             
 (aa) Vessel registration and numbering under RSA 270-E.
                                             
 (bb) Administrative fines for inspection stations in violation of
any inspection law or rule, as authorized under RSA 266:1, XI.
                                             
 (cc) Licensing of emergency medical care providers and
administration and enforcement of emergency medical and trauma care
services under RSA 153-A.
                                             
 (dd) The methods, procedures, and techniques for the testing of
blood, urine, and breath to determine alcohol concentration as described
under RSA 265-A:5, V.
                                             
 (ee) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. The commissioner of safety shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A
and RSA 260:5, relative to motor vehicle registration as follows:
                                             
 (a) Application for and issuance of motor vehicle certificates of
title, including all necessary forms, as authorized by RSA 261:1, 261:4,
and 261:31, I.
                                             
 (b) Exemption from the motor vehicle certificate of title
requirement, as authorized by RSA 261:3.
                                             
 (c) Maintaining records of motor vehicle certificates of title,
as authorized by RSA 261:7.
                                             
 (d) Requirements for posting bond when motor vehicle ownership is
in doubt, as authorized by RSA 261:10, II.
                                             
 (e) Certificates of title held by motor vehicle dealers, as
authorized by RSA 261:15.
                                             
 (f) Voluntary and involuntary transfers of interests in a motor
vehicle, as authorized by RSA 261:14, 261:16, and 261:17.
                                             
 (g) Certificates of title for salvage vehicles, as authorized by
RSA 261:22.
                                             
 (h) Issuance of duplicate certificates of title, as authorized by
RSA 261:12.
                                             
 (i) Perfection, assignment, and release of security interests in
motor vehicles, as authorized by RSA 261:24-29.
                                             
 (j) Investigations to procure information relative to motor
vehicle certificates of title, as authorized by RSA 261:31, II.
                                             
 (k) Identification numbers for vehicles, as authorized by RSA
261:31, IV.
                                             
 (l) Fees for issuing certificates of title, as authorized by RSA
261:20.
                                             
 (m) Application for and issuance of certificates of registration
for motor vehicles, including all necessary forms, as authorized by RSA
261:40 and 261:52.
                                             
 (n) Registration of motor vehicles owned by nonresidents, as
authorized by RSA 261:42-48.
                                             
 (o) Maintaining records of certificates of registration, as
authorized by RSA 261:58.
                                             
 (p) Preparation and distribution of registration listings, as
authorized by RSA 261:60.
                                             
 (q) Extension of registration expiration, as authorized by RSA
261:63.
                                             
 (r) Exemption from the registration requirement for certain
construction equipment, as authorized by RSA 261:64.
                                             
 (s) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (t) Issuing certificates of registration upon transfer of
ownership, as authorized by RSA 261:66.
                                             
 (u) Procedures for registration by municipal agents, as
authorized by RSA 261:74-a-261:74-g.
                                             
 (v) Issuance of number plates for motor vehicles, as authorized
by RSA 261:75-97.
                                             
 (w) Registration by motor vehicle manufacturers or dealers,
including the posting of bond by a dealer, as authorized by RSA 261:97
through RSA 261:111-a.
                                             
 (x) Registration by motorcycle and moped manufacturers or
dealers, as authorized by RSA 261:112-113.
                                             
 (y) Registration by transporters, as authorized by RSA
261:114-118.
                                             
 (z) Registration by utility dealers, as authorized by RSA
261:119-122.
                                             
 (aa) Registration by automotive recycling dealers, as authorized
by RSA 261:123-134.
                                             
 (bb) Registration by motor vehicle repairers, as authorized by
RSA 261:136-139.
                                             
 (cc) Classification of motor vehicles for registration fee
purposes, as authorized by RSA 261:143.
                                             
 (dd) Exemption from registration fees for publicly owned
vehicles, as authorized by RSA 261:145, and for emergency vehicles, as
authorized by RSA 261:146.
                                             
 (ee) Refund of registration fees for members of the armed forces,
as authorized by RSA 261:68.
                                             
 (ff) Municipal permits for registration, as authorized by RSA
261:148.
                                             
 (gg) Exemption from municipal permit fees for certain disabled
veterans, as authorized by RSA 261:157 and 261:159; and for nonprofit
organizations, as authorized by RSA 261:158.
                                             
 (hh) Suspension of registrations, licenses, and privileges, as
authorized by RSA 261:177 and 261:178.
                                             
 (ii) Permits for the use of antique motor car registration
plates, as authorized by RSA 261:89-a.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner of safety shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A
and RSA 260:5, relative to licensing drivers as follows:
                                             
 (a) Procedures for and information required on driver's license
applications, including all necessary forms, as authorized by RSA
263:5.
                                             
 (b) Driver's license examination and reexamination requirements,
as authorized by RSA 263:6 and 263:7.
                                             
 (c) Restricted licenses, as authorized by RSA 263:13.
                                             
 (d) Conditions and requirements for a driver's license, as
authorized by RSA 263:14-263:33-b.
                                             
 (e) Intrastate licenses for nonresidents, as authorized by RSA
263:39-a.
                                             
 (f) Access to information regarding anatomical gifts, as
authorized by RSA 263:41.
                                             
 (g) Collection of drivers' license fees, as authorized by RSA
263:42.
                                             
 (h) Petitions for refund of fees, as authorized by RSA 263:43.
                                             
 (i) Application and requirements for issuance of motor vehicle
drivers' school licenses, as authorized by RSA 263:44-47 and 263:49-51.
                                             
 (j) Suspension or revocation of a driver's license or driving
privilege, as authorized by RSA 263:53 through RSA 263:65, RSA 263:73,
RSA 265-A:26, and RSA 265-A:29.
                                             
 (k) Appeals of driver's license denial, suspension, or
revocation, as authorized by RSA 263:75, RSA 265-A:34, and RSA 263:76.
                                             
 (l) Application for and issuance of a vanpooler's permit, as
authorized by RSA 376:2, XII.
                                             
 (m) Commercial driver license requirements, as authorized by RSA
263:98.
                                             
 (n) Temporary driver's licenses, including procedures for the
issuance, revocation, form, and other related matters, as authorized by
RSA 263:5-a.
                                             
 (o) Format, content and procedures for the display of the notice
required under RSA 260:10-a, II.
                                             
 (p) Criteria for waiver of the default fee required under RSA
263:56-a, I-a.
                                             
 (q) Approval of driver attitude programs and fee as provided in
RSA 263:56-e.
                                             
 (r) Administrative suspension of motor vehicle licenses pursuant
to RSA 265:91-b and RSA 265:91-c and RSA 265-A:30 through RSA 265-A:32,
including notices, forms, temporary driving permits, hearing procedures,
and procedures for restoration after the suspension period.
                                             
 (s) Establishment of administrative procedures to aid in the
collection of protested checks relating to drivers' licenses, vehicle
registrations, titles, permits or fees, including provisions for
suspension of license, registration, title, or permit.
                                             
 (t) Procedures for conducting the problem driver pointer system
search, including forms and procedures to be used in conducting a
problem driver pointer search as initiated by an employer.
                                             
 V. The commissioner of safety shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A and
RSA 260:5, relative to motor vehicle regulation as follows:
                                             
 (a) Motor vehicle inspection, as authorized by RSA 266:1, I.
                                             
 (b) School bus inspection, as authorized by RSA 266:7.
                                             
 (c) School bus design, as authorized by RSA 266:62.
                                             
 (d) School bus driver certification, as authorized by RSA
263:29.
                                             
 (e) Proof of financial responsibility, as authorized by RSA 264:1
and 264:2, II.
                                             
 (f) Forms of security, as authorized by RSA 264:4.
                                             
 (g) Reports of motor vehicle accidents, as authorized by RSA
264:25.
                                             
 (h) Licensing of distributors of motor fuels, as authorized by
RSA 260:36.
                                             
 (i) Licensing of transporters of motor fuels and petroleum
products, as authorized by RSA 260:42, I.
                                             
 (j) Reporting requirements for motor fuel distributors and
transporters, as authorized by RSA 260:43.
                                             
 (k) Refunds of road tolls on motor fuels, as authorized by RSA
260:47, 260:48 and 260:49.
                                             
 (l) Licensing of users of special fuels, as authorized by RSA
260:52, V.
                                             
 (m) Special fuel user bonds.
                                             
 (n) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (o) Notification of statutory liens, as authorized by RSA
260:63.
                                             
 (p) Procedures for motor vehicle hearings, including habitual
offender hearings.
                                             
 (q) Procedures for the inspection and verification of oil import
records pursuant to RSA 146-A:11-b after consultation with the
department of environmental services and the oil fund disbursement
board, and pursuant to RSA 147-B:12 after consultation with the
department of environmental services.
                                             
 (r) Procedures and criteria for authorizing the disposal of
abandoned vehicles pursuant to RSA 262:36-a.
                                             
 (s) Issuance of permits for emergency lights for hospital
emergency personnel pursuant to RSA 266:78-c, V.
                                             
 (t) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (u) School bus driver qualification files, school bus operation
and school bus accident reports, as provided in RSA 263:29-a.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner of safety shall adopt by rule, under RSA 541-A,
the fuel tax agreement and any proposed changes to the fuel tax
agreement that have been adopted by the legally joined jurisdictions to
the agreement.
                                             
 VII. The commissioner of safety, in consultation with the fire
standards and training commission and the emergency medical and trauma
services coordinating board, shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A, relative
to:
                                             
 (a) Fees for tuition, services, and licenses under RSA 21-P:12-a
and 21-P:12-b.
                                             
 (b) Tuition reimbursement under RSA 21-P:12-a and 21-P:12-b.
                                             
 (c) The circumstances in which a waiver may be granted under RSA
21-P:12-a, II(b) and RSA 21-P:12-b, II(m).
                                             
 VIII. The commissioner of safety, in consultation with the enhanced
911 commission, shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (a) The conduct of the enhanced 911 commission meetings.
                                             
 (b) The development of minimum selection, educational, and
training standards for emergency public safety answering point
personnel.
                                             
 (c) Procedures for the conduct of investigations authorized under
RSA 106-H.
                                             
 (d) Procedures for the collection and updating of the necessary
database.
                                             
 (e) Procedures for the necessary cooperation and coordination
with telephone utilities, municipalities, and the public for the
effective implementation of the enhanced 911 system.
                                             
 (f) Procedures necessary for adequate funding of the enhanced 911
system, including coordination with the public utilities commission for
appropriate tariff and billing mechanisms.
                                             
 (g) Procedures necessary to provide for the proper administration
of RSA 106-H.
                                             
 IX. The commissioner of safety shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A,
for the licensing of persons responsible for the use of flame,
pyrotechnics, or other means of special effects for entertainment,
exhibition, demonstration, or simulation before a proximate audience as
regulated by the state fire code adopted under RSA 153:5 and for
establishing fees for such licenses.
                                             
 X. The commissioner of safety shall have authority to approve rules
prior to adoption by the mechanical licensing board, as provided in RSA
153:16-b and 153:27-38.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1; 296:4; 356:4. 1988, 64:21; 151:15, II; 271:6;
288:15. 1989, 230:11; 253:7; 309:4; 319:18; 384:2. 1990, 62:1; 107:1;
190:2; 229:18. 1991, 73:2; 108:1; 347:8. 1992, 163:2; 258:2. 1993,
171:4; 294:2; 337:4, 7. 1994, 184:1; 350:9; 364:8. 1995, 41:3; 85:1;
282:6. 1996, 19:4; 228:10, 11; 292:1, 2, 41, I. 1997, 252:5, I. 1999,
164:2; 345:4. 2001, 91:5; 293:12-14. 2002, 257:6. 2003, 298:1; 319:87,
103. 2004, 247:3; 257:15, II. 2006, 206:2; 216:1; 260:4-6; 317:1. 2007,
230:2. 2008, 249:6; 358:13. 2010, 94:2, 3. 2011, 8:3, eff. June 24,
2011; 224:6, eff. June 29, 2011. 2013, 100:6, II, eff. Aug. 23, 2013;
275:2, 15, III, eff. July 1, 2013. 2015, 142:12, eff. July 1, 2015.
2016, 145:2, I, eff. July 26, 2016; 196:13, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 21-P:15

 **21-P:15 Departmental Organization; Transfers of Personnel and
Appropriations. –**
                                             
 I. Upon the recommendation of the commissioner, the governor and
council are authorized to approve such changes in internal
administrative departmental organization not inconsistent with RSA 21-P
as the governor and council find from time to time may improve or make
more economical the administration of the department; provided, however,
that no such change shall eliminate any then existing position within
the classified services.
                                             
 II. With the approval of the governor and council, the commissioner
is authorized to transfer classified personnel, appropriations or
portions of appropriations relating to such personnel or appropriations
as well as necessary equipment, within or between any division of the
department, provided, however, that no such transfer shall eliminate the
classified position transferred.
                                             
 III. Any transfer involving the division of fire standards and
training and emergency medical services undertaken pursuant to this
section shall require consultation with the fire standards and training
commission, prior to the transfer being proposed to the governor and
council.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1987, 124:1. 1989, 388:7. 1992, 165:4. 1993, 231:5, II.
1994, 389:10. 2000, 36:1. 2004, 171:28. 2005, 149:4, eff. Aug. 20, 2005.

### Section 21-P:15-a

 **21-P:15-a Hazardous Materials Incident Response Coordinator. –**
There is created within the department of safety, division of fire
safety, the classified, full-time position of hazardous materials
incident response coordinator. The position shall be at labor grade 23.
The coordinator shall be appointed by the state fire marshal and shall
oversee the preparedness of the state's regional hazardous materials
response teams as provided in RSA 21-P:12, III.

**Source.** 2002, 220:2, eff. July 16, 2002.

### Section 21-P:15-b

 **21-P:15-b Commission Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a commission to study recommendations of the
National Transportation Safety Board.
                                             
 II. The members of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) Three members of the house of representatives, including the
chairperson of the house transportation committee, or designee,
appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (b) One member of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of the department of safety, or designee.
                                             
 (d) The commissioner of the department of transportation, or
designee.
                                             
 (e) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (f) A representative of the New Hampshire School Transportation
Association, appointed by that association.
                                             
 III. Legislative members of the commission shall receive mileage at
the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the commission.
                                             
 IV. The commission shall study recommendations submitted by the
National Transportation Safety Board to the state of New Hampshire and
recommend whether any of these recommendations should be the subject of
future legislation.
                                             
 V. The chairperson, or designee, of the house transportation
committee shall chair the commission and the members of the commission
shall elect a vice-chairperson from among the members. The first meeting
of the commission shall be called by the first-named house member. The
first meeting of the commission shall be held within 45 days of the
effective date of this section. Six members of the commission shall
constitute a quorum.
                                             
 VI. The commission shall report its findings and any recommendations
for proposed legislation to the speaker of the house of representatives,
the president of the senate, the house clerk, the senate clerk, the
governor, and the state library on or before November 1, 2009, and
thereafter within 60 days of receipt of the recommendations of the
National Transportation Safety Board.

**Source.** 2009, 150:1, eff. July 8, 2009.

### Section 21-P:15-c

 **21-P:15-c Employee Candidate Background Checks. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner may require a background investigation and a
criminal history records check on any candidate for employment or
promotion prior to a final offer of employment. The commissioner may
request only a state records check or both a federal and state records
check, to be conducted through the division of state police. The
department may extend a conditional offer of employment to a candidate,
with a final offer of employment subject to a successfully completed
criminal history records check.
                                             
 II. A candidate for employment in a position which the commissioner
determines requires a background investigation and a criminal history
records check shall submit to the department a notarized criminal
history records release form, as provided by the division of state
police, which authorizes the release of the person's criminal records,
if any. The candidate shall submit with the release form a complete set
of fingerprints taken by a law enforcement agency as directed by the
commissioner. In the event that the first set of fingerprints is invalid
due to insufficient pattern and a second set of fingerprints is
necessary in order to complete the criminal history records check, the
conditional offer of employment shall remain in effect. If, after 2
attempts, a set of fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern,
the department may, in lieu of the criminal history records check,
accept police clearances from every city, town, or county where a
candidate has lived during the past 5 years.
                                             
 III. To obtain a state records check only, the department shall
submit a state criminal history records release form to the division of
state police. To obtain both the federal and the state records check,
the department shall submit the criminal history records release form
and applicant fingerprint card to the division of state police, which
shall conduct a criminal history records check through its records and
through the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Upon completion of the
background investigation, the division of state police shall report any
criminal conviction information to the commissioner. The department may
submit fingerprint information electronically, in accordance with
procedures established by the division of state police. The department
shall maintain the confidentiality and security of all criminal history
records information received pursuant to this paragraph.
                                             
 IV. In this section, "candidate for employment'' shall include
candidates for contract positions, volunteers, or interns.

**Source.** 2013, 176:4, eff. Aug. 31, 2013.

Transport of Hazardous Materials and Waste
------------------------------------------

### Section 21-P:16

 **21-P:16 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Hazardous materials'' means "hazardous materials'' as defined in
RSA 147-B:2, VIII.
                                             
 II. "Waste'' means "hazardous waste'' as defined in RSA 147-B:2,
VII.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1, eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 21-P:17

 **21-P:17 Duty of Commissioner. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department of safety shall regulate and
promote the safe transportation of hazardous materials and wastes by all
modes of transportation within this state by:
                                             
 (a) Adopting as rules, under RSA 541-A, the current version of
the regulations promulgated by the United States Department of
Transportation, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
contained in parts 100-185 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, the current version of the regulations promulgated by the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation contained in parts 390-397 of Title 49 of
the Code of Federal Regulations, and the current version of the
regulations promulgated by the United States Nuclear Regulatory
Commission and contained in parts 71 and 73 of Title 10 of the Code of
Federal Regulations. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 541-A, any
amendments or additions by the respective federal agencies or their
successor agencies shall also amend or supplement the rules adopted by
the commissioner of safety without further action on the commissioner's
part, and these rules shall not expire without specific action by the
general court for the commissioner.
                                             
 (b) Adopting rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to the
transportation of hazardous materials or wastes by all modes of
transport which shall be no less protective of public safety than the
regulations promulgated by the federal government with respect to such
transportation, including, but not limited to, the proper packaging,
shipping, reporting and brokering of shipments, financial responsibility
of shippers, and financial liability for cleanup of transportation
accidents.
                                             
 (c) Adopting rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to the reporting of
all incidents involving the transportation of hazardous materials or
wastes, the manner in which such incidents were handled, and on-the-spot
inspection of vehicles carrying hazardous materials or wastes by any
peace officer or other authorized agent of the commissioner of safety.
In adopting such rules, the commissioner shall review rules adopted by
the department of environmental services for the regulation of hazardous
wastes under RSA 147-A, 147-B, 147-C, and 147-D and shall, to the extent
possible, coordinate the rules of the department with those of the
department of environmental services in order to avoid inconsistency and
duplication.
                                             
 (d) Entering into cooperative agreements with agencies of this
and other states and of the federal government relative to the
enforcement of rules adopted pursuant to this subdivision and
regulations promulgated by the federal government or rules adopted by
other state agencies which apply to transportation in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (e) Adopting rules, under RSA 541-A, which shall require
shipments of low-level radioactive waste generated within or passing
through the state and destined for any disposal facility to conform with
the applicable packaging and transportation laws and rules of the state
where such regional facility is located, to the extent that such laws
and rules do not conflict with federal law.
                                             
 (f) Adopting rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, establishing the
criteria for distribution of hazardous material transportation penalty
fees under RSA 21-P:21, II.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of the department of safety or his authorized
representative shall be the state designee to receive notification
required by Title 10 of the Code of Federal Regulations for shipments of
radioactive materials.
                                             
 III. In enforcing the provisions of this subdivision and rules
adopted under this subdivision, police employees of the division of
state police shall not be limited by the provisions of RSA 106-B:15.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1; 348:2. 1996, 228:12, eff. July 1, 1996. 2012,
172:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 21-P:18

 **21-P:18 Drivers of Retail Fuel Oil Delivery Trucks. –**
Notwithstanding the provisions of any rule adopted under the authority
of RSA 21-P:17 pertaining to the qualification of drivers, it shall not
be unlawful for a person 18 years of age on or before January 1, 2011 to
drive in intrastate commerce any vehicle carrying home heating oil for
the purpose of making retail deliveries of such home heating oil, if
such person holds a valid driver's license for the class of vehicle
being driven and if the driver and vehicle are in compliance with all
other applicable laws and rules. All other persons shall have attained
the age of 21 in order to drive such vehicles.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1. 2010, 99:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 21-P:19

 **21-P:19 Enforcement. –** The provisions of this subdivision and
any rules adopted under it shall be enforced anywhere in the state by
any state trooper, highway patrol and enforcement officer, authorized
agent of the commissioner of safety, or by any law enforcement officer
within his respective jurisdiction. The officers may detain and inspect
any sealed or unsealed vehicle, container, or shipment which contains or
which they have reason to believe contains hazardous materials or wastes
while in transit or in maintenance facilities or terminals or on other
public or private property to ascertain if hazardous materials or wastes
are being loaded, unloaded, stored, or transported and to inspect the
contents, take samples, and to otherwise insure compliance with the
provisions of this subdivision and of all rules adopted under this
subdivision. If a seal is opened for inspection, the inspecting officer
shall reseal any vehicle, container, or shipment prior to further
transportation.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1. 1988, 288:3. 2001, 139:1. 2002, 262:1, eff.
July 17, 2002.

### Section 21-P:20

 **21-P:20 Licenses. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 308:127, VII, eff. July 1,
1995.
                                             ]

### Section 21-P:21

 **21-P:21 Civil Penalties; Revolving Fund. –** Any person who
violates any of the provisions of this subdivision, any rule adopted
under this subdivision or any term or condition of a license or permit
issued under this subdivision shall be subject to a civil penalty not to
exceed 
                                             $5,000 for a natural person or 
                                             $25,000 for any other person.
The sums obtained from the levying of civil penalties or fees under this
subdivision shall be credited to the department of safety to be used for
state, local or regional emergency response programs identified by the
commissioner and deemed appropriate by him to receive such funding.
These sums shall be distributed at least annually. The department of
safety shall establish a revolving fund into which it shall deposit the
sums allocated in this section. The department of safety, with approval
of the governor and council, shall be authorized to utilize the moneys
from the revolving fund so created for the purposes outlined in this
section.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1; 348:1. 1990, 253:14, eff. April 1, 1990.

### Section 21-P:22

 **21-P:22 Criminal Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding the civil penalties provided in RSA 21-P:21, any
shipper, broker, or transporter of any hazardous materials or wastes who
violates the provisions of this subdivision or rules adopted under this
subdivision shall be guilty of a violation for the first offense and,
notwithstanding the provisions of RSA title LXII, may be fined not more
than 
                                             $500 if a natural person or more than 
                                             $1,000 if any other person.
Any person convicted of an offense under this subdivision who was
convicted of an offense relating to the transportation of hazardous
materials or wastes within the 5 years preceding the commission of the
offense under this subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any
person convicted of an offense under this subdivision who was convicted
of 2 or more offenses relating to the transportation of hazardous
materials or wastes within 5 years preceding the commission of the
offense under this subdivision shall be guilty of a class B felony if a
natural person or of a felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding the civil penalties provided in RSA 21-P:21, the
shipper, broker, or transporter of any hazardous material or waste who
transports or causes to be transported a hazardous material or waste on
a forged manifest, transporter's license, or license decal shall be
guilty of a class B felony if a natural person or of a felony if any
other person.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1, eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 21-P:23

 **21-P:23 Highway Fund Surplus. –** Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, in case the expenditure of additional funds over
budget estimates is necessary for the proper functioning of the
department of safety, the governor and council, with the prior approval
of the fiscal committee of the general court, upon request from the
commissioner, may authorize the transfer of funds from the highway
surplus account to the department of safety for such purpose.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1, eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 21-P:24

 **21-P:24 Effect on Other Laws. –** Nothing contained in this
chapter shall be construed to modify, limit, or be inconsistent with the
duties and authority conferred upon the department of environmental
services under RSA 147-A, 147-B, 147-C, and 147-D.

**Source.** 1987, 124:1. 1996, 228:108, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 21-P:24-a

 **21-P:24-a Hazardous Materials Transportation Advisory Committee.
–** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 368:1(8), eff. Dec. 31, 2010.
                                             ]

Fire Standards and Training Commission
--------------------------------------

### Section 21-P:25

 **21-P:25 Program Authorized; Definitions. –**
                                             
 I. The New Hampshire fire standards and training commission is
hereby established and directed to establish minimum educational and
training standards for employment as full-time fire service personnel,
establish minimum selection standards for full-time fire service
personnel, establish and publish educational and training standards for
fire service personnel, and certify fire service personnel as meeting
the educational and training standard. This commission shall also act in
an advisory capacity to the director of the division of fire standards
and training and emergency medical services with reference to the
instruction methods of determining and dealing with the causes of fire,
the prevention of fire, techniques of firefighting and rescue, research
techniques in firefighting and fire protection, and the administration
and management of fire departments. The commission shall meet at least 4
times annually.
                                             
 II. As used in this subdivision:
                                             
 (a) "Commission'' means the fire standards and training
commission; and
                                             
 (b) "Director'' means the director of the division of fire
standards and training and emergency medical services.
                                             
 (c) "Fire service personnel'' means firefighters, fire officers,
rescue personnel connected with fire departments, fire prevention
officers, inspectors, investigators, fire instructors, public education
specialists, fire alarm personnel, or any other personnel who are
members of fire departments or fire-related state agencies, whether full
or part-time.

**Source.** 1989, 388:3. 1997, 135:2, 3. 2004, 171:28. 2005, 149:1, eff.
Aug. 20, 2005.

### Section 21-P:26

 **21-P:26 Commission. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a fire standards and training commission
consisting of 16 members, including the commissioner of safety or
designee, the commissioner of education or designee, the attorney
general or designee, the chief of the forest protection, the director of
the division of fire standards and training and emergency medical
services, and the state fire marshal, who shall each serve during his or
her continuance in such office, and members of each of the following
associations or groups chosen by the governor, with the approval of the
council, from a list of 3 qualified members submitted by each
association or group:
                                             
 (a) Two representatives of the New Hampshire Association of Fire
Chiefs, at least one of whom shall be a chief of a full-time fire
department, and one a chief of a volunteer department.
                                             
 (b) One representative of the Professional Firefighters of New
Hampshire--International Association of Firefighters.
                                             
 (c) One representative of the Fire Instructors and Officers
Association of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (d) One representative of the Federation of Fire Mutual Aid
Associations.
                                             
 (e) One representative of the New Hampshire State Firemen's
Association.
                                             
 (f) One representative of the insurance industry of New
Hampshire, which members shall be recommended by the New Hampshire
Association of Domestic Insurance Companies.
                                             
 (g) One representative of the New Hampshire Municipal
Association.
                                             
 (h) One representative of the New Hampshire State Permanent
Firemen's Association.
                                             
 (i) One representative of the Fire Prevention Society.
                                             
 I-a. The director of the division of fire standards and training and
emergency medical services shall be a nonvoting member of the
commission.
                                             
 II. Each member shall serve a term of 3 years, provided that no such
member shall serve beyond the time he ceases to hold the membership
which qualified him for appointment to the commission.
                                             
 III. Members shall serve without compensation except that they shall
be reimbursed for their regular and necessary expenses in the
performance of their duties as members of the commission.
                                             
 IV. Members shall annually elect from among themselves a person to
serve as commission chairman and another to serve as commission
vice-chairman. The director of the division of fire standards and
training and emergency medical services shall serve as the commission's
executive officer. The commission shall hold no fewer than 4 regular
meetings a year at such times and places as the chairman shall fix,
either on his own motion or upon written request of any 4 members.

**Source.** 1989, 388:3. 1994, 389:11-13. 1998, 321:4. 2002, 257:2.
2003, 319:104. 2004, 171:28. 2005, 149:2, eff. Aug. 20, 2005.

### Section 21-P:27

 **21-P:27 Rulemaking Authority. –**
                                             
 I. The commission and the commissioner of safety shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (a) The conduct of the meetings of the commission.
                                             
 (b) The establishment of minimum selection, educational, and
training standards for fire service personnel and evidentiary standards
pertaining to such matters, other than fire officials employed by the
forest fire control division of the department of resources and economic
development.
                                             
 (c) What constitutes a full-time career firefighter for purposes
of RSA 21-P:29, I.
                                             
 (d) Procedures for the conduct of investigations regarding the
certification of firefighters.
                                             
 (e) The issuance of certificates evidencing the satisfaction of
educational and training requirements, including transfer credits and
reciprocity, the revocation or suspension of a certificate, the
procedures for incidents involving cheating or fraud in obtaining a
certificate and the release of criminal or motor vehicle records by a
student for purposes of determining qualifications to be appointed as a
firefighter.
                                             
 (f) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (g) A procedure for the commission to waive any of the standards
established under subparagraph (b) for fire service personnel whom the
commission finds do not have emergency response and mitigation as their
predominant responsibilities.
                                             
 II. The commission shall:
                                             
 (a) Establish and publish general minimum educational and
training standards for fire service personnel and evidentiary standards
pertaining to such matters, other than fire officials employed by the
forest fire control division of the department of resources and economic
development.
                                             
 (b) Establish and publish general minimal curriculum requirements
for preparatory, in-service, and advanced courses and programs for
schools operated by or for the state or any political subdivisions
thereof for the specific purpose of training fire service personnel.

**Source.** 1989, 388:3. 1994, 389:2. 1997, 135:4-6, 11, I. 2005, 149:3,
eff. Aug. 20, 2005. 2012, 171:5, eff. Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 21-P:28

 **21-P:28 Powers and Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The commission, within budgetary limitations, shall:
                                             
 (a) Certify fire service personnel as meeting minimum educational
and training standards.
                                             
 (b) Act upon request as the advisory committee to the state board
of education concerning any fire educational programs.
                                             
 (c) Require submission of reports and information from fire
departments within the state that may be pertinent to the functioning of
the commission.
                                             
 (d) In coordination with the division of fire standards and
training and emergency medical services, make such investigations as may
be necessary to determine whether governmental units are complying with
the provisions of this subdivision.
                                             
 II. The commission may:
                                             
 (a) Make or cause to be made studies of any aspect of fire
service, education, operations, training, research or recruitment;
                                             
 (b) Recommend to the director of the division of fire standards
and training and emergency medical services that he enter into contracts
or do such things as may be necessary and incidental to the
administration of the commission's authority pursuant to this
subdivision;
                                             
 (c) Undertake any project and engage in any activity which will
serve to improve public fire safety or public safety; and
                                             
 (d) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1989, 388:3. 1994, 389:3, 14, 15, 18. 1997, 135:7, 11, II.
2004, 171:28, eff. July 24, 2004.

### Section 21-P:29

 **21-P:29 Educational and Training Requirements; Certification. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall be appointed as a full-time career firefighter,
except on a temporary or probationary basis, unless such person has
satisfactorily completed a preparatory program of fire training
consisting of an accredited certification program meeting the objectives
of a nationally accepted standard regarding firefighter professional
qualifications. No person shall be excluded from such employment on the
basis of any rule adopted under RSA 21-P:27, II, until such rule has
been in effect for at least one year.
                                             
 II. The commission shall issue a certificate evidencing satisfaction
of the educational and training requirements established under RSA
21-P:27, II, to any person presenting the commission with satisfactory
evidence of the completion of such requirements, whether in this
jurisdiction or any other.
                                             
 III. Prior to any final vote regarding minimum standards, selection
procedures, or certification, the commission shall:
                                             
 (a) Provide notice of the proposed action to members of the fire
service.
                                             
 (b) Allow a 60-day period for the receipt of written comments on
the proposal.
                                             
 (c) Hold public hearings, one in the daytime hours and another
during the evening hours, in such a way as to maximize input from
members of the fire service.

**Source.** 1989, 388:3. 1997, 135:8. 2010, 3:1, eff. May 24, 2010.

### Section 21-P:30

 **21-P:30 Reimbursement of Expenses. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2005, 149:6,
eff. Aug. 20, 2005.
                                             ]

### Section 21-P:31

 **21-P:31 Funding. –** 
                                             [Repealed, 1997, 135:11, III, eff. Aug. 8,
1997.
                                             ]

### Section 21-P:32

 **21-P:32 Facilities. –** In order to promote the effectiveness and
efficiency of the fire service training and research program, the
commission is encouraged to use such personnel and equipment from other
state agencies, federal agencies, district fire mutual aid associations,
and public and private fire departments, as may be made available to
them by the heads or appropriate authorities of such agencies, including
but not limited to the use of radio and other communications facilities,
including computer systems.

**Source.** 1989, 388:3, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 21-P:33

 **21-P:33 Delegation. –** The commission may delegate to the
division of fire standards and training and emergency medical services
any powers and duties enumerated in this subdivision.

**Source.** 1994, 389:4. 2004, 171:28, eff. July 24, 2004.

Homeland Security and Emergency Management
------------------------------------------

### Section 21-P:34

 **21-P:34 Purpose. –** Because of the possibility of the occurrence
of natural and human-caused disasters resulting from fire, flood,
hurricane, earthquake, prolonged power outages, disruption or
contamination of the food or water supply, degradation of critical
facilities and vital systems, disruption of communication systems, or
other natural, technological or human causes, including acts of
terrorism, and in order that the state of New Hampshire will be
adequately prepared to cope with such disasters; and, generally, in
order to preserve the lives and the property of the people of the state,
a state division of emergency services, communications, and management
is hereby created under the direction of the director of the division of
homeland security and emergency management. The emergency management
powers provided in this subdivision are conferred upon the governor and
upon other executive heads of governing bodies of the state; the
creation of local organizations for emergency management in the
political subdivisions of the state is authorized; and provision is made
for the rendering of mutual aid among the political subdivisions of the
state and between this and other states and to cooperate with the
federal government with respect to the carrying out of emergency
management functions. It is further declared to be the purpose of this
subdivision and the policy of the state that all emergency management
functions of this state be coordinated to the maximum extent with the
comparable functions of the federal government including its various
departments and agencies, of other states and localities, and of private
agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective preparation
and use may be made of the nation's manpower, resources, and facilities
for dealing with any disaster or incident of terrorism that may occur.

**Source.** 2002, 257:7. 2003, 319:106. 2004, 171:2. 2008, 361:2, eff.
July 11, 2008.

### Section 21-P:35

 **21-P:35 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of safety.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. "Council'' means the advisory council on emergency preparedness
and security.
                                             
 IV. "Director'' means the director of the division of homeland
security and emergency management.
                                             
 V. "Emergency management'' means the preparation for and the
carrying out of all emergency functions, including but not limited to
emergency response and training functions, to prevent, minimize, and
repair injury or damage resulting from the occurrence or threat of
widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property
resulting from any natural or human cause, including but not limited to
fire, flood, earthquake, windstorm, wave actions, technological
incidents, oil or chemical spill, or water contamination requiring
emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination,
blight, drought, infestation, explosion, terrorist act, or riot.
                                             
 VI. "Local organization for emergency management'' means an
organization created in accordance with the provisions of this
subdivision by state, county, or local authority to perform local
emergency management functions.
                                             
 VII. "Political subdivision'' means counties, cities, towns, and
duly established village precincts.
                                             
 VIII. "State of emergency'' means that condition, situation, or set
of circumstances deemed to be so extremely hazardous or dangerous to
life or property that it is necessary and essential to invoke, require,
or utilize extraordinary measures, actions, and procedures to lessen or
mitigate possible harm.

**Source.** 2002, 257:7. 2003, 319:131, II. 2004, 171:3. 2008, 361:3,
eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 21-P:36

 **21-P:36 Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management.
–**
                                             
 I. There is hereby created a division of homeland security and
emergency management within the department of safety under the
supervision of the director of homeland security and emergency
management nominated and appointed as provided in RSA 21-P:5-a.
                                             
 II. The division shall consist of 2 bureaus, a bureau of homeland
security and a bureau of emergency management. With the approval of the
commissioner, the director may employ such necessary technical,
clerical, stenographic, and other personnel, and may make such
expenditures from state or federal funds as are or may be made available
for purposes of homeland security and emergency management. The director
and other personnel of the division shall be provided with appropriate
office space, furniture, equipment, supplies, stationery and printing,
and funds for traveling and related expenses, in the same manner
provided for personnel of other state agencies. The division and its
personnel shall have such additional duties, responsibilities, and
authority authorized by applicable laws as may be prescribed by the
commissioner.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of safety shall nominate an assistant director
of homeland security and emergency management, for appointment by the
governor with consent of the council, to serve at the pleasure of the
commissioner. The assistant director shall receive the salary provided
in RSA 94:1-a for the position.
                                             
 IV. During service as assistant director, the assistant director of
the division of homeland security and emergency management shall be
eligible to be a group II member if he or she was a group II member or
receiving a group II retirement allowance prior to appointment.

**Source.** 2002, 257:7. 2003, 319:107. 2004, 171:4. 2008, 361:4, eff.
July 11, 2008. 2013, 196:4, eff. July 9, 2013.

### Section 21-P:36-a

 **21-P:36-a Assistant Director of the Division of Homeland Security
and Emergency Management; Retirement System. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 226:4,
III, eff. June 16, 2012.
                                             ]

### Section 21-P:37

 **21-P:37 Emergency Management Powers Conferred. –** The director
shall have general direction and control of the division of homeland
security and emergency management, and shall be responsible for the
carrying out of the provisions of this subdivision. In the event of
disaster beyond local control, the governor may assume direct
operational control over all or any part of the emergency management
functions within the state. In performing the director's duties under
this subdivision and to effect its policy and purposes, the director is
authorized to cooperate with the federal government, with other states,
and with private agencies in all matters pertaining to the emergency
management of this state and of the nation, and is further authorized
and empowered:
                                             
 I. To prepare a comprehensive plan and program for the emergency
management of this state, such plan and program to be integrated into
and coordinated with the emergency management plans of the federal
government and of other states to the greatest possible extent, and to
coordinate the preparation of plans and programs for emergency
management by the political subdivisions of this state and private
agencies, such plans to be integrated into and coordinated with the
emergency management plan and program of this state to the greatest
possible extent.
                                             
 II. In accordance with such plan and program for the emergency
management of this state, to procure supplies and equipment, to
institute training programs and public information programs, and to take
other necessary preparatory steps to insure the furnishing of adequately
trained and equipped forces of emergency management personnel in time of
need.
                                             
 III. To make such studies and surveys of industries, transportation,
communication, housing and medical facilities, and resources, including
but not limited to food, petroleum, and housing, and other facilities in
the state as may be necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the state
for emergency management, and to plan for their most efficient emergency
use.
                                             
 IV. On behalf of the state and subject to the approval of the
governor, to coordinate mutual aid plans between or among political
subdivisions of the state.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. To prepare a comprehensive plan and program for the evacuation
of search and rescue dogs and service animals, as defined in RSA 167-D.

**Source.** 2002, 257:7. 2003, 319:108, 131, III. 2004, 171:5. 2006,
230:1. 2008, 361:15. 2011, 170:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 21-P:37-a

 **21-P:37-a State Policy for Service Animals. –** In cases of
emergency, it shall be the policy of the state that service animals
shall not be separated from the persons they serve. Every effort shall
be made to keep service animals and the persons they serve together, and
all appropriate state emergency planning and state sponsored emergency
training shall be based on such assumptions.

**Source.** 2006, 230:2, eff. July 31, 2006.

### Section 21-P:37-b

 **21-P:37-b Agreement Resulting From Disaster Declaration. –** If,
as the result of a disaster declaration, the state of New Hampshire
enters into an agreement with the federal government or another entity
for assistance, either direct or indirect, financial or otherwise, such
agreement shall be transmitted to the president of the senate and the
speaker of the house of representatives within 30 days after approval by
the governor and council. Any obligation of the general fund as the
result of such an agreement shall be transmitted to the president of the
senate and the speaker of the house of representatives for prompt
payment. Administrative costs of the state of New Hampshire incident to
such obligation shall be included in the submission to the general
court.

**Source.** 2008, 361:5, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 21-P:38

 **21-P:38 Emergency Management Powers and Duties Regarding
Communications Systems. –** The division of emergency services and
communications shall ascertain what means exist for rapid and efficient
communications during natural and man-made disasters. The division shall
consider the desirability of supplementing these communications
resources or of integrating them into a comprehensive state or state and
federal telecommunications or other communications system which may be
established for purposes of emergency management. In studying the
character and feasibility of any such system or its several parts, the
division of emergency services and communications shall evaluate the
possibility of the multi-purpose use of such a system for general state
and local government purposes. The division shall make recommendations
regarding such communications systems to the assistant commissioner as
appropriate.

**Source.** 2002, 257:7. 2003, 319:109. 2004, 171:6. 2008, 361:14. 2011,
224:334, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 21-P:39

 **21-P:39 Local Organization for Emergency Management. –**
                                             
 I. Each political subdivision of the state shall establish a local
organization for emergency management in accordance with the state
emergency management plan and program. Each local organization for
emergency management shall have a local director who shall be appointed
and removed by the county commissioners of a county, the city council of
a city, or board of selectmen of a town, and who shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of
such local organization for emergency management, subject to the
direction and control of such appointing officials. Each local
organization shall have jurisdiction only within its respective
political subdivision, and the director appointed by that political
subdivision shall be responsible to his or her appointing authority. The
appointing authority may appoint one of its own members or any other
citizen or official to act as local director and shall notify the state
director in writing of such appointment. If a local director is removed,
the state director shall be notified immediately. Each local
organization for emergency management shall perform emergency management
functions within the territorial limits of the political subdivision
within which it is organized.
                                             
 II. Until a local director has been appointed, the chief elected
official shall be directly responsible for the organization,
administration, and operation of such local organization for emergency
management.
                                             
 III. In carrying out the provisions of this subdivision, each
political subdivision in which any disaster as described in RSA 21-P:35,
V occurs may enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to
combat such disaster, protecting the health and safety of persons and
property, and providing emergency assistance to the victims of such
disaster. Each political subdivision may exercise the powers vested
under this section in the light of the exigencies of the extreme
emergency situation without regard to time-consuming procedures and
formalities prescribed by law, excepting mandatory constitutional
requirements, pertaining to the performance of public work, entering
into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of
temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase of supplies and
materials, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds.
                                             
 IV. In carrying out the provisions of this subdivision, each
political subdivision in which any disaster as described in RSA 21-P:35,
V occurs may meet at any place within or without the territorial limits
of such political subdivision and shall proceed to establish and
designate by ordinance, resolution, or other manner, alternate or
substitute sites or places as the emergency temporary location or
locations of such government where all or any part of the public
business may be transacted and conducted during the emergency situation.
Such sites or places may be within or without the territorial limits of
such political subdivision, but shall be within this state.

**Source.** 2002, 257:7, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 21-P:40

 **21-P:40 Mutual Aid Arrangements. –** The local director of each
local organization for emergency management may, with the approval of
the commissioner and in collaboration with other public and private
agencies within this state, develop or cause to be developed mutual aid
arrangements for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in
case of disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted. Such
arrangements shall be consistent with the state emergency management
plan and program, and in time of emergency it shall be the duty of each
local organization for emergency management to render assistance in
accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid arrangements. Parties
shall be entitled to the same immunities and exemptions as provided in
RSA 21-P:41.

**Source.** 2002, 257:7, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 21-P:41

 **21-P:41 Immunity and Exemption. –**
                                             
 I. All functions under this subdivision and all other activities
relating to emergency management are hereby declared to be governmental
functions. Neither the state nor any of its political subdivisions nor
any agency of the state or political subdivision, nor any private
corporations, organizations, or agencies, nor any emergency management
worker complying with or reasonably attempting to comply with this
subdivision, or any order or rule adopted or regulation promulgated
pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision, or pursuant to any
ordinance relating to precautionary measures enacted by any political
subdivision of the state, shall be liable for the death of or injury to
persons, or for damage to property, as a result of any such activity.
The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any person
to receive benefits to which he or she would otherwise be entitled under
this subdivision, under the workers' compensation law, or under any
retirement law, nor the right of any such person to receive any benefits
or compensation under any act of Congress.
                                             
 II. Any requirement for a license to practice any professional,
mechanical, or other skill shall not apply to any authorized emergency
management worker who shall, in the course of performing his or her
duties as such, practice such professional, mechanical, or other skill
during an emergency.
                                             
 III. As used in this section the term "emergency management worker''
includes any full or part-time paid, volunteer, or auxiliary employee of
this state, other states, territories, possessions, the District of
Columbia, the federal government, any neighboring country, or of any
political subdivision of such entities, or of any corporation, agency or
organization, public or private, performing emergency management
services at any place in this state subject to the order or control of,
or pursuant to a request of, the state government or any of its
political subdivisions.
                                             
 IV. Dentists licensed in this state, nurses registered in this
state, student nurses undergoing training at a licensed hospital in this
state, or emergency medical care providers licensed under RSA 153-A,
during any emergency, shall be regarded as authorized emergency
management workers and while so engaged may practice, in addition to the
authority granted them by other statutes, administration of anesthetics;
minor surgery; intravenous, subcutaneous, and intramuscular procedures;
and oral and topical medication under the general but not necessarily
direct supervision of a member of the medical staff of a legally
incorporated and licensed hospital of this state, and to assist such
staff members in other medical and surgical procedures.
                                             
 V. Any emergency management worker, performing emergency management
services at any place in this state pursuant to agreements, compacts or
arrangements for mutual aid and assistance, to which the state or one of
its political subdivisions is a party, shall possess the same powers,
duties, immunities, and privileges the worker would ordinarily possess
if performing his or her duties in the state or political subdivision in
which normally employed or rendering services.
                                             
 VI. Any emergency management worker shall:
                                             
 (a) If the worker is an employee of the state, have the powers,
duties, rights, and privileges and receive the compensation incidental
to his or her employment;
                                             
 (b) If the worker is an employee of a political subdivision of
the state, whether serving within or without such political subdivision,
have the powers, duties, rights, privileges, and immunities and receive
the compensation incidental to his or her employment; and
                                             
 (c) If the worker is not an employee of the state or one of its
political subdivisions, be entitled to the same rights as to
compensation for injuries as are provided by law for the employees of
this state. The emergency management personnel shall, while on duty, be
subject to the operational control of the authority in charge of
emergency management activities in the area in which they are serving,
and shall be reimbursed for all actual travel and subsistence expenses
incurred under orders issued by the director.

**Source.** 2002, 257:7, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 21-P:42

 **21-P:42 Private Liability. –** Any person owning or controlling
real estate or other premises or private property who grants a license
or privilege or otherwise permits the designation or use of the whole or
any part or parts of such real estate or premises or private property
for the purpose of compliance or attempting to comply with this
subdivision during an actual or impending emergency or practice
exercise, together with his or her successors in interest, if any, shall
not be civilly liable for negligently causing the death of, or injury
to, any person on or about such real estate or premises or private
property or loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.

**Source.** 2002, 257:7, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 21-P:43

 **21-P:43 Appropriations and Authority to Accept Services, Gifts,
Grants, and Loans. –** Each political subdivision may make
appropriations in the manner provided by law for making appropriations
for the ordinary expenses of such political subdivision for the payment
of expenses of its local organization for emergency management. Whenever
the federal government or any federal agency or officer offers to the
state, or through the state to any of its political subdivisions,
services, equipment, supplies, materials, or funds by way of gift,
grant, or loan for purposes of emergency management the state, acting
through the governor, commissioner, or such political subdivision,
acting with the consent of the governor and through its executive
officer, city council, or board of selectmen, may accept such offer,
subject to the terms of the offer and the rules and regulations, if any,
of the agency making the offer. Whenever any person, firm or corporation
offers to the state or to any of its political subdivisions services,
equipment, supplies, materials, or funds by way of gift, grant, or loan
for purposes of emergency management the state, acting through the
governor, or such political subdivision, acting through its executive
officer, city council, or board of selectmen, may accept such offer,
subject to its terms.

**Source.** 2002, 257:7, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 21-P:44

 **21-P:44 Utilization of Existing Services and Facilities. –** In
carrying out the provisions of this subdivision, the governor, executive
heads of state agencies, and local executive officers of the political
subdivisions of the state shall utilize the services, equipment,
supplies, and facilities of existing departments, offices, and agencies
of the state and its political subdivisions to the maximum extent
practicable, and the officers and personnel of all such departments,
offices, and agencies are directed to cooperate with and extend such
services and facilities to the governor and to the emergency management
organizations of the state upon request.

**Source.** 2002, 257:7, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 21-P:45

 **21-P:45 Enforcement. –** It shall be the duty of every
organization for emergency management established under this subdivision
and of the officers of such organization to execute and enforce such
orders, rules, and regulations as may be made by the governor under
authority of this subdivision or RSA 4:45.

**Source.** 2002, 257:7, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 21-P:46

 **21-P:46 New Hampshire Emergency Response and Recovery Fund. –**
There is hereby established a New Hampshire emergency response and
recovery fund. The fund shall provide a source for the matching funds
required as a commitment to secure Federal Emergency Management Agency
relief assistance grants for costs incurred in disasters declared by the
President of the United States. The fund shall be nonlapsing and
continually appropriated to the department of safety.

**Source.** 2002, 257:7, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 21-P:46-a


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-P:46-a repealed by 2013, 273:4, II, effective on the date when
all moneys in the New Hampshire disaster fund have been disbursed as
provided by 2013, 173:5.
                                             ]

 **21-P:46-a New Hampshire Disaster Relief Fund. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be established a fund that is to be accounted for
separately from all other funds and which shall be designated as the New
Hampshire disaster relief fund, which shall be credited and continually
appropriated to the director for disaster relief. The moneys in 2
existing funds, one in the legislative branch known as the disaster
fund, and one in the office of the state treasurer, known as the New
Hampshire disaster relief fund 2011, shall lapse into the New Hampshire
disaster relief fund on the effective date of this section.
                                             
 II. Funds in the New Hampshire disaster relief fund shall be made
available to individuals who suffer damage and loss as a result of a
declared disaster. All disbursements from the fund shall be approved by
the director of homeland security and emergency management, in
consultation with the individual assistance committee appointed under
paragraph III.
                                             
 III. The director shall appoint an individual assistance committee
to review, evaluate, and make recommendations on requests for individual
assistance. The committee shall be comprised of representatives from the
nonprofit community, human service organizations, disaster response
organizations, the Community Action Programs, and volunteer
organizations, who shall serve at the pleasure of the director. The
director shall designate a committee chair.
                                             
 IV. The director shall maintain complete records of all funds
disbursed from the New Hampshire disaster relief fund and shall report
all such disbursements to the individual assistance committee every 6
months following the effective date of this section.

**Source.** 2013, 273:3, eff. July 24, 2013.

### Section 21-P:47

 **21-P:47 Penalty. –** If any person violates or attempts to violate
any order, rule, or regulation made pursuant to this subdivision, such
person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2002, 257:7, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 21-P:48

 **21-P:48 Advisory Council on Emergency Preparedness and Security.
–**
                                             
 I. There is hereby created an advisory council on emergency
preparedness and security, consisting of the following members:
                                             
 (a) The director of the division of homeland security and
emergency management.
                                             
 (b) The attorney general, or designee.
                                             
 (c) The chair of the public utilities commission, or designee.
                                             
 (d) The adjutant general, or designee.
                                             
 (e) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (f) The director of the division of fire safety.
                                             
 (g) The commissioner of the department of safety, or designee.
                                             
 (h) The director of the office of energy and planning.
                                             
 (i) The commissioner of the department of transportation, or
designee.
                                             
 (j) The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development, or designee.
                                             
 (k) The commissioner of the department of agriculture, markets,
and food, or designee.
                                             
 (l) The commissioner of the department of environmental services,
or designee.
                                             
 (m) The commissioner of the department of administrative
services, or designee.
                                             
 (n) The director of the division of ports and harbors, Pease
development authority.
                                             
 (o) The director of police standards and training.
                                             
 (p) The director of the division of fire standards and training.
                                             
 (q) A local police chief, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (r) A local fire chief, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (s) A county sheriff appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (t) A representative of the Professional Firefighters of New
Hampshire, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (u) The director of the division of state police.
                                             
 (v) The director of the division of public health services.
                                             
 (w) The commissioner of the department of corrections, or
designee.
                                             
 (x) The executive director of the department of fish and game, or
designee.
                                             
 (y) The executive director of the New Hampshire Hospital
Association.
                                             
 (z) A representative of a regional emergency planning committee,
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (aa) One member of the state hazardous materials cooperative,
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (bb) A representative of the hazardous materials transporter
industry, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (cc) A representative of the hazardous materials industry,
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (dd) The director of the division of emergency communications and
services.
                                             
 (ee) A representative of the Business and Industry Association,
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (ff) A representative from the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, appointed by that agency.
                                             
 (gg) A representative from the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
appointed by the Bureau.
                                             
 (hh) A representative from the United States Coast Guard,
appointed by that agency.
                                             
 (ii) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (jj) A representative of the nuclear power industry, appointed by
the governor.
                                             
 (kk) A representative of the United States Department of Homeland
Security, appointed by the department.
                                             
 (*ll*) The primary investigator for the Centers for Disease
Control and Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR)
grant programs.
                                             
 (mm) A representative of the state citizens corps, appointed by
the governor.
                                             
 (nn) A representative of the emergency medical services medical
control board, appointed by the board.
                                             
 (*oo*) The United States Attorney for the District of New
Hampshire, or designee.
                                             
 (pp) A representative from the department of health and human
services radiological health program, designated by the commissioner of
health and human services.
                                             
 (qq) A representative from the department of environmental
services environmental health program, designated by the commissioner of
environmental services.
                                             
 (rr) A representative from the department of environmental
services waste management division, designated by the commissioner of
environmental services.
                                             
 (ss) A judicial branch representative, chosen by the chief
justice of the supreme court.
                                             
 (tt) A representative of a volunteer emergency response
non-governmental organization, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (uu) The commissioner of the department of information
technology, or designee.
                                             
 (vv) Such other representatives as the governor, from time to
time, may deem necessary for the fulfillment of the council's mandates.
                                             
 II. (a) The council shall advise the governor on issues involving
the state's ability to respond to natural and human-caused disasters,
and the preparation and maintenance of a state disaster plan in
conformance with any federal regulation or law.
                                             
 (b) The director of homeland security and emergency management
shall seek the advice of the council in matters pertaining to any of the
state's emergency plans, including the allocation of state and federal
resources to meet the objectives of such plan.
                                             
 (c) The council shall serve the functions of the state emergency
response commission (SERC) and the Centers for Disease Control's state
public health emergency preparedness committee, and may form
subcommittees as necessary to perform these functions.
                                             
 (d) The council or an appropriate subcommittee of the council
shall review state and federal legislative proposals and regulations,
problems with hazardous material transportation, emergency response
action team plans, and training and instructional materials on the
transportation of hazardous materials, and make recommendations as
necessary regarding the efficacy of controls relative to such
transportation and the best means for applying such controls without
duplication of responsibility or regulation.
                                             
 (e) The council shall make available upon request through the
department of safety current regulations and reference materials
relative to hazardous materials and address any regulations or
ordinances that appear to be in conflict.
                                             
 (f) The council shall oversee statewide radio communications
interoperability efforts through the statewide interoperability
executive committee, established in paragraph IV, and approve the
strategic statewide interoperable communications plan developed by the
committee under paragraph VII.
                                             
 (g) The council shall periodically and otherwise as necessary
report to the governor, the senate president, and the speaker of the
house of representatives on any recommendations of the council that
pertain to the state's preparedness and ability to respond to natural
and human-caused disasters and acts of terrorism.
                                             
 (h) The commissioner of safety or the commissioner's designee
shall serve as the chairperson of the council.
                                             
 III. No fewer than 20 members shall constitute a quorum at any
meeting. For ex officio positions a designee from that organization may
be appointed in writing by the member to represent him or her at any
meeting which the member is unable to attend.
                                             
 IV. There is established within the department of safety a radio
interoperability governance group known as the statewide
interoperability executive committee (SIEC). The SIEC shall report to
the council and shall be comprised of the following members:
                                             
 (a) The commissioner of the department of safety, or designee,
who shall serve as chairperson of the committee.
                                             
 (b) The statewide interoperability coordinator, who shall serve
as an ex-officio member of the committee.
                                             
 (c) The director of the division of homeland security and
emergency management, or designee.
                                             
 (d) Two representatives of the New Hampshire Association of
Chiefs of Police, one of whom serves as chief of police for a city and
one of whom serves as chief of police for a town.
                                             
 (e) Two representatives of the New Hampshire Association of Fire
Chiefs, one of whom serves as fire chief for a city and one of whom
serves as fire chief for a town.
                                             
 (f) A representative of a charitable organization that provides
disaster relief, appointed by the commissioner.
                                             
 (g) One member of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (h) One member of the senate, appointed by the senate president.
                                             
 (i) One member of the Professional Fire Fighters of New
Hampshire, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (j) One representative of the New Hampshire Sheriff's
Association, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (k) The state fire marshal, or designee.
                                             
 (l) One member of the New Hampshire Police Association, appointed
by the association.
                                             
 (m) A representative of the New Hampshire Hospital Association,
appointed by the association.
                                             
 (n) A local emergency medical services provider, appointed by the
commissioner.
                                             
 (o) A local public health official, appointed by the
commissioner.
                                             
 (p) A local public works official, appointed by the
commissioner.
                                             
 (q) A representative of the New Hampshire Emergency Dispatchers
Association, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (r) One representative of a major public safety dispatch center,
appointed by the commissioner.
                                             
 (s) The commissioner of the department of administrative
services, or designee.
                                             
 (t) The executive director of fish and game, or designee.
                                             
 (u) The commissioner of transportation, or designee.
                                             
 (v) The commissioner of resources and economic development, or
designee.
                                             
 (w) The commissioner of health and human services, or designee.
                                             
 (x) The director of emergency services and communications, or
designee.
                                             
 (y) A representative of the university system of New Hampshire,
appointed by the chancellor of the university system.
                                             
 (z) The adjutant general, or designee.
                                             
 (aa) Not more than 2 representatives of technology-related
businesses in the private sector, appointed by the commissioner.
                                             
 V. Public members of the committee shall serve 3-year terms.
Representatives of state agencies and legislative members of the
committee shall serve terms coterminous with their term in office. If in
the course of a member's term, the member becomes ineligible because of
a change of occupation or is no longer a member of the group that he or
she represented, he or she shall continue to serve until a replacement
is qualified and designated. Voting members of the committee shall elect
by majority vote a vice-chairperson and a secretary, each of whom shall
serve a term of 2 years. A voting member, or the member's designee, may
submit a single alternate member, who may serve as a voting member in
the absence of the voting member or designee by submitting the name and
position in writing to the chair prior to the alternate making any vote.
A quorum shall consist of 12 voting members of the committee.
                                             
 VI. The SIEC shall include an executive management group and 3
working groups.
                                             
 (a) The executive management group shall be responsible for
aligning overarching interoperability strategies and plans, and
maintaining fiduciary and fiscal compliance. The executive management
group shall be comprised of 18 members, including the 14 designees from
state, county, and local government entities, a chairperson designated
by the commissioner, and the chairpersons of the 3 working groups
established in subparagraph (b).
                                             
 (b) The working groups shall be comprised of voting members of
the SIEC selected by the commissioner and shall consist of a radio
frequency communications working group, a data communications working
group, and an operations working group.
                                             
 (c) The chairperson of each working group shall serve on the
executive management group of the SIEC representing the interest of his
or her group.
                                             
 (d) The SIEC and the working groups may invite subject matter
experts to provide information and testimony relevant to the committee
or group.
                                             
 VII. The SIEC shall oversee statewide radio communications
interoperability efforts and shall develop, with the approval of the
council, a strategic statewide interoperable communications plan and any
amendments thereto. The SIEC shall:
                                             
 (a) Utilize the most contemporaneous statewide communications
interoperability plan (SCIP), the National Emergency Communications
Plan, and the SCIP action plan as a framework to better understand the
current baselines of communications interoperability and to determine
how to best implement each step toward interoperability in the state,
with neighboring states, and with federal partners.
                                             
 (b) Direct the working groups established in paragraph VI to
identify and recommend technologies, operating procedures, network
consolidation, and other resources that will enhance communications
interoperability in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (c) Create a statewide communications interoperability strategy
and spending plan; attempt to bridge regional plans with the statewide
strategy; and oversee implementation of the statewide communications
interoperability plan and the national emergency communications plan.
                                             
 (d) Recommend best practices, policies, procedures, and protocols
for communications personnel, including dispatchers and dispatch center
supervisors as well as technical communications support staff.
                                             
 (e) Establish training baselines and recommend training for key
communications personnel, and help to ensure that training opportunities
supporting communications interoperability are available to all public
safety first responders and public safety dispatchers.

**Source.** 2002, 257:7. 2003, 319:110-113. 2004, 171:7, 8, 28; 257:44.
2005, 149:5. 2008, 361:6. 2011, 169:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2012; 224:274, III,
eff. July 1, 2011. 2012, 265:5, eff. June 18, 2012. 2015, 176:3, 4, eff.
June 26, 2015.

Emergency Services and Communications
-------------------------------------

### Section 21-P:48-a

 **21-P:48-a Division of Emergency Services and Communications. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby created a division of emergency services and
communications within the department of safety under the supervision of
the director of emergency services and communications and reporting to
the assistant commissioner. The commissioner shall nominate a director
of the division of emergency services and communications for appointment
by the governor, with the consent of the council, who shall serve a term
of 4 years until a successor has been appointed. The director shall be
responsible to carry out such duties as are specifically enumerated in
this subdivision and as may be assigned by the office of the
commissioner. The director shall be academically and technically
qualified to hold the position and shall receive the salary specified in
RSA 94:1-a for the director of emergency services and communications.
                                             
 II. With the approval of the commissioner, the director may employ
such necessary technical, clerical, stenographic, and other personnel,
and may make such expenditures from state or federal funds as are or may
be made available for purposes of emergency services and communications.
The director and other personnel of the division shall be provided with
appropriate office space, furniture, equipment, supplies, stationery and
printing, and funds for traveling and related expenses, in the same
manner as provided for personnel of other state agencies. With general
oversight by the assistant commissioner, the director shall coordinate
the activities of all organizations for emergency 911 telecommunications
within the state, state and local, county, and private, and shall
maintain liaison with and cooperate with police, fire, emergency
medical, and sheriff's departments and emergency telecommunications
organizations of other states and of the federal government. The
director shall have such additional duties, responsibilities, and
authority authorized by applicable laws as may be prescribed by the
commissioner.

**Source.** 2008, 361:7. 2011, 224:335, eff. July 1, 2011. 2016, 147:3,
eff. July 1, 2016.

Public Health Emergency Management Powers; Oversight Committee
--------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 21-P:49

 **21-P:49 Public Health Powers and Duties. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2002,
258:24, I, eff. July 1, 2004.
                                             ]

### Section 21-P:50

 **21-P:50 Safe Disposal of Corpses. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2002, 258:24, II,
eff. July 1, 2004.
                                             ]

### Section 21-P:51

 **21-P:51 Joint Legislative Oversight Committee. –**
                                             
 I. A joint legislative oversight committee on the emergency
management system is hereby established.
                                             
 II. The committee shall consist of 7 members:
                                             
 (a) Six members of the house of representatives, 2 of whom shall
be from the health, human services and elderly affairs committee and one
of whom shall be from the science, technology and energy committee,
appointed by the speaker of the house.
                                             
 (b) One senator, appointed by the senate president.
                                             
 III. The committee shall elect from its membership a chairperson, a
vice-chairperson and a clerk. All members shall be appointed to serve on
the committee for a term coterminous with the term of their elected
legislative office, and may be reappointed if reelected to the same
office. Three members of the committee shall constitute a quorum.
Members of the committee shall receive mileage at the legislative rate
when attending to the duties of the committee.
                                             
 IV. The committee shall:
                                             
 (a) Provide legislative oversight and serve as the legislative
liaison for the emergency management system.
                                             
 (b) Develop, with the assistance of the department of health and
human services and other appropriate agencies, a grid which outlines a
gradation of emergency conditions and describes the powers authorized
for each level of emergency.
                                             
 (c) Conduct a continuing study of the major problems and concerns
regarding planning, testing, and implementation of states of emergency.
                                             
 (d) Hold such public hearings as may be necessary on matters
pertaining to the emergency management system.
                                             
 V. The committee shall report its findings and any recommendations
for proposed legislation to the speaker of the house of representatives,
the senate president, the house clerk, the senate clerk, the governor,
and the state library on or before November 1 of each year, beginning
November 1 of 2003.

**Source.** 2002, 258:23, eff. July 1, 2002 at 12:01 a.m. 2014, 206:1,
eff. Sept. 9, 2014.

Statewide Incident Command System
---------------------------------

### Section 21-P:52

 **21-P:52 Incident Command System Adopted. –** There shall be a
statewide incident command system based on the incident command system
of the National Interagency Incident Management System. The commissioner
of safety shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A to implement the
statewide incident command system. The statewide incident command system
shall be used in responding to any natural or man-made cause that
requires emergency management by multiple agencies or departments within
state and local government.

**Source.** 2004, 106:1, eff. July 16, 2004.

Public Health Emergency Management Powers
-----------------------------------------

### Section 21-P:53

 **21-P:53 Public Health Powers and Duties. –** During the existence
of a state of emergency under this chapter, the commissioner of health
and human services shall have the following powers and duties, subject
to the direction and control of the governor, which are in addition to
those set forth in RSA 141-C; provided that such powers and duties shall
be limited to the specific nature of the emergency, its geographic
limits, and the conditions that brought it about, as specified in the
declaration of the state of emergency:
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall have the responsibility and authority to
carry out all public health activities within the state in cooperation
and collaboration with the division of homeland security and emergency
management.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may, without the approval of the governor's
council or the legislative fiscal committee, and notwithstanding the
provisions of RSA 4:45, 9:13-d, and 9:19, and any other law to the
contrary, purchase and distribute anti-toxins, serums, vaccines,
immunizing agents, antibiotics, and other pharmaceutical agents that the
commissioner deems to be in the interest of public health.
                                             
 III. If there is a statewide or regional shortage or threatened
shortage of any anti-toxins, serums, vaccines, immunizing agents,
antibiotics, and other pharmaceutical agents, the commissioner may
control, restrict, and ration the use, sale, dispensing, distribution,
or transportation of such products as necessary to best protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the people of this state. In making
rationing or other supply and distribution decisions, the commissioner
shall determine high risk or critical need groups that shall receive
priority for such products.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner may investigate any incident or imminent threat
of any disease or health condition that may be caused by a natural
disaster, radiation or chemical exposure, or the release of any
microorganism, infectious substance, or naturally occurring or
manufactured biological product, that poses a risk of a significant
number of human fatalities or incidents of permanent or long-term
disability. Such investigations may include requiring information from
any health care provider or other person affected by, or having
information related to, the incident or threat, inspections of buildings
and conveyances and their contents, laboratory analysis of samples
collected during the course of such inspections, and requiring a
physical examination and the provision of specimens of body secretions,
excretions, fluids, and discharges for laboratory examination of any
person having a disease or health condition that necessitates an
investigation under this paragraph.
                                             
 V. The commissioner may order a person to undergo such medical care
as may be necessary to treat or prevent an incident or threat of disease
or other health condition prompting an investigation pursuant to
paragraph IV. Such care may include immunization of individuals as
necessary to prevent the spread of contagious disease, except that an
individual may refuse treatment or immunization pursuant to the
provisions of RSA 141-C:15, VI.
                                             
 VI. Any order compelling an investigation, physical examination, the
provision of specimens, medical treatment or care, or immunization, and
any other order of the commissioner under this chapter, shall be subject
to the due process requirements of RSA 141-C:14-a.
                                             
 VII. The department of health and human services shall acquire and
retain only the minimum amount of information, specimens, and samples
relating to individuals necessary to carry out its obligations under
this section. Any genetic testing of specimens and samples shall be
limited to the viruses, bacteria, fungi, or other microorganisms
therein. Personally identifiable information shall not be acquired or
retained unless necessary for the department to carry out its
responsibilities under this section, RSA 141-C, or any other provision
of law. Such information shall not be retained beyond the duration of
the state of emergency without the approval of the governor and
executive council, which information shall be subject to the
confidentiality provisions of RSA 141-C:10.

**Source.** 2008, 271:1, eff. June 26, 2008.

### Section 21-P:54

 **21-P:54 Safe Disposal of Corpses. –**
                                             
 I. During the existence of a state of emergency under this chapter,
the commissioner of health and human services shall have the following
powers and duties, subject to the direction and control of the governor,
which are in addition to those set forth in RSA 141-C; provided that
such powers and duties shall be limited to the specific nature of the
emergency, its geographic limits, and the conditions that brought it
about, as specified in the declaration of the state of emergency:
                                             
 (a) Adopt and enforce such measures to provide for the safe
disposal of corpses as may be necessary for the health and welfare of
the community;
                                             
 (b) Take possession and control of any corpse and direct the
embalming, burial, cremation, interment, disinterment, transportation,
and disposal of corpses;
                                             
 (c) Compel any business or facility authorized to embalm, bury,
cremate, inter, disinter, transport, and dispose of corpses under the
laws of this state to accept any corpse or provide the use of its
business or facility if such actions are necessary for emergency
response;
                                             
 (d) Compel any business or facility authorized to embalm, bury,
cremate, inter, disinter, transport, and dispose of corpses under the
laws of this state to clearly label any corpse with all available
information necessary to identify the decedent and the apparent cause of
death;
                                             
 (e) Compel any business or facility authorized to embalm, bury,
cremate, inter, disinter, transport, and dispose of corpses under the
laws of this state having custody of a corpse of a person known or
believed to have had an infectious disease to clearly label the corpse
with a tag indicating that the corpse is so infected and indicating, if
known, the infectious disease; and
                                             
 (f) Compel every person in charge of disposing of any corpse to
maintain a written record of each corpse and all available information
to identify the decedent.
                                             
 II. In carrying out the foregoing actions, the department, to the
extent feasible under the circumstances, shall adhere to the religious
practices and preferences of the decedents where known.
                                             
 III. The costs of embalming, cremation, burial, or other disposal of
a corpse pursuant to this section shall be a cost to the estate of the
decedent and shall be a necessary expense of the funeral and burial of
the decedent pursuant to RSA 554:19, I(b).
                                             
 IV. Any taking of real or personal property in this section shall be
subject to the provisions of RSA 4:46.

**Source.** 2008, 271:1. 2010, 189:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

State Highway Safety Program
----------------------------

### Section 21-P:55

 **21-P:55 Policy. –** It is hereby declared to be the policy of this
state and in the public interest to have a highway safety program
designed to reduce traffic accidents and deaths, injuries and property
damage resulting therefrom. Such program shall include, but not be
limited to, improvement of driver performance, improvement of pedestrian
performance, an accident record system, accident investigations, vehicle
registration, operation, and inspection, highway design and maintenance,
traffic control, vehicle codes and laws, surveillance of traffic and
emergency services.

**Source.** 2015, 276:159, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 21-P:56

 **21-P:56 Provisions Accepted. –** The provisions of the federal
Highway Safety Act of 1966, approved September 9, 1966, entitled "An Act
to provide for a coordinated national highway safety program through
financial assistance to the states to accelerate highway traffic safety
programs, and for other purposes,'' and all acts amendatory thereof and
supplementary thereto, are assented to, and the governor shall be the
official of this state having the ultimate responsibility for dealing
with the federal government with respect to programs and activities
pursuant to carrying out the provisions of said acts.

**Source.** 2015, 276:159, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 21-P:57

 **21-P:57 Faith and Credit Pledged. –** The faith and credit of the
state are pledged to make adequate provision, from time to time, by
appropriation or otherwise, to meet all the obligations of the state
incident to the acceptance of federal aid under the provisions of said
act.

**Source.** 2015, 276:159, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 21-P:58

 **21-P:58 Expenditures. –** To meet such obligations the governor
with the consent of the council is authorized to accept and expend any
federal funds for the highway safety program.

**Source.** 2015, 276:159, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 21-P:59

 **21-P:59 Governor's Authority. –** The governor in addition to
other duties and responsibilities conferred upon him or her by the
constitution and laws of this state is hereby empowered to contract and
to do all other things necessary in behalf of this state to secure the
full benefits available to this state under the federal Highway Safety
Act of 1966 and all acts amendatory and supplemental thereto, and in so
doing, to cooperate with federal and state agencies, agencies private
and public, interested organizations, and individuals, to effectuate the
purposes of that enactment, and any and all subsequent amendments
thereto. The governor shall coordinate the activities of any and all
departments and agencies of this state and its subdivisions, relating
thereto.

**Source.** 2015, 276:159, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 21-P:60

 **21-P:60 Local Highway Safety Programs. –**
                                             
 I. The towns, village districts, school districts, cities, and
counties are hereby authorized to establish highway safety programs.
                                             
 II. A school district providing comprehensive driver training
programs in accordance with the federal statutory provisions assented to
in and under RSA 21-P:56 shall be eligible for reimbursement of federal
funds apportioned to this state for such programs. A school district
shall mean a town school district, a special school district, an
incorporated school district operating within a city, a city operating a
dependent school department, a cooperative school district, and an
authorized regional enrollment (AREA) school.
                                             
 III. Each political subdivision enumerated herein which implements
highway safety programs approved by the governor in accordance with the
Highway Safety Act of 1966 is eligible for reimbursement of federal
funds apportioned to this state for such programs.

**Source.** 2015, 276:159, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 21-P:61

 **21-P:61 Highway Safety Unit; Governor's Representative. –** There
is hereby created the state highway safety unit as a unit within the
department of safety which shall be the agency responsible under the
executive direction of the governor to develop and implement the state's
highway safety program. The commissioner shall be the governor's
representative with the national highway traffic safety administration
and will aid the governor in the coordination of interdepartmental
activities and those of the various political subdivisions.

**Source.** 2015, 276:159, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 21-P:62

 **21-P:62 Staff. –** Subject to state personnel regulations and
within budgetary appropriations, the commissioner shall appoint such
field representatives and secretarial and clerical assistants as may be
needed to carry out the purpose of this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 276:159, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 21-P:63

 **21-P:63 Gifts and Grants. –** The governor is authorized to
receive gifts and grants from any source, public or private, in the name
of the state, and to expend these monies for the state highway safety
program. Any monies accepted by the governor shall be deemed to be an
appropriation of the same amount for the purposes hereof.

**Source.** 2015, 276:159, eff. July 1, 2015.

Traffic Safety Commission
-------------------------

### Section 21-P:64

 **21-P:64 Traffic Safety Commission Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a traffic safety commission
consisting of the following members:
                                             
 (a) Representatives of the following organizations nominated by
their respective organizations and appointed by the commissioner of the
department of safety. Initial appointments shall be: 4 members for one
year, 5 members for 2 years, and 5 members for 3 years. After the
initial term, members shall each serve for terms of 3 years and until a
successor is duly qualified and recommended by their respective
organizations. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms in the
same manner as the original appointment.
                                             
 (1) One member of the New Hampshire Association of Chiefs of
Police.
                                             
 (2) One member of the New Hampshire Sheriffs Association.
                                             
 (3) One county attorney representing the New Hampshire
Association of Counties.
                                             
 (4) One representative of the New Hampshire Municipal
Association.
                                             
 (5) One representative of the New Hampshire Automobile Dealers
Association.
                                             
 (6) One representative of the New Hampshire Motor Transport
Association.
                                             
 (7) One representative of the New Hampshire School
Transportation Association.
                                             
 (8) One representative of the American Automobile Association
of Northern New England.
                                             
 (9) One representative of the New Hampshire branch of AARP.
                                             
 (10) One representative of the New Hampshire Driver Education
Teachers Association.
                                             
 (11) One representative of the New Hampshire Hospital
Association.
                                             
 (12) One representative of the New Hampshire Association of
Fire Chiefs.
                                             
 (13) One representative of the Granite State Wheelmen.
                                             
 (14) One representative of the Associated General Contractors
of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (b) The following members shall serve while holding their
respective offices which qualify them for membership:
                                             
 (1) The commissioner of the department of safety, or
designee.
                                             
 (2) The director of the department of safety, division of
motor vehicles, or designee.
                                             
 (3) The director of the department of safety, division of
state police, or designee.
                                             
 (4) The attorney general, or designee.
                                             
 (5) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (6) The chairman of the New Hampshire liquor commission, or
designee.
                                             
 (7) The commissioner of the department of education, or
designee.
                                             
 (8) The commissioner of the department of transportation, or
designee.
                                             
 (9) A member of the judiciary, appointed by the chief justice
of the New Hampshire supreme court.
                                             
 (c) The following members shall serve for 3-year terms. Vacancies
in these positions shall be filled by the governor for the unexpired
terms.
                                             
 (1) A victim advocate, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (2) Three members of the public, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 II. The commission shall have a chairperson who shall be designated
by the governor from the membership, and the commission shall elect a
vice-chair. The term of the chair shall be for his or her term of
office, not to exceed 3 years. The commission shall meet at least once
per quarter and at such other times as may be convened by the call of
the chairperson or the commissioner of the department of safety or upon
petition of 5 or more members.
                                             
 III. Members shall receive no compensation or expenses except that
the public members shall be entitled to mileage when in the performance
of duties of the commission.

**Source.** 2015, 276:159, eff. July 1, 2015. 2016, 164:1, eff. Aug. 2,
2016.

### Section 21-P:65

 **21-P:65 Powers and Duties. –** The traffic safety commission is
authorized to act in an advisory capacity to the commissioner.

**Source.** 2015, 276:159, eff. July 1, 2015.

Substance Abuse Enforcement Program
-----------------------------------

### Section 21-P:66

 **21-P:66 Substance Abuse Enforcement Program. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of safety shall establish a substance abuse
enforcement program which shall make grants available to county and
local law enforcement agencies, and also provide funding for the
division of state police for the following purposes:
                                             
 (a) Overtime costs for officers performing law enforcement
activities under this program.
                                             
 (b) Overtime, supplies, and other costs of the state forensic
science laboratory.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall establish protocols and conditions for
increased state police patrols and conditions for eligibility for grants
to local and county law enforcement agencies. The protocols and
conditions shall be based on the principles of intelligence-driven,
problem-oriented policing, using statistics and information to place
additional police patrol and investigative presence at the locations,
times, and places where there have been a significant convergence of
motor vehicle crashes, crimes, and drug use, or in corridors known to be
used by drug dealers for shipments of illegal drugs into the state. The
protocols and conditions shall:
                                             
 (a) Require dedicated patrol units relieved of taking calls for
service absent an emergency.
                                             
 (b) Insure that the officers assigned to such patrol units have
been trained in the concept of data-driven policing and have an
appropriate knowledge of the requirements of the state and federal
constitutions.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall give equal consideration to all local
and county law enforcement agencies and the division of state police
when allocating available program funding.
                                             
 IV. The program shall include the following prohibitions on
allowable uses of funds:
                                             
 (a) No funds shall be granted for "purchase of evidence'' or for
"confidential funds.''
                                             
 (b) No funds shall be used for the purchase of operational
equipment, except for direct supply costs for state forensic science
laboratory testing.
                                             
 (c) No funds shall be used for supplanting locally budgeted and
approved funds for routine law enforcement.
                                             
 V. The program shall include semi-annual reporting, to the governor,
senate president, and speaker of the house of representatives, which
includes measurable program results and a detailed accounting of program
funding and uses. The first report shall be submitted on or before
December 15, 2016.

**Source.** 2016, 277:2, eff. June 17, 2016.

### Section 21-P:67


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-P:67 effective until July 1, 2017; see also RSA 21-P:67 set out
below.
                                             ]

 **21-P:67 Rulemaking. –**
                                             
 The commissioner of safety shall adopt rules to implement this
subdivision. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, such rules
shall be exempt from the provisions of RSA 541-A.


                                             [RSA 21-P:67 effective July 1, 2017; see also RSA 21-P:67 set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**21-P:67 Rulemaking.** --
                                             
 The commissioner of safety shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
to implement this subdivision.

**Source.** 2016, 277:2, eff. June 17, 2016; 277:3, eff. July 1, 2017.
