---
title: 'CHAPTER 21-R DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 21-R
                                             
DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
------------------------------------

### Section 21-R:1

 **21-R:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
information technology.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of information technology.

**Source.** 2008, 335:1, eff. Sept. 5, 2008.

### Section 21-R:2

 **21-R:2 Department of Information Technology Established. –** There
is established the department of information technology, an agency of
the state, under the executive direction of a commissioner of the
department of information technology, who shall also be known as the
chief information officer. The department of information technology,
through its officials, shall be responsible for managing and
coordinating all technology resources in the executive branch of
government, developing and implementing strategies to enhance state
services, and creating statewide efficiencies through the use of
information and other technologies.

**Source.** 2008, 335:1, eff. Sept. 5, 2008.

### Section 21-R:3


                                             


                                             [RSA 21-R:3 effective until conditions provided in 2014, 327:79 have
been met; see also RSA 21-R:3 set out below.
                                             ]

 **21-R:3 Commissioner; Directors; Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department of information technology
shall be appointed by the governor, with the advice and consent of the
council, and shall serve for a term of 4 years. The commissioner shall
be academically and technically qualified to hold the position, and
shall be known as the chief information officer. A vacancy shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as the
original appointment.
                                             
 II. (a) The commissioner shall nominate the following division
directors for appointment by the governor, with the consent of the
council:
                                             
 (1) The director of operations.
                                             
 (2) The director of technical support services.
                                             
 (3) The director of web support.
                                             
 (4) The director of agency software.
                                             
 (b) Division directors shall serve for a term of 4 years and
shall be qualified by reason of professional competence, education, and
experience.
                                             
 III. The salaries of the commissioner and division directors shall
be as specified in RSA 94:1-a.


                                             [RSA 21-R:3 effective when conditions provided in 2014, 327:79 have
been met; see also RSA 21-R:3 set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
**21-R:3 Commissioner; Deputy Commissioner; Directors; Compensation.**
--
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department of information technology
shall be appointed by the governor, with the advice and consent of the
council, and shall serve for a term of 4 years. The commissioner shall
be academically and technically qualified to hold the position, and
shall be known as the chief information officer. A vacancy shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as the
original appointment.
                                             
 I-a. The commissioner of the department of information technology
shall nominate for appointment by the governor, with the consent of the
executive council, a deputy commissioner of the department of
information technology, who shall serve for a term of 4 years and shall
be qualified to hold that position by reason of education and
experience. The deputy commissioner shall perform such duties as may be
assigned by the commissioner, which may include, but not be limited to,
the authority and power with approval of the commissioner to direct and
supervise the operation and administration of any division of the
department.
                                             
 II. (a) The commissioner shall nominate the following division
directors for appointment by the governor, with the consent of the
council:
                                             
 (1) The director of operations.
                                             
 (2) The director of technical support services.
                                             
 (3) The director of web support.
                                             
 (4) The director of agency software.
                                             
 (b) Division directors shall serve for a term of 4 years and
shall be qualified by reason of professional competence, education, and
experience.
                                             
 III. The salaries of the commissioner, deputy commissioner, and
division directors shall be as specified in RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 2008, 335:1, eff. Sept. 5, 2008. 2014, 327:77, eff. as
provided in 2014, 327:79.

### Section 21-R:4

 **21-R:4 Duties of the Commissioner. –** In addition to the powers,
duties, and functions otherwise vested in the commissioner pursuant to
RSA 21-G:9, the commissioner shall be responsible for the following:
                                             
 I. Providing technical information technology consultation to all
executive branch agencies and to any other agency that requests it,
including technical advice consistent with the principles of open
government data established in RSA 21-R:11 through RSA 21-R:14 during
the development or acquisition of information systems.
                                             
 II. Monitoring technological trends and informing all state
employees and officials about state-of-the-art information systems and
management techniques.
                                             
 III. Developing a formal information technology planning process for
approving agency information technology plans.
                                             
 IV. Preparing and maintaining a statewide information technology
plan based upon agency information technology plans.
                                             
 V. Reviewing, assessing, and approving the feasibility of agency
information technology plans, including cost estimates and effects on
other agencies and political subdivisions of the state.
                                             
 VI. Developing standards and processes for collaborative stakeholder
involvement to assure that hardware, software, and telecommunications
systems acquired or developed by the state are as compatible among
themselves and with other systems of the state and political
subdivisions as are necessary and practical.
                                             
 VII. Providing training and educational programs to technicians and
managers.
                                             
 VIII. Monitoring and reporting to the governor and general court on
the effectiveness of the use of information technology resources and on
statewide progress in implementing information technology plans.
                                             
 IX. Coordinating information technology development efforts that
affect multiple agencies.
                                             
 X. Developing and implementing a data center consolidation plan,
which establishes strategic data centers throughout the state for data
processing operations and service responsibilities for all executive
branch agencies.
                                             
 XI. Developing, in concert with the commissioner of administrative
services and the budget director as defined in RSA 21-I:1-a, the capital
and operating budget requests for implementing each agency's information
technology plan, including, but not limited to, appropriate standards
for the uniform presentation of the general budget requests.
                                             
 XII. Developing, in concert with the department of administrative
services, division of procurement and support services, specifications
for the procurement of computer hardware, software, related licenses,
media, documentation, support and maintenance services, and other
related services.
                                             
 XIII. Developing and implementing a strategy to increase efficiency
and effectiveness in all areas of state government by using information
technology to its fullest potential.
                                             
 XIV. Developing and implementing a strategy to consolidate statewide
shared information technology services.
                                             
 XV. Developing an information technology satisfaction measurement
program to ensure information technology resources and strategic plans
are meeting the needs of each agency.
                                             
 XVI. Developing and implementing a strategy to address cyber
security risks to the state's data, information, and technology
resources.
                                             
 XVII. Developing and implementing a strategy to address the state's
geographical information system (GIS) technology.
                                             
 XVIII. Establishing as necessary, after consultation with the
information technology council, established under RSA 21-R:6, statewide
standards and protocols for information technology, networks, and cyber
security, which shall be adhered to by all executive branch agencies
unless granted a waiver by the commissioner.
                                             
 XIX. Providing telecommunications services to state government.
                                             
 XX. Adopting comprehensive and uniform standards, practices,
procedures, instructions, and funding processes relative to statewide
telephony services applicable to all state agencies. The comprehensive
and uniform requirements shall be in the form of a manual and shall be
subject to the approval of the governor and council, but shall not be
subject to the rulemaking requirements of RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 2008, 335:1, eff. Sept. 5, 2008. 2012, 5:3, eff. May 11,
2012; 192:1, eff. July 1, 2012; 265:4, 6, 7, eff. June 18, 2012. 2014,
327:49, eff. Aug. 2, 2014. 2015, 276:30, eff. July 1, 2015. 2016, 147:2,
eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 21-R:5

 **21-R:5 Divisions Established. –** The following divisions, each of
which shall be under the supervision of a division director appointed
pursuant to RSA 21-R:3, are established within the department of
information technology:
                                             
 I. The division of operations.
                                             
 II. The division of technical support services.
                                             
 III. The division of web support.
                                             
 IV. The division of agency software.

**Source.** 2008, 335:1, eff. Sept. 5, 2008.

### Section 21-R:6

 **21-R:6 Information Technology Council. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established the information technology council.
The council shall advise the commissioner on the following:
                                             
 (a) Statewide strategic technology plans.
                                             
 (b) Outsourcing relationships, including the purchase of
technology equipment and contracts with technology vendors.
                                             
 (c) Computer systems consolidation.
                                             
 (d) Implementation of centralized services.
                                             
 (e) Information technology resource changes, including changes in
quantity of resources allocated to executive branch agencies, location
of information technology resources, and allocation of information
technology personnel.
                                             
 (f) Statewide information technology policies and standards.
                                             
 (g) Information technology budgeting and resource allocation.
                                             
 (h) The security of data shared with the federal government,
methods to improve state data security practices, and suggested
legislation, policies, and procedures to limit data sharing when its
confidentiality cannot be assured.
                                             
 II. The information technology council shall consist of the
following members:
                                             
 (a) The commissioner of administrative services, or designee.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner of transportation, or designee.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of health and human services, or designee.
                                             
 (d) The commissioner of safety, or designee.
                                             
 (e) The commissioner of revenue administration, or designee.
                                             
 (f) Two heads of other departments, or their designees, appointed
by the governor.
                                             
 (g) The commissioner of the department of education, or
designee.
                                             
 (h) Two state representatives, appointed by the speaker of the
house of representatives for the duration of their legislative term.
                                             
 (i) One representative of municipal government, appointed by the
governor for a 3-year term.
                                             
 (j) One representative of county government, nominated by the New
Hampshire Association of Counties and appointed by the governor for a
3-year term.
                                             
 (k) One representative of academia, appointed by the governor for
a 3-year term.
                                             
 (l) One representative of the business community, appointed by
the governor for a 3-year term.
                                             
 (m) One person appointed by the governor for a 3-year term, who
shall serve as the chairperson of the council.
                                             
 III. Six members of the council shall constitute a quorum. Qualified
members who have served one or more terms shall be eligible for
reappointment to the council.

**Source.** 2008, 335:1, eff. Sept. 5, 2008. 2012, 265:2, 3, 9, 10, eff.
June 18, 2012. 2014, 22:1, eff. May 23, 2014; 68:2, eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 21-R:7

 **21-R:7 Technical Committees. –** The commissioner may establish
technical committees to advise him or her on technical issues. Each
technical committee shall include personnel from all 3 branches of
government who have experience in the specific issue that is the focus
of the committee. These issues may include but are not limited to:
                                             
 I. Hardware, software, and telecommunications standards.
                                             
 II. Information technology planning process.
                                             
 III. Development of statewide policies and procedures.
                                             
 IV. Emerging Internet and "intranet,'' or limited network,
technologies.
                                             
 V. E-government strategy and deployment.
                                             
 VI. Wide area network efficiencies.

**Source.** 2008, 335:1, eff. Sept. 5, 2008.

### Section 21-R:8

 **21-R:8 Agency Satisfaction Metrics. –** The commissioner shall use
a system of agency satisfaction metrics, a measurement and communication
system to track the satisfaction of delivery of information technology
solutions. The department of information technology may use surveys, web
tools, and special processes to ensure that vehicles exist for agency
heads to get the quality of information technology solutions they
require to operate their agencies. The commissioner shall set
satisfaction benchmarks to meet or exceed expectations.

**Source.** 2008, 335:1, eff. Sept. 5, 2008.

### Section 21-R:8-a

 **21-R:8-a Purchasing Policy. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall, in collaboration with the department of
administrative services, establish standards for computer hardware,
software, related licenses, media, documentation, support and
maintenance services, and other related services. Agencies may purchase
directly using contracts established by administrative services without
approval from the chief information officer, or designee, subject to any
limitations established by the chief information officer.
                                             
 II. Prior to an agency's issuance of a solicitation for the purchase
of computer hardware, software, related licenses, media, documentation,
support and maintenance services, and other related services including a
request for proposal, request for purchase, or other procurement
documentation, the agency shall consult with and seek approval from the
department of information technology.
                                             
 III. The department of information technology, in consultation with
the information technology council, shall annually review and set
dollar, or other, limits for purchases and contracts that require
approval from the chief information officer before proceeding.
                                             
 IV. For purposes of this section, "agency'' shall have the meaning
defined in RSA 21-I:11, II(b), but shall not include those agencies
exempt under RSA 21-I:18 from the provisions of RSA 21-I.

**Source.** 2009, 149:1, eff. Sept. 6, 2009. 2012, 192:2, eff. July 1,
2012. 2014, 327:50, eff. Aug. 2, 2014. 2015, 276:31, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 21-R:9

 **21-R:9 Legislative Oversight Committee. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a joint legislative information
technology oversight committee.
                                             
 II. The committee shall consist of 6 members, 3 of whom shall be
members of the house of representatives, with one such member from the
house finance committee and one from the house executive departments and
administration committee, appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives, and 3 of whom shall be senators, appointed by the
president of the senate. Members shall be appointed for their term of
office. All members shall be eligible for reappointment so long as they
are qualified under this section. Members shall be appointed no later
than December 30 of the year of their election to the general court,
except that vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term within 30
days of the creation of such vacancy, and the initial appointments under
this section shall be made within 30 days of the effective date of this
section. The members shall choose from their number a chairperson,
provided that the chair shall rotate biennially between the house and
senate members.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall report quarterly to the committee on the
activities of the department, including the status of the state
information technology plan, the organizational structure of information
technology employees among state agencies, and financial budget tracking
related to information technology.
                                             
 IV. Members of the committee shall serve without compensation but
shall receive mileage at the legislative rate when attending to the
duties of the committee.

**Source.** 2008, 335:1, eff. Sept. 5, 2008.

Open Standards
--------------

### Section 21-R:10

 **21-R:10 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Open data format'' means the organization of digital data within
a computer file in a manner that makes it accessible for all to
implement and use in perpetuity, with no royalty or fee. The published
specification for the open data format is usually maintained by a
standards organization.
                                             
 I-a. "Open source software'' means software that guarantees the
user:
                                             
 (a) Unrestricted use of the software for any purpose;
                                             
 (b) Unrestricted access to the respective source code;
                                             
 (c) Unlimited inspection of the working mechanisms of the
software;
                                             
 (d) Use of the internal mechanisms and arbitrary portions of the
software, to adapt them to the needs of the user;
                                             
 (e) The right to make and distribute copies of the software; and
                                             
 (f) The right to modify the software and to distribute
modifications of the new resulting software, under the same license as
the original software.
                                             
 II. "Open standards'' means specifications for the encoding and
transfer of computer data that:
                                             
 (a) Is free for all to implement and use in perpetuity, with no
royalty or fee;
                                             
 (b) Has no restrictions on the use of data stored in the format;
                                             
 (c) Has no restrictions on the creation of software that stores,
transmits, receives, or accesses data codified in such way;
                                             
 (d) Has a specification available for all to read, in a
human-readable format, written in commonly accepted technical language;
                                             
 (e) Is documented, so that anyone can write software that can
read and interpret the complete semantics of any data file stored in the
data format;
                                             
 (f) If it allows extensions, ensures that all extensions of the
data format used by the state are themselves documented and have the
other characteristics of an open data format;
                                             
 (g) Allows any file written in that format to be identified as
adhering or not adhering to the format; and
                                             
 (h) If it includes any use of encryption or other means of data
obfuscation, provides that the encryption or obfuscation algorithms are
usable in a royalty-free, nondiscriminatory manner in perpetuity, and
are documented so that anyone in possession of the appropriate
encryption key or keys or other data necessary to recover the original
data is able to write software to access the data.
                                             
 III. "Proprietary software'' means software that does not fulfill
all of the guarantees provided by open source software.
                                             
 IV. "State agency'' means any department, commission, board,
institution, bureau, office, or other entity, by whatever name called,
established in the state constitution, statutes, or executive orders.
The judicial branch and the legislative branch of state government are
explicitly exempted from this definition.

**Source.** 2012, 5:2, eff. May 11, 2012. 2013, 118:1, 7, eff. June 25,
2013.

### Section 21-R:11

 **21-R:11 Use of Open Source Software by State Agencies. –**
                                             
 I. For all software acquisitions, each state agency, in consultation
with the department of information technology, shall:
                                             
 (a) Consider whether proprietary or open source software offers
the most cost effective software solution for the agency, based on
consideration of all associated acquisition, support, maintenance, and
training costs;
                                             
 (b) Except as provided in subparagraphs (d) and (e), acquire
software products primarily on a value-for-money basis, based on
consideration of the cost factors as described in subparagraph (a);
                                             
 (c) Provide a brief analysis of the purchase decision, including
consideration of the cost factors in subparagraph (a), to the chief
information officer;
                                             
 (d) Avoid the acquisition of products that do not comply with
open standards for interoperability or data storage; and
                                             
 (e) Avoid the acquisition of products that are known to make
unauthorized transfers of information to, or permit unauthorized control
of or modification of a state agency's computer.
                                             
 II. All state procurement documents related to software acquisitions
shall include language that requires adherence to this section.

**Source.** 2012, 5:2, eff. May 11, 2012. 2012, 265:8, eff. June 18,
2012. 2013, 118:8, eff. June 25, 2013.

### Section 21-R:12

 **21-R:12 Metrics; Inventory of Agency Software. –** Each state
agency shall maintain an inventory of all software products used by the
agency, indicating whether they are proprietary or open source, and
whether they use restricted or open data formats.

**Source.** 2012, 5:2, eff. May 11, 2012. 2013, 118:2, eff. June 25,
2013.

### Section 21-R:13

 **21-R:13 Use of Open Standards and Open Data Formats by State
Agencies. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall assist state agencies in the purchase or
creation of data processing devices or systems that comply with open
standards for the accessing, storing, or transferring of data. The
commissioner shall:
                                             
 (a) Ensure that any new data standards which the state of New
Hampshire defines and to which it owns all rights are open standards
compliant.
                                             
 (b) Use open standards unless specific project requirements, or
excessive cost, preclude use of an open data format.
                                             
 (c) Reexamine existing data stored in a restricted format to
which the state of New Hampshire does not own the rights every 4 years
to determine if the format has become open and, if not, whether an
appropriate open standard exists.
                                             
 (d) Make readily accessible, on the state website, documentation
on open data formats used by the state of New Hampshire. When data in
open format is made available through the state's website, a link shall
be provided to the corresponding data format documentation.

**Source.** 2012, 5:2, eff. May 11, 2012. 2013, 118:3, eff. June 25,
2013.

### Section 21-R:14

 **21-R:14 Statewide Information Policy on Open Government Data
Standards. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall develop a statewide information policy
based on the following principles of open government data. According to
these principles, open data is data that is:
                                             
 (a) Complete. All public data is made available, unless subject
to valid privacy, security, or privilege limitations.
                                             
 (b) Primary. Data is collected at the source, with the highest
possible level of granularity, rather than in aggregate or modified
forms.
                                             
 (c) Timely. Data is made available as quickly as necessary to
preserve the value of the data.
                                             
 (d) Accessible. Data is available to the widest range of users
for the widest range of purposes.
                                             
 (e) Machine processable. Data is reasonably structured to allow
automated processing.
                                             
 (f) Nondiscriminatory. Data is available to anyone, with no
requirement of registration.
                                             
 (g) Nonproprietary. Data is available in a format over which no
entity has exclusive control, with the exception of national or
international published standards.
                                             
 (h) License-free. Data is not subject to any copyright, patent,
trademark, or trade secret regulation. Reasonable privacy, security, and
privilege restrictions may be allowed.
                                             
 II. The information policy developed under paragraph I shall include
a mechanism for adoption and review by each state agency. Each agency
that adopts the policy shall designate a contact person responsible for
oversight and implementation of open government data standards for that
agency. The contact shall act as a liaison between the department, the
implementing agency, and the public in matters related to open
government data standards. The commissioner shall include the status of
the development and implementation of the statewide information policy
based on open government data standards in the quarterly report to the
legislative oversight committee under RSA 21-R:9.
                                             
 III. In developing the open data standards policy, the commissioner
shall solicit information from the secretary of state relative to state
archiving practices and the collection of data for historical purposes.

**Source.** 2012, 5:2, eff. May 11, 2012.
