---
title: |
    CHAPTER 21-U INTERAGENCY INFORMATION SHARING BY FINANCIAL SERVICES
    REGULATORS
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 21-U
                                             
INTERAGENCY INFORMATION SHARING BY FINANCIAL SERVICES REGULATORS
----------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 21-U:1

 **21-U:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to provide a
mechanism for information sharing between the state agencies responsible
for regulating financial services and to promote improved communication
and cooperation between agencies with respect to the enforcement of
financial services, statutes, and regulations. Under this chapter, these
agencies shall meet regularly to share complaint, investigation, and
enforcement data and to create and maintain a cooperative
information-sharing database to ensure effective oversight and
regulation of individuals and entities subject to regulatory
jurisdiction, maximize agency effectiveness and avoid unnecessary
duplication of effort.

**Source.** 2012, 241:1, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 21-U:2

 **21-U:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Agency data'' means information originally received, created, or
held by a member agency regarding consumer complaints, agency
investigations, and agency enforcement actions. For the department of
justice, "agency data'' means complaint, investigation and enforcement
data received, created, or held by the consumer protection and antitrust
bureau and does not apply to privileged documents between any agency and
the department of justice, nor does it apply to any documents related to
an active criminal investigation. "Agency data'' does not include any
information received from foreign, federal, or state governmental
agencies or other third parties that is protected from further
disclosure by statute, regulation, or a nondisclosure or
non-dissemination agreement entered into by the member agency in
possession of the information. "Agency data'' does not include records
of examination, except to the extent such records are included in an
investigation file.
                                             
 II. "Cooperative information-sharing database'' means a shared
system designed, developed, or purchased using data standards developed
by the member agencies to make complaint data from each member agency
accessible to all member agencies.
                                             
 III. "Interagency group'' means the New Hampshire financial services
regulators group.
                                             
 IV. "Member agency'' or "member agencies'' means the department of
justice, the insurance department, the banking department, and the
bureau of securities regulation, department of state.
                                             
 V. "Shared data'' means agency data submitted and held within the
cooperative information-sharing database.

**Source.** 2012, 241:1, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 21-U:3

 **21-U:3 Interagency Information. –**
                                             
 I. The member agencies shall cooperate with one another to share
relevant agency data for the purpose of conducting audits, examinations,
investigations, administrative enforcement proceedings, and/or civil
agency enforcement actions.
                                             
 II. A member agency is not required to cooperate with another member
agency to share agency data if the 2 member agencies are engaged, or
about to be engaged, in a contested action or proceeding in
contradictory roles.
                                             
 III. A member agency, except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
shall preserve any privilege or confidentiality regarding agency data or
shared data it receives from another member agency pursuant to this
chapter. In the case where the providing member agency itself received
the information or documents from another source whether the source is a
New Hampshire agency or an agency of another state, the federal
government, or any foreign government, the receiving member agency shall
preserve any such privilege or confidentiality placed on the use of the
information or documents by such source. In addition, except as provided
in this chapter, the receiving member agency may assert on its own
behalf any legal limitation upon release or privilege to which it is
entitled.

**Source.** 2012, 241:1, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 21-U:4

 **21-U:4 Interagency Group Created. –** There is hereby established
the New Hampshire financial services regulators group.
                                             
 I. The interagency group shall consist of the attorney general or
designee, the insurance commissioner or designee, the banking
commissioner or designee, and the director of the bureau of securities
regulation or designee.
                                             
 II. The interagency group shall facilitate strategic planning among
member agencies regarding regulatory and enforcement efforts and the
sharing of agency data, including confidential or privileged records and
legal analysis.
                                             
 III. The interagency group shall elect a chair from among its member
agency representatives and shall provide for the periodic rotation of
the chairmanship.

**Source.** 2012, 241:1, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 21-U:5

 **21-U:5 Duties. –** The duties of the interagency group shall be
to:
                                             
 I. Meet at least quarterly.
                                             
 II. Develop and use a cooperative information-sharing database that
makes summary agency data from each member agency accessible to all
member agencies.
                                             
 III. Use the cooperative information-sharing database to ensure
efficient use of the state's financial services enforcement resources
and effective strategic planning of financial services regulatory and
enforcement efforts among member agencies.
                                             
 IV. Enter into a memorandum of agreement in accordance with this
chapter and protect the confidentiality of confidential shared
information.

**Source.** 2012, 241:1, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 21-U:6

 **21-U:6 Confidentiality. –** No waiver of any applicable privilege
or claim of confidentiality shall occur as a result of the disclosure or
sharing of agency data and shared data with member agencies under this
chapter. Each member agency shall maintain the confidentiality of agency
data and shared data. The agency data of each member agency held in the
cooperative information-sharing database shall be retained in accordance
with the member agency's records retention requirements. In the event
that the interagency group receives a request for information under RSA
91-A, the interagency group shall not be defined as, or considered to
be, a custodian of the documents or information requested. The member
agency which originally possessed a document shall be deemed to possess
and control it for purposes of RSA 91-A and shall be responsible to
respond to the request for information received under RSA 91-A. Whether
or not a document or information requested shall be released pursuant to
a request under RSA 91-A shall be made by the member agency originally
possessing the document or information, in accordance with the statutes,
rules, and procedures of such agency. Member agencies shall enter into a
memorandum of agreement consistent with this chapter and with all
applicable statutes governing the member agencies in order to provide
for the confidentiality of agency data and shared data and to ensure
that confidential information is appropriately handled to prevent
disclosure, except as may be necessary for law enforcement purposes.

**Source.** 2012, 241:1, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 21-U:7

 **21-U:7 Cooperative Information-Sharing Database. –** Each member
agency shall be responsible for providing for the planning, development,
acquisition, and management of the cooperative information-sharing
database under a shared service program.

**Source.** 2012, 241:1, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 21-U:8

 **21-U:8 Notification. –** Except for a request under RSA 91-A for
information under RSA 21-U:3, upon receipt of a request by a third party
to release, view, or copy information and documents, whether
confidential or privileged, the receiving agency shall promptly notify
any agency which would be affected by the release, viewing, or copying
of the information and documents. The receiving agency shall not grant
the request until the agency or agencies notified have indicated in
writing that there is no objection to the granting of the request, in
whole or part; provided that the receiving agency may release the
information upon receiving an order of a federal or New Hampshire state
court which has jurisdiction.

**Source.** 2012, 241:1, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.
