---
title: CHAPTER 21 STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 21
                                             
STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION
----------------------

### Section 21:1

 **21:1 Application. –** In the construction of all statutes the
following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the legislature or repugnant to
the context of the same statute.

**Source.** RS 1:30. CS 1:30. GS 1:1. GL 1:1. PS 2:1. PL 2:1. RL 7:1.

### Section 21:2

 **21:2 Common Usage. –** Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language; but
technical words and phrases, and such others as may have acquired a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law, shall be construed and
understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.

**Source.** GS 1:2. GL 1:2. PS 2:2. PL 2:2. RL 7:2.

### Section 21:3

 **21:3 Number; Gender. –** Words importing the singular number may
extend and be applied to several persons or things; words importing the
plural number may include the singular; and words importing the
masculine gender may extend and be applied to females. Gender-specific
terms relating to the marital relationship or familial relationships,
including without limitation, "spouse,'' "family,'' "marriage,''
"immediate family,'' "dependent,'' "next of kin,'' "man,'' "woman,''
"groom,'' "bride,'' "husband,'' "wife,'' "widow,'' or "widower,'' shall
be construed to be gender-neutral for all purposes throughout New
Hampshire law, whether in statute, state administrative or court rule,
policy, common law, or any other source of civil state law.

**Source.** RS 1:1, 2. CS 1:1, 2. GS 1:3. GL 1:3. PS 2:3. PL 2:3. RL
7:3. 2014, 160:4, eff. July 10, 2014.

### Section 21:4

 **21:4 State; United States. –** The word "state,'' when applied to
different parts of the United States, may extend to and include the
District of Columbia and the several territories, so called; and the
words "United States'' shall include said district and territories.

**Source.** RS 1:3. CS 1:3. GS 1:4. GL 1:4. PS 2:4. PL 2:4. RL 7:4.

### Section 21:5

 **21:5 Town. –** The word "town'' shall extend and be applied to any
place incorporated, or whose inhabitants are required to pay any tax,
and shall mean that city, town, ward, or place in which the
subject-matter referred to is situate, or in which the persons referred
to are resident, unless from the context, a different intention is
manifest.

**Source.** RS 1:4. CS 1:4. GS 1:5. GL 1:5. PS 2:5. PL 2:5. RL 7:5.

### Section 21:6

 **21:6 Resident; Inhabitant. –** A resident or inhabitant or both of
this state and of any city, town or other political subdivision of this
state shall be a person who is domiciled or has a place of abode or both
in this state and in any city, town or other political subdivision of
this state, and who has, through all of his actions, demonstrated a
current intent to designate that place of abode as his principal place
of physical presence for the indefinite future to the exclusion of all
others.

**Source.** RS 1:5. CS 1:5. GS 1:6. GL 1:6. PS 2:6. PL 2:6. RL 7:6. RSA
21:6. 1981, 261:1, eff. June 16, 1981.

### Section 21:6-a

 **21:6-a Residence. –** Residence or residency shall mean a person's
place of abode or domicile. The place of abode or domicile is that
designated by a person as his principal place of physical presence for
the indefinite future to the exclusion of all others. Such residence or
residency shall not be interrupted or lost by a temporary absence from
it, if there is an intent to return to such residence or residency as
the principal place of physical presence.

**Source.** 1981, 261:1, eff. June 16, 1981.

### Section 21:7

 **21:7 Biennial; Annual. –** The words "biennial'' and
"biennially,'' when applied to meetings and elections in towns, shall
mean the biennial meetings and elections required by law to be holden in
the month of November biennially, dating from the commencement of
biennial elections in 1878; and the word "annual,'' when applied to
meetings and elections in towns, shall mean the annual meetings and
elections required by law to be holden in the month of March.

**Source.** RS 1:6. CS 1:6. GS 1:7. GL 1:7. PS 2:7. PL 2:7. RL 7:7.

### Section 21:8

 **21:8 Month; Year. –** The word "month'' shall mean a calendar
month, and the word "year'' a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed;
and the word "year'' shall be equivalent to the expression "year of our
Lord.''

**Source.** RS 1:7. CS 1:7. CS 1:8. GL 1:8. PS 2:8. PL 2:8. RL 7:8.

### Section 21:9

 **21:9 Person. –** The word "person'' may extend and be applied to
bodies corporate and politic as well as to individuals.

**Source.** RS 1:8. GS 1:8. GS 1:9. GL 1:9. PS 2:9. PL 2:9. RL 7:9.

### Section 21:10

 **21:10 Charter. –** The word "charter'' may include the articles of
agreement by which a corporation is formed under the general laws.

**Source.** PS 2:10. PL 2:10. RL 7:10.

### Section 21:11

 **21:11 Seal. –** When the seal of a court, public officer, or
corporation is required by law to be affixed to any paper the word
"seal'' shall include an impression of the official seal made upon the
paper alone, as well as an impression thereof made by means of wax, or a
wafer, affixed thereto. The seal of a corporation upon a corporate bond
or other corporate obligation for the payment of money may be a
facsimile, engraved or printed, where such bond or other obligation is
authenticated or certified by a trustee.

**Source.** RS 1:9. CS 1:9. GS 1:10. GL 1:10. PS 2:11. PL 2:11. RL 7:11.
RSA 21:11. 1963, 38:3, eff. June 4, 1963.

### Section 21:12

 **21:12 Justice. –** The word "justice,'' when applied to a
magistrate, shall mean a justice of a municipal court, or a justice of
the peace having jurisdiction over the subject-matter.

**Source.** RS 1:10. CS 1:10. GS 1:11. GL 1:11. PS 2:12. PL 2:12. RL
7:12.

### Section 21:13

 **21:13 Preceding; Following. –** The words "preceding'' and
"following,'' when used by way of reference to any section of these
laws, shall mean the section next preceding or following that in which
such reference is made, unless some other is expressly designated.

**Source.** RS 1:11. CS 1:11. GS 1:12. GL 1:12. PS 2:13. PL 2:13. RL
7:13.

### Section 21:14

 **21:14 Said; Such. –** The words "said'' and "such,'' when used by
way of reference to any person or thing, shall apply to the same person
or thing last mentioned.

**Source.** RS 1:12. CS 1:12. GS 1:13. GL 1:13. PS 2:14. PL 2:14. RL
7:14.

### Section 21:15

 **21:15 Joint Authority. –** Unless otherwise expressly declared:
                                             
 I. Words purporting to give a joint authority to 3 or more public
officers shall give such authority to a majority of them.
                                             
 II. The authority of any board, commission, or other body whose
members are approved by the governor and council to conduct official
business shall be vested in a majority of those members who have been
approved by the governor and council.

**Source.** RS 1:13. CS 1:13. GS 1:14. GL 1:14. PS 2:15. PL 2:15. RL
7:15. 2009, 260:1, eff. Sept. 14, 2009.

### Section 21:16

 **21:16 Grantor; Grantee. –** The word "grantor'' may include every
person by or from whom any estate or interest in land passes in or by
any deed; and the word "grantee'' may include every person to whom any
such estate or interest passes in like manner.

**Source.** RS 1:14. CS 1:14. GS 1:15. GL 1:15. PS 2:16. PL 2:16. RL
7:16.

### Section 21:17

 **21:17 Mortgagor; Mortgagee. –** The word "mortgagor'' or
"mortgagee'' may include any person claiming under such party or having
his right.

**Source.** RS 131:17. CS 137:17. GS 1:16. GL 1:16. PS 2:17. PL 2:17. RL
7:17.

### Section 21:18

 **21:18 Insane. –** The words "insane'' or "insane person'' shall
include every idiot, non-compos, lunatic, insane, or distracted person.

**Source.** RS 1:15. CS 1:15. GS 1:17. GL 1:17. PS 2:18. PL 2:18. RL
7:18.

### Section 21:19

 **21:19 Spendthrift. –** The word "spendthrift'' shall include
anyone who is liable to be put under guardianship on account of
excessive drinking, gaming, idleness, debauchery or vicious habits of
any kind, or who is unable to manage his affairs with prudence.

**Source.** GS 1:18. GL 1:18. PS 2:19. PL 2:19. RL 7:19. RSA 21:19.
1967, 106:1, eff. July 10, 1967.

### Section 21:20

 **21:20 Issue. –** The word "issue,'' as applied to the descent of
estates, shall include all the lawful lineal descendants of the
ancestor.

**Source.** RS 1:16. CS 1:16. GS 1:19. GL 1:19. PS 2:20. PL 2:20. RL
7:20.

### Section 21:21

 **21:21 Land; Real Estate. –**
                                             
 I. The words "land,'' "lands'' or "real estate'' shall include
lands, tenements, and hereditaments, and all rights thereto and
interests therein.
                                             
 II. Manufactured housing as defined by RSA 674:31 shall be included
in the term "real estate.''

**Source.** RS 1:17. CS 1:17. GS 1:20. GL 1:20. PS 2:21. PL 2:21. RL
7:21. RSA 21:21. 1983, 230:1, eff. Aug. 17, 1983.

### Section 21:22

 **21:22 Will. –** The word "will'' shall include codicils.

**Source.** RS 1:18. CS 1:18. GS 1:21. GL 1:21. PS 2:22. PL 2:22. RL
7:22.

### Section 21:23

 **21:23 Written. –** The words "written'' or "in writing'' may
include printing or any other mode of representing words and letters,
except where the written signature of a person is required. The
signature of any corporate officer upon a corporate bond or other
corporate obligation for the payment of money, or upon any interest
coupons attached thereto, may be a facsimile, engraved or printed, where
such bond or other obligation is authenticated or certified by a
trustee.

**Source.** RS 1:19. CS 1:19. GS 1:22. GL 1:22. PS 2:23. PL 2:23. RL
7:23. RSA 21:23. 1963, 38:2, eff. June 4, 1963.

### Section 21:24

 **21:24 Oath. –** The word "oath'' shall include "affirmation'' in
all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath;
and, in like cases, the word "sworn'' shall include the word
"affirmed.''

**Source.** RS 1:20. CS 1:20. GS 1:23. GL 1:23. PS 2:24. PL 2:24. RL
7:24.

### Section 21:25

 **21:25 Sworn; Public Officers. –** The word "sworn,'' when applied
to public officers required by the constitution to take oaths therein
prescribed, shall refer to those oaths; when applied to other officers
it shall mean sworn to the faithful discharge of the duties of their
offices before a justice of the peace, or other person authorized to
administer official oaths in such cases.

**Source.** GS 1:24. GL 1:24. PS 2:25. PL 2:25. RL 7:25.

### Section 21:25-a

 **21:25-a Sufficient Sureties. –** Whenever a person is required to
recognize or give bond "with sufficient sureties,'' with "corporate
sureties,'' or "sufficient bond'' or "give security'' in any court
proceeding the deposit of cash in the required amount shall be deemed
sufficient.

**Source.** 1959, 2:1, eff. April 7, 1959.

### Section 21:26

 **21:26 Highway. –** The word "highway'' or "road'' shall include
all bridges thereon.

**Source.** RS 1:21. CS 1:21. GS 1:25. GL 1:25. PS 2:26. PL 2:26. RL
7:26.

### Section 21:27

 **21:27 County. –** The word "county'' may mean the county in which
the subject matter referred to is situate, belongs, or is cognizable.

**Source.** RS 1:22. CS 1:22. GS 1:26. GL 1:26. PS 2:27. PL 2:27. RL
7:27.

### Section 21:27-a

 **21:27-a County Attorney. –** The words "county solicitor'' or the
word "solicitor'' when referring to the county law official, shall mean
the county attorney.

**Source.** 1959, 12:1, eff. May 10, 1959.

### Section 21:28

 **21:28 Selectmen; Town Clerk. –**
                                             
 I. The word "selectmen'' may mean the selectmen of the town or ward,
or the mayor and aldermen of the city, to which the subject matter to be
acted upon belongs or in which it is situate; and the words "town
clerk'' may mean the clerk of the town, ward, or city to which the
subject matter referred to belongs or in which it is situate.
                                             
 II. The words "selectwoman,'' "selectperson,'' and "select board''
may be used interchangeably with "selectman'' in all instances, where
appropriate.

**Source.** RS 1:23. CS 1:23. GS 1:27. GL 1:27. PS 2:28. PL 2:28. RL
7:28. 2008, 183:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2008.

### Section 21:28-a

 **21:28-a Clerk; Election Laws. –** The word "clerk'' as used in the
election laws shall mean city clerk, town clerk or ward clerk unless
specifically defined otherwise.

**Source.** 1975, 188:1. 1979, 436:10, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 21:29

 **21:29 School Board. –** The words "school board'' may mean any
agent, committee, school board, or board of education entrusted with the
hiring of teachers and the management of the prudential affairs of the
district.

**Source.** PS 2:29. PL 2:29. RL 7:29.

### Section 21:30

 **21:30 Place. –** The word "place'' may mean city or town, unless
some other meaning is implied by the context.

**Source.** GS 1:28. GL 1:28. PS 2:30. PL 2:30. RL 7:30.

### Section 21:31

 **21:31 Designation of Office Title. –** When a court, officer, or
board is named by official title, such designation shall apply to the
court, officer, or board of the county, town, or district within and for
which they are qualified to act in such capacity.

**Source.** RS 1:24. CS 1:24. GS 1:29. GL 1:29. PS 2:31. PL 2:31. RL
7:31.

### Section 21:31-a

 **21:31-a Governor and Council. –** The phrase "governor and
council'' shall mean the governor with the advice and consent of the
council.

**Source.** 1957, 3:1, eff. Feb. 6, 1957.

### Section 21:32

 **21:32 Publication of Notice; Publication for Statewide
Circulation. –**
                                             
 I. By the words "publish,'' "published,'' "publishing,'' or
"publication,'' when notice is required or permitted to be given by
publication, shall be intended publication in a newspaper circulated in
the vicinity, and the publication shall be for 3 weeks successively, and
the last publication one week, at least, before the day or thing of
which notice is given, unless otherwise specially provided.
                                             
 II. The terms "publication of daily statewide circulation,''
"publication of general statewide circulation,'' or "publication in a
newspaper of statewide circulation'' regarding any requirement of any
executive branch state agency, board, department, or official to provide
notice under state law in respect to any real or personal property, act,
event, hearing, or other occurrence, by advertisement or notice, shall
mean publication of such notice at the offices of the agency, board,
department, or official; prominently on a publicly accessible Internet
site maintained by the agency, board, department, or official; and in
any local or regional publication circulated where the real or personal
property is located or where the act, event, hearing, or other
occurrence is to take place, all in accordance with the time frame for
notice prescribed by law.

**Source.** GS 1:30. GL 1:30. PS 2:32. PL 2:32. RL 7:32. 2011, 224:192,
eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 21:32-a

 **21:32-a Registered Mail. –** The words "registered mail'' when
used in connection with the requirement for notice by mail shall mean
either registered mail or certified mail.

**Source.** 1955, 242:1, eff. June 30, 1955.

### Section 21:33

 **21:33 Intoxicating Liquors. –** By the words "spirit,'' "liquor,''
"spirituous liquor,'' "intoxicating liquor'' shall be intended all
distilled liquors, or rectified spirits; vinous, fermented, brewed, and
malt liquors; and any beverage, by whatever name called, containing more
than one percent of alcohol by volume at 60 degrees Fahrenheit; and any
beverage any part of which is intoxicating.

**Source.** GS 1:31. GL 1:31. PS 2:33. 1903, 122:5. 1911, 193:1. 1917,
147:60. PL 2:33. RL 7:33.

### Section 21:33-a

 **21:33-a Terms of Appointment. –** Whenever a statute provides for
appointment to a position in a state office, agency, commission, or
board for a term of stated and limited duration by the governor and
council or requires approval or confirmation of such an appointment by
the governor and council, such statute shall be construed, unless it
shall be exempted from the application of this section by language
expressly referring to this section, to provide:
                                             
 I. That the language in such statute creating a term of stated and
limited duration shall create a term of the position, not of the
appointee thereto, with the first such term, to a position to which no
appointment has previously been made, to commence on the date of such
appointment, confirmation or approval by the governor and council.
                                             
 II. That a vacancy in such position shall be filled for the
unexpired term.
                                             
 III. (a) That any commissioner or agency head of a department, as
defined in RSA 21-G:5, VI, who is an unclassified employee of the state,
and appointed to such position, shall serve for the appropriate term or
unexpired portion thereof. The commissioner or agency head may serve
beyond the appointed term or unexpired portion thereof with the written
authorization of the governor, provided that such service shall not
extend beyond 6 months. This subparagraph shall also apply to the
adjutant general and the attorney general, and to appointees to the
liquor commission, the lottery commission, and the public utilities
commission.
                                             
 (b) That any other appointee to such position shall serve for the
appropriate term or unexpired portion thereof and until a successor is
appointed and qualified.
                                             
 IV. That when an appointment is made and when a vacancy is filled,
one of the factors which may be taken into consideration shall be the
gender balance in the population which is served or regulated by the
state office, agency, commission, or board, so that when the position is
filled, it may result in a state office, agency, commission, or board
which reflects that gender balance.

**Source.** 1973, 425:1. 1992, 56:1. 2007, 156:1. 2008, 25:1. 2011,
131:2, eff. Aug. 6, 2011. 2015, 276:118, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 21:34

 **21:34 Filling Vacancy. –** The term "vacancy shall be filled for
the unexpired term'', when used in connection with appointments to the
state service by the governor and council shall be construed to mean
that the successor shall be commissioned for a term equal in length to
the unexpired balance of the term of his predecessor and where an
appointee has held over beyond the expiration date of his commission, so
far as the appointment of a successor is concerned, a vacancy shall be
deemed to have been created.

**Source.** 1943, 39:1, eff. Mar. 3, 1943.

### Section 21:34-a

 **21:34-a Farm, Agriculture, Farming. –**
                                             
 I. The word "farm'' means any land, buildings, or structures on or
in which agriculture and farming activities are carried out or conducted
and shall include the residence or residences of owners, occupants, or
employees located on such land. Structures shall include all farm
outbuildings used in the care of livestock, and in the production and
storage of fruit, vegetables, or nursery stock; in the production of
maple syrup; greenhouses for the production of annual or perennial
plants; and any other structures used in operations named in paragraph
II of this section.
                                             
 II. The words "agriculture'' and "farming'' mean all operations of a
farm, including:
                                             
 (a)(1) The cultivation, conservation, and tillage of the soil.
                                             
 (2) The storage, use of, and spreading of commercial
fertilizer, lime, wood ash, sawdust, compost, animal manure, septage,
and, where permitted by municipal and state rules and regulations, other
lawful soil amendments.
                                             
 (3) The use of and application of agricultural chemicals.
                                             
 (4) The raising and sale of livestock which shall include but
not be limited to all beef and dairy cattle, steer, oxen, goats, sheep,
swine, horses, mules or other equidae, as well as domesticated strains
of buffalo, bison, llamas, alpacas, emus, ostriches, poultry, rabbits,
yaks, elk (Cervus canadensis), fallow deer (Dama dama), red deer (Cervus
elephus), and reindeer (Rangifer tarandus).
                                             
 (5) The breeding, boarding, raising, training, riding
instruction, and selling of equines.
                                             
 (6) The commercial raising, harvesting, and sale of fresh
water fish or other aquaculture products.
                                             
 (7) The raising, breeding, or sale of poultry or game birds.
                                             
 (8) The raising of bees.
                                             
 (9) The raising, breeding, or sale of domesticated strains of
fur-bearing animals.
                                             
 (10) The production of greenhouse crops.
                                             
 (11) The production, cultivation, growing, harvesting, and
sale of any agricultural, floricultural, viticultural, forestry, or
horticultural crops including, but not limited to, berries, herbs,
honey, maple syrup, fruit, vegetables, tree fruit, grapes, flowers,
seeds, grasses, nursery stock, sod, trees and tree products, Christmas
trees grown as part of a commercial Christmas tree operation, trees
grown for short rotation tree fiber, compost, or any other plant that
can be legally grown and harvested extensively for profit or
subsistence.
                                             
 (b) Any practice on the farm incident to, or in conjunction with
such farming operations, including, but not necessarily restricted to:
                                             
 (1) Preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market,
or to carriers for transportation to market of any products or materials
from the farm.
                                             
 (2) The transportation to the farm of supplies and materials.
                                             
 (3) The transportation of farm workers.
                                             
 (4) Forestry or lumbering operations.
                                             
 (5) The marketing or selling at wholesale or retail, of any
products from the farm, on-site and off-site, where not prohibited by
local regulations. Marketing includes agritourism, which means
attracting visitors to a farm to attend events and activities that are
accessory uses to the primary farm operation, including, but not limited
to, eating a meal, making overnight stays, enjoyment of the farm
environment, education about farm operations, or active involvement in
the activity of the farm.
                                             
 (6) Irrigation of growing crops from private water supplies or
public water supplies where not prohibited by state or local rule or
regulation.
                                             
 (7) The use of dogs for herding, working, or guarding
livestock, as defined in RSA 21:34-a, II(a)(4).
                                             
 (8) The production and storage of compost and the materials
necessary to produce compost, whether such materials originate, in whole
or in part, from operations of the farm.
                                             
 III. A farm roadside stand shall remain an agricultural operation
and not be considered commercial, provided that at least 35 percent of
the product sales in dollar volume is attributable to products produced
on the farm or farms of the stand owner.
                                             
 IV. Practices on the farm shall include technologies recommended
from time to time by the university of New Hampshire cooperative
extension, the New Hampshire department of agriculture, markets, and
food, and appropriate agencies of the United States Department of
Agriculture.
                                             
 V. The term "farmers' market'' means an event or series of events at
which 2 or more vendors of agricultural commodities gather for purposes
of offering for sale such commodities to the public. Commodities offered
for sale must include, but are not limited to, products of agriculture,
as defined in paragraphs I-IV. "Farmers' market'' shall not include any
event held upon any premises owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by
any individual vendor selling therein.
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1961, 140:1. 1977, 95:1. 1979, 60:1. 1985, 6:1. 1997, 250:1.
1999, 191:2. 2005, 107:1. 2006, 11:5; 326:1. 2007, 157:1. 2008, 8:1,
eff. July 4, 2008. 2014, 97:2, eff. Aug. 10, 2014. 2016, 267:1, 6, eff.
June 16, 2016.

### Section 21:35

 **21:35 Time, How Reckoned; Days Included and Excluded. –**
                                             
 I. Except where specifically stated to the contrary, when a period
or limit of time is to be reckoned from a day or date, that day or date
shall be excluded from and the day on which an act should occur shall be
included in the computation of the period or limit of time.
                                             
 II. If a statute specifies a date for filing documents or paying
fees and the specified date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday, the document or fee shall be deemed timely filed if it is
received by the next business day.

**Source.** RS 1:25. CS 1:25. GS 1:33. GL 1:32. PS 2:34. PL 2:34. RL
7:34. RSA 21:35. 1994, 348:1. 2008, 11:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 21:36

 **21:36 Standard Time. –** The standard time within the state,
except as hereinafter provided, shall be based on the mean astronomical
time of the seventy-fifth degree of longitude west from Greenwich, known
and designated by the federal statute as "Eastern Standard Time.'' At 2
o'clock ante-meridian of the second Sunday in March of each year, the
standard time in this state shall be advanced one hour, at 2 o'clock
ante-meridian of the first Sunday in November of each year, the standard
time in this state shall, by the retarding of one hour, be made to
coincide with the astronomical time hereinbefore described as Eastern
Standard Time, so that between the second Sunday in March at 2 o'clock
ante-meridian and the first Sunday in November at 2 o'clock
ante-meridian in each year the standard time in this state shall be one
hour in advance of the United States Standard Time. In all laws,
statutes, orders, decrees, rules, and regulations relating to the time
of performance by any officer or department of this state, or of any
county, city, town, or district thereof, or relating to the time in
which any rights accrue or determine, or within which any act shall or
shall not be performed by any person subject to the jurisdiction of this
state, or of any county, city, town, or district thereof, and in all
contracts or choses in action made or to be performed in this state, it
shall be understood and intended that the time shall be as set forth in
this section.

**Source.** 1921, 15:1. 1923, 105:1, 2. PL 42:76. 1937, 95:1. RL 51:95.
1954, 2:4. RSA 21:36. 1987, 10:1. 2011, 103:1, eff. July 30, 2011.

### Section 21:37

 **21:37 Effect of Repeal. –** The repeal of an act shall in no case
affect any act done, or any right accruing, accrued, acquired, or
established, or any suit or proceeding had or commenced in any civil
case, before the time when repeal shall take effect.

**Source.** RS 1:26. CS 1:26. GS 1:34. GL 1:33. PS 2:35. PL 2:35. RL
7:35.

### Section 21:38

 **21:38 Pending Prosecution, Etc. –** No suit or prosecution,
pending at the time of the repeal of any act, for any offense committed
or for the recovery of a penalty or forfeiture incurred under the act so
repealed, shall be affected by such repeal.

**Source.** RS 1:27. CS 1:27. GS 1:35. GL 1:34. PS 2:36. PL 2:36. RL
7:36.

### Section 21:39

 **21:39 No Revival. –** The repeal of an act shall not revive any
other act which has been repealed.

**Source.** RS 1:28. CS 1:28. GS 1:36. GL 1:35. PS 2:37. PL 2:37. RL
7:37.

### Section 21:40

 **21:40 When Laws Take Effect. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1957, 12:2, eff. Feb.
15, 1957.
                                             ]

### Section 21:41

 **21:41 Declaration of Purpose. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 278:3, eff.
Aug. 1, 1983.
                                             ]

### Section 21:42

 **21:42 Effective Dates. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 278:3, eff. Aug. 1,
1983.
                                             ]

### Section 21:43

 **21:43 Security Interests. –** Statutes using the words "pledge'',
"mortgage'', "conditional sale'', "lien'', "assignment'' and like terms
in referring to a security interest in personal property shall also
apply to a corresponding type of security interest under RSA 382-A.

**Source.** 1959, 247:2(II) Commercial Code, eff. July 1, 1961.

### Section 21:44

 **21:44 Age of Majority; Adults. –** Notwithstanding any provision
of law to the contrary, the words "adult'', "majority'', "age of
majority'', "full age or lawful age'', and all other terms of referring
to those persons who are to be considered adults, shall mean those
persons who have attained the age of 18 years.

**Source.** 1973, 72:72, eff. June 3, 1973.

### Section 21:45

 **21:45 "Bylaw'' or "Ordinance''. –** The term "bylaw'' when used in
reference to legislative action taken by a city, town, county or village
district shall have the same meaning as an ordinance and shall be
subject to the same procedures for enactment.

**Source.** 1975, 300:1, eff. Aug. 6, 1975.

### Section 21:46

 **21:46 Mobile Homes. –** The words "mobile home'' shall mean
manufactured housing as defined by RSA 674:31.

**Source.** 1983, 230:2, eff. Aug. 17, 1983.

### Section 21:47

 **21:47 Legislative Body. –** When used to refer to a municipality,
and in the absence of applicable chapter or subdivision definitions, the
term "legislative body'' shall mean a town meeting, school district
meeting, village district meeting, city or town council, mayor and
council, mayor and board of aldermen, or, when used to refer to
unincorporated towns or unorganized places, or both, the county
convention.

**Source.** 1989, 205:1, eff. July 21, 1989.

### Section 21:48

 **21:48 Governing Body. –** When used to refer to a municipality,
and in the absence of applicable chapter or subdivision definitions, the
term "governing body'' shall mean the board of selectmen in a town, the
board of aldermen or council in a city or town with a town council, the
school board in a school district or the village district commissioners
in a village district, or when used to refer to unincorporated towns or
unorganized places, or both, the county commissioners.

**Source.** 1989, 205:1, eff. July 21, 1989.

### Section 21:49

 **21:49 Sexual Orientation. –** "Sexual orientation'' means having
or being perceived as having an orientation for heterosexuality,
bisexuality, or homosexuality. This definition is intended to describe
the status of persons and does not render lawful any conduct prohibited
by the criminal laws of this state or impose any duty on a religious
organization. This definition does not confer legislative approval of
such status, but is intended to assure the basic rights afforded under
New Hampshire law.

**Source.** 1997, 108:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 21:50

 **21:50 Veteran; Armed Forces; Active Duty; Service-Connected
Injury, Illness, or Disability. –**
                                             
 I. (a) "Veteran'' means any person who:
                                             
 (1) Served in the United States armed forces for more than 4
years and continues to serve; or
                                             
 (2) Has been discharged or released from duty in the United
States armed forces with:
                                             
 (A) An honorable discharge; or
                                             
 (B) An uncharacterized discharge based on a
service-connected injury, illness, or disability.
                                             
 (b) The following documents may be used to establish an
individual's status as a veteran:
                                             
 (1) DD Form 214 from any branch of the armed forces.
                                             
 (2) DD Form 215 from any branch of the armed forces.
                                             
 (3) DD Form 217 from any branch of the armed forces.
                                             
 (4) DD Form 2 (Retired).
                                             
 (5) WD AGO Form 53-55 from the United States Army.
                                             
 (6) WD AGO Form 53-98 from the United States Army.
                                             
 (7) WD AGO Form 755 from the United States Army.
                                             
 (8) NAVPERS Form 553 from the United States Navy.
                                             
 (9) NAVPERS Form 554 from the United States Navy.
                                             
 (10) NAVPERS Form 660 from the United States Navy.
                                             
 (11) NAVPERS Form 661 from the United States Navy.
                                             
 (12) NAVMC Form 70-PD from the United States Marine Corps.
                                             
 (13) NAVMC Form 78-PD from the United States Marine Corps.
                                             
 (14) NAVCG Form 2510 from the United States Coast Guard.
                                             
 (15) NGB Form 22 from the National Guard.
                                             
 (16) GSA Form 6954 from the National Archives.
                                             
 (17) NA Form 13038 from the National Archives.
                                             
 (18) NA Form 13041 from the National Archives.
                                             
 (19) Verification of Service letter from the Department of
Veterans Affairs.
                                             
 (20) Summary of Military Service Record from the New Hampshire
Korean War Bonus application.
                                             
 (21) Notarized statement of service letter signed by the
individual's commanding officer or administrative officer.
                                             
 (22) Completed DD FORM 4/2, October 2007 from the National
Guard.
                                             
 (23) Completed DD FORM 1300, February 2011.
                                             
 (24) Other documents approved by the director, state office of
veterans services.
                                             
 II. "Armed forces'' means the United States Army, Army Reserve,
Navy, Naval Reserve, Marine Corps, Marine Corps Reserve, Air Force, Air
Force Reserve, Coast Guard, Coast Guard Reserve, Army National Guard,
and the Air National Guard. "Armed forces'' also includes other
components, but is limited to those components and active duty periods
described in 38 C.F.R. 3.7.
                                             
 III. "Active duty'' means full-time duty as an enlisted member, or
as a commissioned or warrant officer, in any branch of the armed
forces.
                                             
 IV. "Service-connected injury or illness or disability'' means an
injury, illness or disability incurred or aggravated while in the line
of duty in the armed forces of the United States.

**Source.** 2004, 89:1. 2010, 119:7, eff. July 31, 2010. 2013, 254:1,
eff. July 24, 2013.

### Section 21:51

 **21:51 Petition. –** The word "petition'' when used in connection
with the equity jurisdiction of the superior court, and referring to a
document filed with the court, shall mean complaint, and "petitioner''
shall mean plaintiff.

**Source.** 2014, 204:1, eff. July 11, 2014.

### Section 21:52

 **21:52 Under Oath. –** The words "under oath'' when used in
connection with a document to be filed with the court shall be satisfied
by electronic signature "under the penalty of perjury'' if the document
is filed with the court electronically.

**Source.** 2015, 22:1, eff. May 5, 2015.
