---
title: 'CHAPTER 3-C OFFICIAL STATE LANGUAGE'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 3-C
                                             
OFFICIAL STATE LANGUAGE
-----------------------

### Section 3-C:1

 **3-C:1 Official State Language. –**
                                             
 I. The official language of the state of New Hampshire shall be
English. English is designated as the language of all official public
documents and records, and of all public proceedings and nonpublic
sessions.
                                             
 II. For the purposes of this chapter, "official public documents and
records'' are all documents officially compiled, published, or recorded
by the state.
                                             
 III. For the purposes of this chapter, "public proceedings and
nonpublic sessions'' mean those proceedings and sessions as defined in
RSA 91-A, and includes the information recorded at such proceedings and
sessions.

**Source.** 1995, 157:1, eff. July 31, 1995.

### Section 3-C:2

 **3-C:2 Exceptions. –** The provisions of this chapter shall not
apply:
                                             
 I. To all public proceedings between the state of New Hampshire and
the province of Quebec when, in the opinion of the state administrator
involved in such proceedings, it may be necessary to conduct such
proceedings between Quebec and New Hampshire wholly or partially in
French, and to use official public documents and records during the
public proceedings, which are written wholly or partially in French.
                                             
 II. To instruction in foreign language courses, or other
requirements of the state university system.
                                             
 III. To instruction designed to aid students with limited English in
a timely transition and integration into the general education system.
                                             
 IV. To the promotion of international commerce, tourism, and
sporting events.
                                             
 V. When deemed to interfere with needs of the justice system.
                                             
 VI. When the public good, public safety, health, or emergency
services require the use of other languages.
                                             
 VII. When expert testimony or witnesses may require a language other
than English; provided, however, that for purposes of deliberation,
decision making, or recordkeeping, the official version of such
testimony or commentary shall be the officially translated
English-language version.

**Source.** 1995, 157:1, eff. July 31, 1995.

### Section 3-C:3

 **3-C:3 Employment. –** No person shall be denied employment with
the state or with any political subdivision of the state based solely
upon that person's lack of facility in a foreign language, except when
related to bona fide job needs reflected in the exceptions listed in RSA
3-C:2.

**Source.** 1995, 157:1, eff. July 31, 1995.

### Section 3-C:4

 **3-C:4 Construction. –** This chapter shall not be construed in any
way to infringe on the rights of citizens under the state constitution
or the constitution of the United States in the use of language in
activities or functions conducted in the private sector. No agency or
officer of the state or of any political subdivision of the state shall
place any restrictions or requirements regarding language usage for
businesses operating in the private sector other than in official
documents, forms, submissions, or other communications directed to
governmental agencies and officers, which communications shall be in
English as recognized in this chapter.

**Source.** 1995, 157:1, eff. July 31, 1995.
