---
title: 'CHAPTER 3-E DISPLAY OF THE FLAG OF THE UNITED STATES'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 3-E
                                             
DISPLAY OF THE FLAG OF THE UNITED STATES
----------------------------------------

### Section 3-E:1

 **3-E:1 United States Flag; Display. –** The flag of the United
States of America shall be displayed in state facilities in accordance
with federal law. United States flags used by the military for military
purposes shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 2000, 203:1, eff. July 29, 2000.

### Section 3-E:2

 **3-E:2 Flag Code for New Hampshire. –**
                                             
 I. The United States flag code, codified at 4 U.S.C. sections 1
through 10, as amended, and the provisions of this chapter are hereby
adopted as the flag code for the state of New Hampshire. The purpose of
the flag code shall be to provide uniform guidelines for the display,
use, and handling of the United States flag.
                                             
 II. In addition to occasions for display of the flag at half staff
provided in the federal law:
                                             
 (a) The governor shall order the flag to be flown at half staff
in the event of the death of any member of the armed forces who dies in
combat and who is a resident of New Hampshire. The flag shall be flown
at half staff the day of and the day after the service member's burial.
                                             
 (b) The governor shall issue a standing order that when any
fallen service member is on a military reservation within the state of
New Hampshire, that reservation will automatically fly the United States
flag at half staff until the fallen service member is no longer within
the confines of the military reservation.

**Source.** 2011, 127:1, eff. June 6, 2011.

### Section 3-E:3

 **3-E:3 Flag Display. –** No rule, ordinance, or agreement of any
kind by a person, municipality, or other entity shall prohibit the
flying of the United States flag from a private residence owned, rented,
or used by a private person. Reasonable restrictions regarding the size
of the flag or the manner in which the flag is displayed may be adopted
and enforced.

**Source.** 2011, 127:1, eff. June 6, 2011.
