---
title: 'CHAPTER 4-C OFFICE OF ENERGY AND PLANNING'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 4-C
                                             
OFFICE OF ENERGY AND PLANNING
-----------------------------

### Section 4-C:1

 **4-C:1 Establishment; General Duties and Responsibilities. –**
                                             
 I. There is established the office of energy and planning within the
office of the governor. The office of energy and planning shall be under
the supervision and direction of the governor or the governor's
designee. The governor's designee shall be known as the director of the
office of energy and planning.
                                             
 II. The office of energy and planning shall:
                                             
 (a) Plan for the orderly development of the state and the wise
management of the state's resources.
                                             
 (b) Compile, analyze, and disseminate data, information, and
research services as necessary to advance the welfare of the state.
                                             
 (c) Encourage and assist planning, growth management, and
development activities of cities and towns and groups of cities and
towns with the purpose of encouraging smart growth.
                                             
 (d) Encourage the coordination and correlation of state planning
by agencies of state government.
                                             
 (e) Participate in interstate, regional, and national planning
efforts.
                                             
 (f) Administer federal and state grant-in-aid programs assigned
to the office by statute or executive order.
                                             
 (g) Participate and advise in matters of land use planning
regarding water resources and floodplain management.
                                             
 (h) Take a leadership role in encouraging smart growth and
preserving farmland, open space land, and traditional village centers.
                                             
 (i) Administer the following programs: the statewide
comprehensive outdoor recreation plan, the national flood insurance
program, the land conservation investment program, fuel assistance
contracts, and weatherization contracts. The office shall employ
necessary personnel to administer these programs. In administering fuel
assistance and weatherization contracts, the office shall ensure that
when an individual applies for fuel assistance or weatherization, the
individual shall be provided with application forms and information
about the Link-Up New Hampshire and Lifeline Telephone Assistance
programs, and shall be provided assistance in applying for these
programs.
                                             
 (j) Perform such other duties as the governor may assign.

**Source.** 1987, 283:3. 1989, 263:10. 1990, 118:1. 1996, 251:4. 2000,
292:1. 2003, 319:10. 2004, 257:44. 2005, 20:3. 2007, 263:173. 2011,
224:110, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 4-C:2

 **4-C:2 State Development Plan. –**
                                             
 I. The office of energy and planning, under the direction of the
governor, shall:
                                             
 (a) Assist the governor in preparing, publishing, and revising
the comprehensive development plan required under RSA 9-A.
                                             
 (b) Coordinate and monitor the planning efforts of various state
agencies and departments to ensure that program plans published by such
agencies are consistent with the policies and priorities established in
the comprehensive development plan.
                                             
 (c) Coordinate and monitor the planning efforts of the regional
planning commissions to ensure that the plans published by the
commissions are consistent, to the extent practical, with the policies
and priorities established in the state development plan.
                                             
 II. In preparing the state development plan, the office of energy
and planning shall consult with the chief executive officers of the
various departments and agencies of state government. The office shall
also consult with officials of regional planning commissions and
regional and local planning and development agencies, local officials,
representatives of the business and environmental community, and the
general public.
                                             
 III. All state agencies and departments shall provide the office of
energy and planning with information and assistance as required by the
office to fulfill its responsibilities under RSA 4-C:2, I. The office
shall maintain the confidentiality of any information which is protected
by law.

**Source.** 1987, 283:3. 2002, 229:2, 3. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44.
2011, 224:111, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 4-C:3

 **4-C:3 Data and Information Services. –** The office of energy and
planning shall:
                                             
 I. Gather, tabulate, and periodically publish information on the
location and pace of development throughout the state, including, but
not limited to, population, housing, and building permit data.
                                             
 II. Initiate data coordination procedures as the state agency
responsible for coordinating data collection and dissemination among the
state, the private sector, and the various political subdivisions.
                                             
 III. Gather information for storage in a data bank concerning the
data which is currently available within all state agencies. This data
shall be used to provide information which is useful in measuring growth
and its impact and for statewide planning purposes in general. The data
available for dissemination shall include, but shall not be limited to,
information for determining future demands for state services and
demographic and economic statistics. Any other state agency or
department which initiates a data collection program shall inform the
office of energy and planning of its efforts so that the office may
utilize that information for planning purposes in its dissemination
program.
                                             
 IV. Cooperate with the department of environmental services in
identifying potential sites for hazardous waste facilities.
                                             
 V. Develop and maintain a computerized geographic information system
in support of state, regional, or local planning and management
activities.
                                             
 VI. Cooperate with the Bureau of the Census and other federal
agencies with the objective of improving access to the statistical
products, data, and information of the federal government.
                                             
 VII. Annually estimate the resident population for all cities and
towns of the state pursuant to RSA 78-A:25.

**Source.** 1987, 283:3. 1996, 228:108. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44, eff.
July 1, 2004.

### Section 4-C:4

 **4-C:4 Coordinator of Federal Funds. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 224:112,
eff. July 1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 4-C:5

 **4-C:5 Rulemaking Authority. –** The director of the office of
energy and planning shall adopt rules, as necessary, under RSA 541-A,
establishing procedures for grant programs administered by the office.
These rules shall be adopted for all state grant programs administered
by the office in which the office has authority to establish
requirements or procedures or interpret state statutes. These rules
shall include, as appropriate:
                                             
 I. Application or grant distribution procedures.
                                             
 II. Criteria and procedures for evaluating applications.
                                             
 III. Procedures for administration of funds by grantees.
                                             
 IV. Monitoring and report procedures.
                                             
 V. Appeal procedures for parties dissatisfied with grant decisions.

**Source.** 1987, 283:3. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44. 2011, 224:114, eff.
July 1, 2011.

### Section 4-C:5-a

 **4-C:5-a Model Ordinance. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 224:115, I, eff.
July 1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 4-C:6

 **4-C:6 Coordination. –**
                                             
 I. The office of energy and planning shall formulate policies and
plans for consideration by the governor which serve to integrate and
coordinate resource and development activities affecting more than one
state agency, level of government, or governmental function. Nothing in
this paragraph shall be construed to grant the governor any additional
authority to implement such plans beyond that which has been granted to
him under the constitution and other laws of this state. Such activities
may include, but shall not be limited to, the following subject areas:
                                             
 (a) Water resources.
                                             
 (b) Transportation.
                                             
 (c) Recreation and natural resources.
                                             
 (d) Solid waste and hazardous waste management.
                                             
 (e) Off-shore, coastal, and estuarine resources.
                                             
 (f) Housing.
                                             
 (g) Economic development.
                                             
 (h) Energy.
                                             
 (i) Shoreland protection.
                                             
 (j) Smart growth.
                                             
 II. The director of the office of energy and planning or his
designee shall promote coordination of state agency planning and
management activities through participation in the deliberations of the
following statutory bodies:
                                             
 (a) Council on resources and development as established in RSA
162-C:1;
                                             
 (b) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (c) Wetlands council as established in RSA 21-O:5-a;
                                             
 (d) Site evaluation committee as established in RSA 162-H:3;
                                             
 (e) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (f) Agricultural lands preservation committee as established in
RSA 432:19.

**Source.** 1987, 283:3. 1989, 339:3. 1991, 303:2. 1996, 228:2; 296:2.
1998, 264:5. 2000, 292:3. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44, eff. July 1, 2004.
2014, 217:28, I, eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 67:3, eff. Aug. 1, 2015.

Reports on Economic Development Loans and Grants
------------------------------------------------

### Section 4-C:6-a

 **4-C:6-a Reports on Economic Development Program Loans and Grants.
–** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 224:115, II, eff. July 1, 2011.
                                             ]

Regional and Municipal Assistance
---------------------------------

### Section 4-C:7

 **4-C:7 Program Established. –** The director shall establish a
program of regional and municipal assistance within the office of energy
and planning. This program shall coordinate state, regional, and local
planning efforts with the goal of assuring delivery of efficient and
effective assistance to local governments in areas related to growth
management and resource protection.

**Source.** 1987, 283:3. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 4-C:8

 **4-C:8 Responsibilities for Assistance. –** The office of energy
and planning shall:
                                             
 I. Provide technical assistance and, within the limits of biennial
legislative appropriations, financial grants to regional planning
commissions established under RSA 36:45-36:53 in support of:
                                             
 (a) Planning assistance to local units of government.
                                             
 (b) Preparation of regional plans.
                                             
 (c) Contributions to and coordination with statewide planning and
management activities, including the formulation and updating of the
comprehensive state development plan prepared pursuant to RSA 4-C:2.
                                             
 II. As requested and in cooperation with regional planning
commissions, provide technical assistance and information in support of
the planning and growth management efforts of local units of government,
including training requested under RSA 673:3-a. The office shall
encourage municipalities to first seek assistance from established
regional planning commissions.
                                             
 III. Provide computer interface capability among and between each
regional planning commission, the office of energy and planning, and
state data collection and storage sources. The computer interface
capability shall be used by regional planning commissions to respond to
municipal requests for assistance in the preparation and amending of
master plans and in the evaluation of municipal infrastructure needs.
The computer interface capability shall also be used by regional
planning commissions to develop and update regional master plans, as
provided in RSA 36:47. The computer equipment used for the purposes of
this paragraph shall be compatible and able to interface with the office
of energy and planning's geographic information system, as well as with
other similar state computerized data collection and storage sources.
                                             
 IV. Provide technical assistance and information to municipalities
with the cooperation of other state and regional planning agencies in
the following areas:
                                             
 (a) Use and application of geographic data available in the
state's geographic information system (GIS) for local planning and
growth management purposes.
                                             
 (b) Recommending standard procedures for the establishment of
accurate, large-scale base mapping to support municipal administrative
functions such as tax assessment, public facility management and
engineering.

**Source.** 1987, 283:3. 1988, 102:1. 1989, 366:2. 2003, 319:11. 2004,
257:44, 45, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 4-C:9

 **4-C:9 Coordination at State Level. –** The office of energy and
planning shall coordinate efforts by state agencies to provide technical
assistance to municipal governments in areas related to growth
management and resource protection.

**Source.** 1987, 283:3. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 4-C:9-a

 **4-C:9-a Revolving Funds. –** In order to enhance its ability to
provide education and training assistance to municipalities and regional
agencies, the following nonlapsing revolving funds, which shall not
exceed 
                                             $20,000 on June 30 of each year, shall be established in the
office of energy and planning:
                                             
 I. A revolving fund known as the publications revolving fund.
                                             
 (a) The moneys in this fund shall be used for the purposes of
printing materials for distribution. A reasonable charge shall be
established for each copy of a document. This charge shall be only in
the amount necessary to pay the cost of producing such document.
                                             
 (b) The amount in the nonlapsing publications revolving fund
shall not exceed 
                                             $20,000, on June 30 of each year and any amounts in
excess of 
                                             $20,000 on June 30 of each year shall be deposited in the
general fund as unrestricted revenue.
                                             
 II. A revolving fund known as the municipal and regional training
fund.
                                             
 (a) The moneys in this fund shall be used for the purpose of
providing training to local and regional officials. A reasonable charge
shall be established for such training. This charge shall be fixed to
reflect the cost of payments to experts to provide the training, the
cost of written training material, rental of facilities, advertising and
other associated costs. Such training shall be conducted in a
geographically dispersed manner and scheduled with the convenience of
part-time officials in mind.
                                             
 (b) The amount in the nonlapsing municipal and regional training
revolving fund shall not exceed 
                                             $20,000 on June 30 of each year and any
amounts in excess of 
                                             $20,000 on June 30 of each year shall be deposited
in the general fund as unrestricted revenue.

**Source.** 1989, 245:1. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 4-C:10

 **4-C:10 Contact Point. –** The office of energy and planning shall
serve as the state's point of contact for local and regional officials
seeking assistance from the state on growth management and resources
protection matters.

**Source.** 1987, 283:3. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44, eff. July 1, 2004.

Community Development Block Grants
----------------------------------

### Section 4-C:11-18

 **4-C:11 to 4-C:18 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2003, 319:15, eff. July
1, 2003.
                                             ]

Water Protection Assistance Program
-----------------------------------

### Section 4-C:19-23

 **4-C:19 to 4-C:23 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 224:117, I, eff.
July 1, 2011.
                                             ]

Housing and Conservation Planning Program
-----------------------------------------

### Section 4-C:24-28

 **4-C:24 to 4-C:28 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 224:119, eff. July
1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 4-C:29

 **4-C:29 Housing and Conservation Planning Program Advisory Board
Established. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 368:1(37), eff. Dec. 31, 2010.
                                             ]

### Section 4-C:30

 **4-C:30 Program Principles. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 224:119, eff. July
1, 2011.
                                             ]
