---
title: 'CHAPTER 4-F NEW HAMPSHIRE GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM COMMITTEE'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 4-F
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM COMMITTEE
-----------------------------------------------------

### Section 4-F:1

 **4-F:1 Geographic Information System (GIS) Committee Established.
–**
                                             
 I. There is established a New Hampshire geographic information
system (GIS) committee.
                                             
 II. The members of the committee shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) The commissioner or agency head of each of the following
state agencies, or designee:
                                             
 (1) Adjutant general.
                                             
 (2) Department of agriculture, markets and food.
                                             
 (3) Department of corrections.
                                             
 (4) Department of cultural resources.
                                             
 (5) Department of education.
                                             
 (6) Office of energy and planning.
                                             
 (7) Department of environmental services.
                                             
 (8) Fish and game department.
                                             
 (9) Department of health and human services.
                                             
 (10) Department of information technology.
                                             
 (11) Department of resources and economic development.
                                             
 (12) Department of revenue administration.
                                             
 (13) Department of safety.
                                             
 (14) Department of transportation.
                                             
 (b) The director of the university of New Hampshire's
geographically referenced analysis and information transfer (GRANIT)
system, or designee.
                                             
 (c) A municipal GIS manager, appointed by the New Hampshire
Municipal Association.
                                             
 (d) A representative from the New Hampshire Association of
Regional Planning Commissions.
                                             
 (e) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. All entities represented on the committee shall share access to
geospatial data and resources with the exception of information that is
nonpublic, is statutorily restricted, or is part of a criminal
investigation. Shared information shall be used exclusively for the
benefit of the state, the state's political subdivisions, and other
relevant parties. No entity represented on the committee shall use data
or resources obtained from another entity represented on the committee
for pecuniary gain.
                                             
 IV. The committee shall review the use, development, and
coordination of geospatial data and resources by state agencies and
municipal governments and shall consider the need for central
coordination, storage, and distribution of such data and resources, and
suggest an appropriate response. The committee shall also consider GIS
activities at public and semi-public agencies and identify avenues where
legislation may further efficiencies through enhanced cooperation.
                                             
 V. The first meeting of the committee shall be called by the
commissioner of the department of information technology, or designee,
and shall be held within 45 days of the effective date of this section.
The members of the committee shall elect a chairperson from among the
members at the first meeting and every 2 years thereafter. Nine members
of the committee shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 VI. The committee shall report annually, beginning November 1, 2016,
to the speaker of the house of representatives, the president of the
senate, and the governor, on or before November 1. The reports shall
describe the activities and findings of the committee and any
recommendations for proposed legislation.

**Source.** 2016, 73:2, eff. May 19, 2016; 162:3, eff. May 19, 2016 at
12:01 a.m.
