---
title: CHAPTER 4 POWERS OF THE GOVERNOR AND COUNCIL IN CERTAIN CASES
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 4
                                             
POWERS OF THE GOVERNOR AND COUNCIL IN CERTAIN CASES
---------------------------------------------------

### Section 4:1

 **4:1 Removal of Public Officials for Cause. –** No state official
who is not a classified employee shall be discharged or removed except
for malfeasance, misfeasance, inefficiency in office, incapacity or
unfitness to perform assigned duties, or for the good of the department,
agency, or institution to which such official is assigned, according to
the procedures set out in this section, unless otherwise provided by
law.
                                             
 I. The attorney general, the governor, any member of the executive
council, or the appointing authority of such official, may petition the
governor and council for the removal of such official setting forth the
grounds and reasons therefor.
                                             
 II. Upon receipt of a petition, the governor and council, by vote of
3 or more members of the executive council in concurrence with the
governor shall accept the petition and schedule a hearing. The state
official shall receive notice of the hearing at least 45 days prior to
the hearing date.
                                             
 III. The governor and council shall conduct a hearing in accordance
with this section. Upon conclusion of the hearing, a vote of 3 or more
council members, in concurrence with the governor, shall be required to
remove the state official from office. The governor and council shall
provide written findings, including a time frame for removal, in support
of a decision to remove an official from office. Failure to obtain the
required vote and concurrence of the governor shall result in the
dismissal of the petition.
                                             
 IV. The governor and council shall set a reasonable rate for the
legal fees of parties. However, no official shall be entitled to have
any legal fees paid by the state unless the attorney general determines
that he or she is the prevailing party.
                                             
 V. The governor and council shall provide copies of their written
findings to counsel for the parties involved, or to the parties
themselves, if not represented by counsel.
                                             
 VI. A party may appeal the order of the governor and council by
filing a petition in the superior court within 30 days of the date of
the order.

**Source.** 1947, 231:1. 1950, part 25:3. RSA 4:1. 1978, 55:3. 1981,
179:1. 2001, 192:1, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 4:2

 **4:2 Vacating Office of Trustee of State Institution. –** Whenever
the trustee of any state institution shall have been absent from 3
consecutive meetings of the board of which he is a member, the governor
and council may, after investigation of the cause of such absence, in
their discretion declare the office of such trustee vacant, and
thereupon his commission shall be automatically revoked. The vacancy
shall then be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as by law
provided for an original appointment.

**Source.** 1931, 108:1. RL 27:3.

### Section 4:3

 **4:3 Anticipation of Vacancies. –** The governor and council may
anticipate by not more than 90 days, and fill any vacancy to occur in
any office during their term of office which they have power to fill.

**Source.** 1844, 90:1. CS 16:1. GS 18:2. GL 19:2. PS 20:2. PL 19:2. RL
27:2.

### Section 4:4

 **4:4 Adjustment of Terms of Office. –** In cases where the terms of
office of the members of any permanent state board, commission or
committee do not expire in successive years, the governor, with the
advice and consent of the council may in making any appointment or
filling any vacancy to such office, appoint any person for a period less
than the full term in order to adjust the commissions of each member so
that their terms of office will expire in successive years.

**Source.** 1943, 39:2, eff. Mar. 3, 1943.

### Section 4:5

 **4:5 Temporary Department Heads. –** In case of the temporary
inability, by reason of illness or otherwise, of the head of any state
department to perform his duties, where the law does not designate or
make other provision for the appointment of an officer to perform such
duties, the governor, with the advice and consent of the council, may
appoint a person to act in his stead, and the person thus appointed
shall have the powers and perform the duties of such head of department
for such time, for such compensation, and subject to such qualifications
as the governor and council may from time to time deem expedient.

**Source.** 1917, 175:1. PL 19:12. RL 27:18.

### Section 4:6

 **4:6 Assignment of Rooms to Departments. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985,
399:24, I, eff. July 1, 1985.
                                             ]

### Section 4:6-a

 **4:6-a Office Space; Secretary of State. –** Notwithstanding any
other provision of law to the contrary, the following shall be assigned
for use by the secretary of state: rooms numbered 203 through 206,
inclusive, on the second floor of the state house. The secretary of
state may have access to the vault in room 104.

**Source.** 1977, 600:30. 1979, 434:90, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 4:7

 **4:7 Availability of Space. –** To the extent that the operation of
the foregoing provision is limited by the availability of adequate
office space, as determined by the governor and council, said provision
shall take effect when such space becomes available, and the governor
and council shall thereupon assign such space.

**Source.** 1950, 5:2, eff. June 30, 1950.

### Section 4:7-a

 **4:7-a Identifying Information Required in Correspondence. –** All
officers and employees of the state shall, when sending written
correspondence to any member of the general public, include in such
correspondence the following:
                                             
 I. The name of the sender of said correspondence;
                                             
 II. The name of the sender's office, the room number of the office,
the name of the building in which the office is located and the mailing
address of the building, including the zip code; and
                                             
 III. The office telephone number, including information regarding
the appropriate teletypewriter (TTY/TDD) access number, of the sender.

**Source.** 1977, 103:1. 1989, 413:2, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 4:8

 **4:8 Gifts to the State. –**
                                             
 I. The governor is authorized to accept in the name of the state
gifts of personal property made to the state or for the benefit of its
inhabitants, and to execute such instruments as are necessary to carry
out the terms and conditions of gifts in trust of personal property for
the benefit of the inhabitants of the state.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding paragraph I, the commissioner of corrections may
accept gifts of personal property for the benefit of the department of
corrections valued at 
                                             $1,000 or less.

**Source.** 1923, 32:1, 2. PL 19:8. RL 27:13. 2009, 140:1, eff. Aug. 28,
2009.

### Section 4:8-a

 **4:8-a Gifts for Historic Sites and the Community College System of
New Hampshire. –**
                                             
 I. The governor and council may, by executive order, authorize the
department of resources and economic development to accept, for the
state, gifts of personal property and money which are donated for use in
connection with historic sites and the buildings or structures thereon,
which are under the management of that department. Each such executive
order shall relate to a particular site and may authorize the use of
such personal property or the expenditure of such money, in accordance
with the terms of the gift, under the supervision of such department.
Such executive order, as originally made or later amended, may also
authorize the sale or exchange of any such personal property found
subsequently to be inappropriate for use, where not inconsistent with
the terms of the gift, and application of the proceeds or items received
in exchange for the purposes of the original gift. The department shall
keep a permanent inventory or record of such gifts and the disposition
of such gifts. The governor and council may, by executive order,
delegate the same authority with reference to gifts to the division of
historical resources, department of cultural resources, and all other
provisions of this section shall apply to such gifts. The board of
trustees, community college system of New Hampshire, may accept gifts of
personal property and money pursuant to RSA 188-F:6. The board shall
consult with the state curator regarding gifts of potential historic
significance. Gifts of historic significance accepted by the board of
trustees shall be cataloged by the state curator pursuant to RSA
227-C:4, XVIII, and recognized by the governor and council under this
section.
                                             
 II. Any legally constituted board or commission which is established
for the purpose of state historic site restoration shall have the option
of retaining ownership of any historic site furnishing, which is
acquired with other than state funds, for the duration of its existence,
and which funds shall be used for the purposes of upgrading or insuring
furnishings at no cost to the state. The commissioner of the department
of resources and economic development shall prepare a site inventory of
all furnishings acquired by the board or commission. The board or
commission shall maintain the inventory and shall report any changes
annually. The director of the division of historical resources shall be
consulted prior to any changes in the inventory.

**Source.** 1967, 116:1. 1977, 290:8. 1988, 201:6. 1989, 303:1. 1990,
73:1. 1992, 90:1. 1995, 182:22, 29. 1998, 272:41; 363:3. 2007, 361:3,
eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 4:9

 **4:9 Portraits or Other Memorials. –** No portraits, busts,
statues, or other memorial objects shall be placed in or on the state
house, state house annex, state library, Hannah Dustin monument,
Franklin Pierce homestead, Daniel Webster birthplace, or grounds
connected with each without the consent of the governor and council. The
director, division of historical resources, shall be responsible for the
location and care of such memorial objects at any of these sites.

**Source.** 1883, 125:2. 1887, 13:1, 2. 1917, 47:1. PL 7:15. 1939,
184:1. RL 12:14. RSA 4:9. 1988, 201:7, eff. July 1, 1988.

### Section 4:9-a

 **4:9-a Law Enforcement Memorial. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a memorial to commemorate the New Hampshire law
enforcement community. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the
contrary, the memorial shall be situated on the southeast corner on the
front grounds connected with the legislative office building. The
governor is authorized to accept in the name of the state the law
enforcement memorial as a private gift upon its completion.
                                             
 II. (a) The administrator of the division of plant and property in
the department of administrative services, subject to the direction and
supervision of the commissioner of administrative services, shall act as
the custodian of the law enforcement memorial, and shall have charge of
all matters relating to the care, maintenance, and repair of, and
additions to, the memorial. For the purpose of this section the
provisions of RSA 21-I shall not apply.
                                             
 (b) The administrator of the division of plant and property in
the department of administrative services, subject to the direction and
supervision of the commissioner of administrative services, shall
administer and disburse to the committee established in RSA 4:9-b the
moneys in the special account established under RSA 4:9-b. No money
other than necessary expenses prior to construction shall be disbursed
until the governor and council approve and award the contract for the
construction of the law enforcement memorial.
                                             
 III. No person shall use the law enforcement memorial at the
legislative office building or the fallen firefighters memorial located
at the fire academy for any commercial purpose. This prohibition shall
not apply to use by firefighting or law enforcement agencies or
firefighter or law enforcement organizations registered with the
director of charitable trusts to support the upkeep and maintenance of
the memorials or to support their charitable activities, provided that
use of the law enforcement memorial is authorized by the division of
plant and property management and use of the fallen firefighters
memorial is authorized by the New Hampshire State Firemen's Association.
Any person who violates this paragraph shall be guilty of a violation
and subject to a fine of 
                                             $500.

**Source.** 1994, 370:1. 2004, 81:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2005. 2014, 54:1, eff.
July 26, 2014; 327:34, eff. Aug. 2, 2014.

### Section 4:9-b

 **4:9-b Committee Established; Special Account. –**
                                             
 I. A committee is established to select the design for a law
enforcement memorial, to oversee the construction of the memorial, to
privately raise all the funds which shall be necessary for its
construction, and to expend the funds which are raised. The governor is
authorized to accept for the committee, in the name of the state, the
gifts of money which are donated to construct the memorial.
                                             
 II. The gifts of money which are donated to construct the memorial
shall be placed in a special nonlapsing account in the state treasury,
to be expended for the purposes of the law enforcement memorial. Any
money remaining in the special account after construction of the
memorial is completed shall be used for the care, maintenance, and
repair of, and additions to, the memorial, or for any other purpose
deemed appropriate by the committee.
                                             
 III. The committee shall remain in existence upon the completion of
the law enforcement memorial for the purpose of approving any changes in
the memorial, such as the addition of names to the memorial. Any site
changes in the memorial shall be made under the supervision of the
administrator of the division of plant and property, in the department
of administrative services, according to the provisions of RSA 4:9-a,
II.

**Source.** 1994, 370:1, eff. June 9, 1994. 2014, 327:35, eff. Aug. 2,
2014.

### Section 4:9-c

 **4:9-c Committee Membership. –**
                                             
 I. The members of the committee established in RSA 4:9-b shall be as
follows:
                                             
 (a) One member appointed by the New Hampshire Association of
Chiefs of Police.
                                             
 (b) One member appointed by the New Hampshire Police
Association.
                                             
 (c) One member appointed by the New Hampshire Sheriffs'
Association.
                                             
 (d) One member appointed by the New Hampshire State Troopers
Association.
                                             
 (e) One member appointed by the 100 Club of New Hampshire,
Incorporated.
                                             
 (f) The executive director of the fish and game department, or
designee.
                                             
 (g) The commissioner of safety, or designee.
                                             
 (h) The attorney general, or designee.
                                             
 (i) The commissioner of cultural resources, or designee.
                                             
 (j) The commissioner of administrative services, or designee.
                                             
 (k) One member appointed by the governor, who shall be a member
of a family of a law enforcement officer killed in the line of duty.
                                             
 (l) The commissioner of corrections, or designee.
                                             
 II. The members of the committee shall elect a chairperson from
among its members. The first meeting of the committee shall be called by
the attorney general. Six members of the committee shall constitute a
quorum.

**Source.** 1994, 370:1. 1998, 363:3. 1999, 296:3, eff. Sept. 14, 1999.

### Section 4:9-d

 **4:9-d Duties of the Committee. –** The duties of the committee
established in RSA 4:9-b shall be as follows:
                                             
 I. The committee shall select the design for the law enforcement
memorial.
                                             
 II. (a) The committee shall oversee the construction of the law
enforcement memorial.
                                             
 (b) The award of the contract for the construction of the law
enforcement memorial shall be subject to the approval of the governor
and council.
                                             
 III. The committee shall advise and inform the city manager of
Concord or designee relative to the design and construction plans for
the memorial.
                                             
 IV. The committee, through the New Hampshire law enforcement
community, shall privately raise all the money necessary for the
planning, design, construction, and maintenance of the law enforcement
memorial. Notwithstanding subparagraph II(b), the committee shall have
the authority to expend the money which is raised without the approval
of governor and council.

**Source.** 1994, 370:1. 2004, 81:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2005.

### Section 4:9-e

 **4:9-e September 11 Memorial. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a memorial to commemorate the victims and families
of the September 11 tragedy especially New Hampshire citizens who lost
their lives, and to commemorate other victims of terrorism. The governor
is authorized to accept in the name of the state the September 11
memorial as a private gift upon its completion.
                                             
 II. (a) The administrator of the division of plant and property in
the department of administrative services, subject to the direction and
supervision of the commissioner of administrative services, shall act as
the custodian of the September 11 memorial, and shall have charge of all
matters relating to the care, maintenance, repair, and additions to the
memorial.
                                             
 (b) The administrator of the division of plant and property in
the department of administrative services, subject to the direction and
supervision of the commissioner of administrative services, shall
administer and disburse to the committee, established in RSA 4:9-f, the
moneys in the special account established under RSA 4:9-f. No money
other than necessary expenses prior to construction shall be disbursed
until the governor and council approve and award the contract for the
construction of the September 11 memorial.

**Source.** 2002, 196:1, eff. May 15, 2002. 2014, 327:36, eff. Aug. 2,
2014.

### Section 4:9-f-9-h

 **4:9-f to 4:9-h Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 368:1(36), eff. Dec.
31, 2010.
                                             ]

### Section 4:9-i

 **4:9-i Public Works Employee Memorial. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a memorial to commemorate New Hampshire public
works employees who were killed while performing public works duties on
behalf of a municipality, a county, or the state. The memorial shall be
situated on a site to be determined by the committee established in RSA
4:9-j. The governor is authorized to accept in the name of the state the
public works employee memorial as a private gift upon its completion.
                                             
 II. (a) The director of operations, subject to the direction and
supervision of the commissioner of transportation, shall act as the
custodian of the public works employee memorial, and shall have charge
of all matters relating to the care, maintenance, repair, and additions
to the memorial.
                                             
 (b) The director of operations, subject to the direction and
supervision of the commissioner of transportation, shall administer and
disburse for the committee established in RSA 4:9-j the moneys in the
special account established under RSA 4:9-j. The committee shall approve
the expenditure of funds prior to payment by the director of
operations.
                                             
 (c) The director of operations, subject to the direction and
supervision of the commissioner of transportation, may administer and
disburse to the committee established in RSA 4:9-j, state owned salvaged
materials, not otherwise allocated by the department, including but not
limited to, granite curb granite blocks, pavement grindings, ditching
material, and concrete products, to assist in the construction of the
memorial.

**Source.** 2009, 109:1. 2012, 193:3, eff. June 11, 2012.

### Section 4:9-j

 **4:9-j Committee Established; Special Account. –**
                                             
 I. A committee is established to oversee the location, design,
construction, and maintenance of a public works employee memorial and to
privately raise and expend all the funds necessary for its construction
and maintenance. The governor is authorized to accept for the committee,
in the name of the state, the gifts of money, which are donated to
construct and maintain the memorial. Notwithstanding any other provision
of law, except as provided by RSA 4:9-k, III, the committee may accept
donated in-kind services, goods, and materials for the construction and
maintenance of the memorial without governor and council approval.
                                             
 II. The gifts of money, which are donated to contract, construct,
and maintain the memorial, shall be placed in a special nonlapsing
account in the state treasury, to be expended for the purposes of the
public works employee memorial. Any money remaining in the special
account after construction of the memorial is completed shall be used
for the care, maintenance, repair, and additions to the memorial, or for
any other purpose deemed appropriate by the committee. Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, except as provided by RSA 4:9-k, III, the
committee may expend the money raised, once accepted as a gift and
without the approval of governor and council, to contract for the
construction and perpetual maintenance of the memorial.
                                             
 III. The committee shall remain in existence upon the completion of
the public works employee memorial for the purpose of overseeing
maintenance and approving any change to the memorial, such as the
addition of names to the memorial. Any site change for the memorial
shall be made under the supervision of the director of operations of the
department of transportation, according to the provisions of RSA 4:9-i,
II.

**Source.** 2009, 109:1. 2012, 193:4, eff. June 11, 2012.

### Section 4:9-k

 **4:9-k Committee Membership and Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The members of the committee established in RSA 4:9-j shall be as
follows:
                                             
 (a) One member appointed by the New Hampshire Public Works
Association.
                                             
 (b) One member appointed by the New Hampshire Road Agents
Association.
                                             
 (c) One member appointed by the New Hampshire Municipal
Association.
                                             
 (d) The commissioner of transportation, or designee.
                                             
 (e) One member, who shall be a classified state employee of the
department of transportation, appointed by the New Hampshire State
Employees Association.
                                             
 (f) One member, who shall be a family member of a public works
employee who died in the course of performing public works duties on
behalf of the state, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 II. The members of the committee shall elect a chairperson from
among the members. The commissioner of transportation, or designee,
shall call the first meeting of the committee. Four members of the
committee shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 III. The committee shall select the location and design for the
public works employee memorial and oversee the construction and
maintenance of the memorial. The award of any contract totaling greater
than 
                                             $25,000 for the design, construction, and maintenance of the
public works employee memorial shall be subject to the approval of the
governor and council. The committee shall advise and inform the
municipality in which the memorial is located as to the design,
construction plans, and location for the memorial.
                                             
 IV. The committee, through the New Hampshire public works community,
shall privately raise all the money necessary for the planning, design,
construction, and maintenance of the public works employee memorial.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, except as provided in RSA
4:9-k, III, the committee may expend the money raised for the purpose of
the public works employee memorial without the approval of governor and
council.

**Source.** 2009, 109:1. 2012, 193:5, eff. June 11, 2012.

### Section 4:9-l

 **4:9-l Commission Established; Special Account. –**
                                             
 I. A commission is established to oversee the location, design,
construction, and maintenance of a John G. Winant memorial and to
privately raise and expend all the funds necessary for its construction
and maintenance. The governor is authorized to accept for the
commission, in the name of the state, the gifts of money, which are
donated to construct and maintain the memorial. Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, the commission may accept donated in-kind
services, goods, and materials for the construction and maintenance of
the memorial without governor and council approval.
                                             
 II. The gifts of money, which are donated to contract, construct,
and maintain the memorial, shall be placed in a special nonlapsing
account in the state treasury, to be expended for the purposes of the
John G. Winant memorial. Any money remaining in the special account
after construction of the memorial is completed shall be used for the
care, maintenance, repair, and additions to the memorial, or for any
other purpose deemed appropriate by the commission. Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, the commission may expend the money raised or
accepted as a gift without the approval of governor and council, to
contract for the construction and perpetual maintenance of the
memorial.
                                             
 III. The commission shall remain in existence upon the completion of
the John G. Winant memorial for the purpose of overseeing maintenance
and approving any change to the memorial. Any site change for the
memorial shall be made under the supervision of the director of
operations of the department of transportation.

**Source.** 2015, 119:1, eff. Aug. 7, 2015.

### Section 4:9-m

 **4:9-m Commission Membership and Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The members of the commission established in RSA 4:9-l shall be
as follows:
                                             
 (a) One member of the New Hampshire house of representatives,
appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (b) Four members of the general public, appointed by the
governor.
                                             
 II. The members of the commission shall elect a chairperson from
among the members. The named house member shall call the first meeting
of the commission. Three members of the commission shall constitute a
quorum.
                                             
 III. The commission shall select the location and design for the
John G. Winant memorial and oversee the construction and maintenance of
the memorial.
                                             
 IV. The commission shall privately raise all the money necessary for
the planning, design, construction, and maintenance of the John G.
Winant memorial.

**Source.** 2015, 119:1, eff. Aug. 7, 2015.

### Section 4:10

 **4:10 Protection of State Water Rights. –** The governor may
institute and prosecute suits at law or in equity in the name of the
state, whenever in his judgment such course shall be necessary to
prevent the injurious diversion of the water of rivers which naturally
flow from other states into New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1895, 26:1. PL 19:9. RL 27:15.

### Section 4:11

 **4:11 Eligibility of Councilor to Other Office. –** No member of
the governor's council shall be eligible to appointment by the governor
and council to any position of profit and emolument, except justice of
the peace and notary public, during the term for which he was elected a
councilor.

**Source.** 1915, 7:1. PL 19:3. RL 27:4.

### Section 4:12

 **4:12 Governor's Staff. –** The governor may appoint such staff,
including but not limited to legal counsel, professional persons,
consultants, assistants, secretaries, stenographers, and clerks, as he
shall need who shall render such services as the governor may require of
them. He shall fix their compensation within the limits of the
appropriation made for such purposes.

**Source.** 1950, 5, part 3:1. RSA 4:12. 1970, 46:1. 1986, 109:1, eff.
Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 4:12-a

 **4:12-a Coordinator of Federal Funds. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 141:4,
eff. July 1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 4:12-b

 **4:12-b Appointment. –** The governor shall appoint a director of
the budget who shall hold office at the pleasure of the governor and
until his successor is appointed and qualified. The governor shall fix
the compensation of such director within the limits of the appropriation
made therefor.

**Source.** 1970, 6:1, eff. July 1, 1970.

### Section 4:12-c

 **4:12-c Duties. –** Said director shall perform the following
duties:
                                             
 I. He shall provide post-election assistance to an incoming
governor.
                                             
 II. He shall examine the tentative budgets prepared by the
commissioner of administrative services, under the provisions of RSA 9
and advise the governor in regard to the same, and shall assist the
governor during hearings on the tentative budget as provided by RSA
9:7.
                                             
 III. He shall formulate the governor's budget which is to be
submitted to the legislature pursuant to RSA 9:8.
                                             
 IV. He shall examine reports made by the commissioner of
administrative services as to operation and administration of the budget
and expenditures thereunder.
                                             
 V. He shall schedule and assist the governor and council in hearings
on departmental and agency requests involving financial matters.
                                             
 VI. He shall exercise continuing examinations and study of budget
procedures.
                                             
 VII. He shall, in conjunction with the commissioner of
administrative services, assist departments on procedures and other
problems of management.
                                             
 VIII. He shall carry on a research program in the field of
governmental and financial administration.

**Source.** 1970, 6:1. 1985, 399:3, I, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 4:12-cc

 **4:12-cc Executive Council Operations. –** The governor and
executive council may appoint an executive assistant who shall serve at
the pleasure of the governor and council, and shall perform such duties
as the governor and council may determine. The executive assistant shall
be an unclassified employee under RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 1995, 308:91, eff. July 3, 1995.

### Section 4:12-d-12-f

 **4:12-d to 4:12-f Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 283:11, eff. May
25, 1987.
                                             ]

Community Development Block Grants
----------------------------------

### Section 4:12-g-12-p

 **4:12-g to 4:12-p Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 283:11, eff. May
25, 1987.
                                             ]

Administrator of Federal-State Financial Information
----------------------------------------------------

### Section 4:12-q,-12-r

 **4:12-q, 4:12-r Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 283:11, eff. May 25,
1987.
                                             ]

Water Protection Assistance Program
-----------------------------------

### Section 4:12-s-12-v

 **4:12-s to 4:12-v Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 283:11, eff. May
25, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 4:13

 **4:13 Governor's Secretary and Clerical Assistants. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1970, 46:2, eff. July 1, 1970.
                                             ]

### Section 4:13-a

 **4:13-a Facsimile Signature of Governor. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1959,
217:2, eff. Aug. 16, 1959.
                                             ]

Observances Proclaimed by Governor
----------------------------------

### Section 4:13-b

 **4:13-b Lafayette Day. –** The governor shall annually issue a
proclamation calling for a proper observance of May 20, the anniversary
of the death of General Marquis de Lafayette, revolutionary war hero, in
lasting recognition of his gallant and illustrious service in the war
for American independence.

**Source.** 1955, 126:1, eff. May 9, 1955.

### Section 4:13-c

 **4:13-c Constitution Days. –** The governor shall annually issue on
the following dates a proclamation calling for a proper observance of
State Constitution Day which is January 5 and September 17 as Federal
Constitution Day, so that the people may be reminded annually on these
dates of the blessings of liberty which they enjoy by the adoption of
the Constitution of the United States, the Bill of Rights and the
Constitution of the State of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1975, 53:1, eff. June 6, 1975.

### Section 4:13-d

 **4:13-d American History Month. –** The governor shall annually
proclaim February as "American History Month'' and request the citizens
of the state to observe the month with appropriate events.

**Source.** 1981, 90:6, eff. June 19, 1981.

### Section 4:13-e

 **4:13-e Law Enforcement Memorial Week. –** In recognition of the
service given by the men and women who, night and day, stand guard in
our midst to protect us through enforcement of our laws, and inviting
the governments, communities, and people of this state to observe such
week with appropriate ceremonies and activities, the governor shall
proclaim the calendar week of May 15 of each year as Law Enforcement
Memorial Week in honor of the federal, state, and municipal officers who
have been killed or disabled in the line of duty.

**Source.** 1996, 11:2, eff. April 2, 1996.

### Section 4:13-f

 **4:13-f New Hampshire Pearl Harbor Day. –**
                                             
 I. The governor shall proclaim December 7 of each year as New
Hampshire Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day.
                                             
 II. The proclamation issued by the governor shall call on the people
of New Hampshire to observe the day with appropriate ceremonies and
activities and shall urge all state agencies and academic institutions,
and interested organizations, groups, and individuals, to fly the flag
of the United States at half-staff each December 7 in honor of the
individuals who died as a result of their service at Pearl Harbor.

**Source.** 1996, 281:2, eff. Aug. 9, 1996.

### Section 4:13-g

 **4:13-g Teacher Appreciation Day. –** The governor shall annually
proclaim the first Tuesday in May as Teacher Appreciation Day, and shall
urge local communities, school administrative units, and school
districts to observe such day in recognition of the dedication and
service of New Hampshire's teachers.

**Source.** 1997, 168:2, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 4:13-h

 **4:13-h Gold Star Mother's Day. –** The governor shall annually
issue a proclamation calling for the proper observance of the first
Sunday after Easter which shall be known as Gold Star Mother's Day
recognizing and honoring all mothers who have lost sons or daughters
while on duty in the United States armed forces. The governor shall urge
the citizens of the state to observe this day with appropriate events.

**Source.** 1999, 72:1, eff. July 27, 1999.

### Section 4:13-i

 **4:13-i United States Army, Navy, Air Force, Coast Guard, and
Marine Corps; Anniversary of Founding Commemorated. –** In recognition
of the men and women who have served in the finest traditions of United
States Army, Navy, Air Force, Coast Guard, and Marine Corps, and to
commemorate the anniversary of the founding of each of these branches of
the armed forces, the governor shall annually order the flags of the
respective branches to be flown over the state house as follows:
                                             
 I. United States Air Force, September 18.
                                             
 II. United States Army, June 14.
                                             
 III. United States Coast Guard, August 4.
                                             
 IV. United States Navy, October 13.
                                             
 V. United States Marine Corps, November 10.

**Source.** 2000, 102:1. 2004, 22:1, eff. June 4, 2004.

### Section 4:13-j

 **4:13-j Destroyer Escort Day. –** The governor shall annually
proclaim June 20 as Destroyer Escort Day and shall urge cities, towns,
and communities throughout the state to observe this day in
commemoration of the bravery and valor of those individuals who lost
their lives while serving aboard these gallant vessels during World War
II, the Korean Conflict, and the Vietnam Conflict.

**Source.** 2000, 135:1, eff. July 14, 2000.

### Section 4:13-k

 **4:13-k Congenital Heart Defect Awareness Day. –** The governor
shall annually proclaim February 14 as Congenital Heart Defect Awareness
Day and shall urge cities and towns throughout the state to observe this
day in an appropriate manner in recognition of the thousands of citizens
of this state affected by congenital heart defects, nationally the
number one birth defect as a cause of infant deaths, and the need for
public awareness, research, and support for victims and their families.

**Source.** 2002, 16:1, eff. May 31, 2002.

### Section 4:13-l

 **4:13-l General John Stark Day. –** The governor shall annually
proclaim the fourth Monday in April as General John Stark Day in
commemoration of General Stark's gallant and illustrious service to New
Hampshire and his country. Schools are encouraged to commemorate the day
with appropriate educational activities.

**Source.** 2003, 183:2. 2011, 77:1, eff. July 15, 2011.

### Section 4:13-m

 **4:13-m Firefighters Memorial Day. –** In recognition of the
service given by the men and women who, night and day, serve the people
of this state as firefighters, and inviting the governments,
communities, and people of this state to observe such day with
appropriate ceremonies and activities, the governor shall proclaim the
last Saturday or Sunday in September of each year as Firefighters
Memorial Day in honor of the firefighters who have been killed or
disabled in the line of duty and those still serving.

**Source.** 2007, 275:1, eff. Sept. 1, 2007. 2014, 15:1, eff. May 14,
2014.

### Section 4:13-n

 **4:13-n Emergency Medical Services Provider Recognition Day. –** In
recognition of the service given by the men and women who, night and
day, serve the people of this state as first responders, emergency
medical technicians, and paramedics, and inviting the governments,
communities, and people of this state to observe such day with
appropriate ceremonies and activities, the governor shall proclaim the
first Saturday in May of each year as Emergency Medical Services
Provider Recognition Day in honor of the emergency medical services
providers who have been killed or disabled in the line of duty and those
still serving.

**Source.** 2008, 78:1, eff. July 20, 2008.

### Section 4:13-o

 **4:13-o Portsmouth Peace Treaty Day. –** The governor shall
annually issue a proclamation calling for the proper observance of
September 5 as Portsmouth Peace Treaty Day and shall call on the
citizens of New Hampshire to observe the day with appropriate ceremonies
and activities commemorating this important day in New Hampshire
history.

**Source.** 2010, 376:2, eff. Oct. 16, 2010.

### Section 4:13-p

 **4:13-p Proper Observance of September 11, 2001. –** The governor
shall annually issue a proclamation calling for a proper observance of
September 11 in honor and remembrance of the people who lost their lives
on September 11, 2001. The proclamation issued by the governor shall
call on the people of New Hampshire to observe the day with appropriate
ceremonies, including, but not limited to, the requirements of section
144 of Public Law 107-89.

**Source.** 2011, 61:1, eff. July 15, 2011.

### Section 4:13-q

 **4:13-q New Hampshire History Week. –** The governor shall annually
issue a proclamation calling for the proper observance of the third week
of October as New Hampshire History Week and shall call on the citizens
and schools of New Hampshire to observe the week with appropriate
ceremonies and activities commemorating New Hampshire history and
promoting its preservation.

**Source.** 2011, 174:2, eff. Aug. 13, 2011.

### Section 4:13-r

 **4:13-r Blue Star Mother's Day. –** The governor shall annually
proclaim the first Sunday after Mother's Day as Blue Star Mother's Day
recognizing and honoring all mothers who now have, or have had, children
honorably serving in the United States armed forces. The governor shall
urge the citizens of this state to observe this day with appropriate
events.

**Source.** 2012, 274:1, eff. June 19, 2012.

### Section 4:13-s

 **4:13-s Canine Veterans Day. –** In recognition of the service
given by the dogs who, night and day, serve the people of this country
and the state, and inviting the governments, communities, and people of
this state to observe such day with appropriate ceremonies and
activities, the governor shall proclaim March 13th of each year as
Canine Veterans Day in honor of the dogs who have bled, suffered, and
died while serving in all of our wars and those still serving; as well
as police canine units, customs canine units, border patrol canine
units, secret service canine units, search and rescue canine units,
airport police canine units, federal bureau of investigation canine
units, and the local police and fire canine units who protect our
neighborhoods should be honored accordingly.

**Source.** 2014, 127:1, eff. Aug. 15, 2014.

### Section 4:13-t

 **4:13-t New Hampshire Genocide Awareness Month. –** The governor
shall annually proclaim the month of April as New Hampshire Genocide
Awareness Month and shall urge cities and towns throughout the state to
observe this month in an appropriate manner educating the public about
the evils of genocide and commemorating victims of genocide.

**Source.** 2014, 181:1, eff. Sept. 9, 2014.

### Section 4:13-u

 **4:13-u Lyme Disease Awareness Month. –** The governor shall
annually proclaim the month of May as Lyme disease awareness month and
shall urge cities and towns throughout the state to observe this month
in an appropriate manner educating the public about the prevention,
diagnosis, and treatment of Lyme disease.

**Source.** 2015, 42:2, eff. May 14, 2015.

### Section 4:13-v

 **4:13-v Cancer Prevention Month, Cancer Prevention Day, and Cure
all Cancer Month. –** The governor shall annually proclaim February as
Cancer Prevention month, February 4th as Cancer Prevention day, and
August as Cure all Cancer month and shall urge cities and towns
throughout the state to observe these dates in an appropriate manner in
recognition of the thousands of citizens of this state affected by all
types of cancer and the need for public awareness, research, and support
for victims and their families.

**Source.** 2016, 128:2, eff. July 19, 2016.

Expenditures and Disbursements
------------------------------

### Section 4:14

 **4:14 Disbursements. –** Whenever any money is due from the state
to any person, by force of a general law, special act or resolution, the
governor is empowered, and it shall be his duty, with advice of the
council, to draw his warrant upon the treasury therefor in favor of such
person.

**Source.** GS 18:1. GL 19:1. PS 20:1. PL 19:1. RL 27:1.

### Section 4:15

 **4:15 Department Expenditures. –** The expenditure of any moneys
appropriated or otherwise provided to carry on the work of any
department of the state government shall be subject to the approval of
the governor, with the advice of the council, under such general
regulations as the governor and council may prescribe with reference to
all or any of such departments, for the purpose of securing the prudent
and economical expenditures of the moneys appropriated. Heads of
departments, assistants and employees thereof shall not be allowed as
expenses travel between their places of residence and their department
offices, nor shall they be allowed board or lodging while in the place
in which their offices are located. Notwithstanding the preceding
provision, the governor and council may by general regulation provide
for the allowance of travel expenses where the department head,
assistant or employee has a work assignment away from the place where
his department office is located and it is more efficient for such
person to proceed directly from his place of residence to such work
assignment without reporting at his office.

**Source.** 1915, 49:1. PL 19:11. 1927, 131:1. 1941, 31:1. RL 27:17. RSA
4:15. 1969, 256:1, eff. Aug. 19, 1969.

### Section 4:16

 **4:16 Incidental Expenses. –** The governor and council are
authorized to audit and allow, as incidental expenses of the state, all
bills for postage, stationery, necessary department supplies, and other
necessary incidental expenses of the state, and the governor is
authorized to draw his warrant for the payment of the same out of any
money in the treasury not otherwise appropriated.

**Source.** 1879, 57:43. PS 20:6. 1901, 74:1. PL 19:10. RL 27:16.

### Section 4:17

 **4:17 Purchases of Surveyors' Maps, and Other Records. –** The
governor and council may expend a sum not to exceed 
                                             $5,000 in any
calendar year for the purpose of purchasing from the estates of deceased
surveyors and civil engineers such field notes, maps, and other records
prepared by them as will be of value in preserving real estate records
of the state, and may direct the highway commissioner or other engineers
to examine such records as are for sale for the purpose of ascertaining
their value to the public. The governor is authorized to draw his
warrant for the payment of the same out of any money in the treasury not
otherwise appropriated.

**Source.** 1935, 30:1. RL 27:14.

### Section 4:18

 **4:18 Emergency Fund. –** There shall be an emergency fund
consisting of such sums as may be appropriated for that purpose by the
general court, which may be expended by the governor, with the consent
of the council, to aid any state department in any emergency which may
arise in carrying on the essential functions of state government and in
protecting the interests of the state which have been impaired by said
emergency.

**Source.** 1879, 59:1. PS 286:2. 1925, 174:13. PL 19:35. 1927, 36:1. RL
27:44. 1949, 321:2. 1953, 17:1, eff. Feb. 26, 1953.

### Section 4:19

 **4:19 Emergency Repairs. –** In case of emergency occasioned by the
partial or total destruction, failure, or damage, by fire or otherwise,
of any building or any other property belonging to the state, or used by
any state department, or in the case of destruction or failure of, or
damage to, the physical or technological infrastructure of any
department or other state entity, the governor, with the consent of the
council, may provide by contract for such repairs, new building, new
property, or new equipment or may provide by contract for such temporary
accommodation as he or she may deem necessary to replace those
destroyed, damaged, or which have failed, and may draw warrants in
payment for the same from any money in the treasury not otherwise
appropriated.

**Source.** 1909, 176:2. PL 19:30. RL 27:36. 2009, 162:1, eff. Sept. 6,
2009.

### Section 4:20

 **4:20 Borrowing for. –** In case there shall not be sufficient
funds in the treasury available for the payment of warrants so drawn the
treasurer, under the direction of the governor and council, is
authorized to borrow on the state's credit for a period of not more than
5 years, at the lowest rate of interest obtainable, such sums as may be
necessary for the purposes aforesaid.

**Source.** 1909, 176:3. PL 19:31. RL 27:37. RSA 4:20. 1993, 31:1, eff.
June 7, 1993.

Pardons; Commutations; and Reprieves
------------------------------------

### Section 4:21

 **4:21 Petitions for Pardon or Commutation of Sentence. –** On all
petitions to the governor and council for pardon or commutation of
sentence written notice thereof shall be given to the state's counsel,
and such notice to others as the governor may direct; and the
prosecuting officer may be required to furnish a concise statement of
the case as proved at the trial and any other facts bearing on the
propriety of granting the petition.

**Source.** GS 18:3. GL 19:3. PS 20:3. PL 19:4. RL 27:5.

### Section 4:22

 **4:22 Commissioner of Corrections to Report on. –** In all cases
where the petition is for the pardon of a person serving a sentence in
the state prison, the commissioner of corrections shall make a report
upon the petition before it is referred to the council.

**Source.** 1931, 117:1. RL 27:9.

### Section 4:23

 **4:23 Commutation. –** The governor, with advice of the council,
upon application of any convict under sentence of death may grant him a
pardon on condition that he shall be imprisoned for life or any term of
years expressed in the pardon, and upon such further conditions as may
be thought just; and the governor's warrant, reciting such conditions,
shall be sufficient authority to all officers to carry into effect such
conditions, as if the same were the original sentence.

**Source.** GS 18:4. GL 19:4. PS 20:4. PL 19:5. RL 27:6.

### Section 4:24

 **4:24 Respite. –** The governor, with the advice of the council,
may respite from time to time, for stated periods, the execution of a
sentence of death upon a convict while proceedings are pending that may
result in a new trial, or if they regard further time necessary for a
proper investigation and consideration of facts bearing upon a question
of absolute or conditional pardon pending before them, or if it appears
to their satisfaction that the convict has become insane, or, being a
female, is quick with child, until they have had sufficient time and
opportunity for such investigation and consideration or the cause is
removed.

**Source.** PS 20:5. PL 19:6. RL 27:7.

### Section 4:25

 **4:25 Conditional Pardons. –** The governor, with the advice of the
council, may, upon petition of a prisoner, grant him a pardon subject to
such conditions as the governor considers proper, but a prisoner so
pardoned shall, during the unexpired term of his sentence, violate no
law, and he shall be in the custody of the state parole officer. The
governor may issue his warrant to all proper officers to carry such
pardon into effect and such warrant shall be obeyed and executed instead
of the sentence originally imposed.

**Source.** 1931, 117:1. RL 27:8.

### Section 4:26

 **4:26 Breach of Condition. –** If a prisoner violates any of the
conditions of his pardon, the warden, superintendent, or keeper of the
institution in which the prisoner was confined shall forthwith cause him
to be arrested and shall give written notice to the governor and council
of such arrest.

**Source.** 1931, 117:1. RL 27:10.

### Section 4:27

 **4:27 Procedure After Arrest. –** The prisoner so arrested shall be
returned forthwith to the institution from which he was released, and
there confined for the unexpired term of his sentence unless the
governor, with the advice of the council, after a hearing at the
prisoner's request, shall otherwise order.

**Source.** 1931, 117:1. RL 27:11.

### Section 4:27-a

 **4:27-a Petition; Award. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1977, 595:4, eff. July 1,
1977.
                                             ]

### Section 4:28

 **4:28 Summoning of Witnesses. –** The governor may summon or cause
to be summoned witnesses to appear before the governor and council to
testify at hearings before them, and may require such witnesses to bring
with them and produce at such hearings any books, papers or other
memoranda or documents.

**Source.** 1911, 176:1. PL 19:7. RL 27:12.

Acquisition and Disposal of Real Estate
---------------------------------------

### Section 4:29

 **4:29 By Purchase. –** The governor, with the advice and consent of
the council, may acquire on behalf of the state, either by purchase or
otherwise, as hereinafter provided, any real estate within the state
which he may deem necessary for any military purpose, for public parks,
public buildings, or for any other public improvement purposes and to
accept deeds thereof in the name of the state; provided, however, that
60 days before a purchase of any real estate within the city of Concord
or the Concord region, the governor shall provide written notice of such
proposed purchase to the state-capitol-region planning commission. No
dam or any real property appurtenant thereto or any rights and easements
in either may be acquired pursuant to the authority of this section or
any other provision of law except an act of the legislature which
authorizes the acquisition of a particular dam, real property, or right
or easement.

**Source.** 1917, 221:1. 1921, 131:1. PL 19:18. 1937, 180:1. RL 27:23.
RSA 4:29. 1969, 399:1. 1991, 116:1, eff. July 13, 1991.

### Section 4:30

 **4:30 By Eminent Domain. –** The governor and council, for the
purposes aforesaid, are empowered to take and appropriate any such real
estate for the use of the state in accordance with RSA 498-A; provided,
however, that 60 days before a taking in the city of Concord or the
Concord region, the governor shall provide written notice of such
proposed taking to the state-capitol-region planning commission.

**Source.** 1917, 221:2. PL 19:19. RL 27:24. RSA 4:30. 1983, 297:12.
1991, 116:2, eff. July 13, 1991.

### Section 4:30-a

 **4:30-a Acquisition of Municipal Land Used for Conservation or
Recreation. –** If the state proposes to acquire any municipal land,
under the provisions of RSA 4:29, 4:30, 233, 236, or of any other
applicable section of RSA, for highway or other purposes, and such land
had been used by said municipality for conservation or recreation, it
shall first comply with the following requirements:
                                             
 I. A public hearing shall be held which may be a special hearing or
the hearing required by RSA 4:33, 233:10, 236, or by any other
applicable section of RSA. At such public hearing and in any statutorily
required notice thereof, and in a notice which shall be posted 90 days
prior to the hearing, the state shall set forth the description of the
land proposed to be acquired and the proposed use of such land, together
with any reasons justifying the acquisition of such property rather than
other land. The state may acquire such land, for highway or other
purposes, unless, at any meeting called prior to said hearing to act on
the question, the governing body of the municipality in which the land
is located, by a majority of its members present and voting, votes to
disapprove the proposed acquisition. Any approval or disapproval of such
proposed acquisition which has been duly voted by the governing body of
the municipality shall be certified to the appropriate state official or
agency by the municipal officials at the public hearing or within 15
days thereafter.
                                             
 II. In the event that the governing body votes to disapprove the
proposed acquisition, the state may acquire such land only by filing a
petition in the superior court for any order permitting it to do so. At
the time the petition is filed, the state shall serve a copy thereof
upon the municipality. After hearing any interested citizens and
considering all the facts and the public policy of this state which
encourages the use of land for recreation and conservation purposes, if
said court finds that no other land is available as a satisfactory
substitute for the land proposed to be taken, it shall issue an
appropriate order.
                                             
 III. When the state acquires any municipal land under the provisions
of this section, it shall transfer to said municipality other comparable
land and facilities to the extent feasible, or shall grant to said
municipality sufficient funds to acquire comparable land and facilities
for such purposes. The fact that the land and facilities are comparable
within the meaning of this paragraph shall be determined by the order of
the court or by the state agency acquiring the land, subject to any
applicable statutory right of appeal therefrom.
                                             
 IV. In order to transfer comparable land and facilities as provided
in this section, the state, or the appropriate agency thereof, may by
purchase or condemnation acquire such land and facilities. When title to
the replaced land was vested in more than one municipality, title to the
replacement land shall be vested in units to each of such municipalities
in the same proportion as that in which the replaced land was held.

**Source.** 1967, 298:1. 1975, 196:1, eff. Aug. 1, 1975.

### Section 4:30-b

 **4:30-b Acquisition of Substitute Recreation Land. –** If the
state, under the provisions of RSA 230 or any other statute, converts
state property acquired or developed with federal assistance under the
Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965, as amended, to other than
public outdoor recreation uses, the state may acquire, by condemnation
or otherwise, other property of at least equal fair market value and of
reasonably equivalent usefulness and location for substitution as
required under said act.

**Source.** 1981, 341:1, eff. Aug. 16, 1981.

### Section 4:31

 **4:31 Vesting of Title. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 297:13, I, eff. Aug.
17, 1983.
                                             ]

### Section 4:32

 **4:32 Notice. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 297:13, II, eff. Aug. 17,
1983.
                                             ]

### Section 4:33

 **4:33 Hearing. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 297:13, III, eff. Aug. 17,
1983.
                                             ]

### Section 4:34

 **4:34 Assessment of Damages. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 297:13, IV, eff.
Aug. 17, 1983.
                                             ]

### Section 4:35

 **4:35 Jury Trial. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 297:13, V, eff. Aug. 17,
1983.
                                             ]

### Section 4:36

 **4:36 Decree. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 297:13, VI, eff. Aug. 17,
1983.
                                             ]

### Section 4:37

 **4:37 Attorney General to Act. –** Any such takings and
appropriations shall be prosecuted or defended on the part of the state
by the attorney general under the advice of the governor and council.

**Source.** 1917, 221:2. PL 19:26. RL 27:31. RSA 4:37. 1983, 297:14,
eff. Aug. 17, 1983.

### Section 4:38

 **4:38 Payment. –** The governor, with the advice and consent of the
council, is authorized to draw his warrant upon any money in the
treasury available for military purposes or not otherwise appropriated,
in payment for real estate acquired for military purposes under the
provisions of this chapter, or, if land is so acquired for other public
purposes, only upon money appropriated for such purposes.

**Source.** 1917, 221:3. 1921, 131:2. PL 19:27. RL 27:32.

### Section 4:39

 **4:39 Property, How Held. –** All real estate acquired under the
provisions of this chapter shall be held by the state for the purposes
for which it was acquired, until otherwise ordered by the legislature.

**Source.** 1917, 221:4. PL 19:28. RL 27:33.

### Section 4:39-a

 **4:39-a New Hampshire Hospital Real Estate. –** The area in the
city of Concord bounded by Pleasant, Fruit, Clinton, and South Spring
streets, excluding any privately owned land and buildings, and also
excluding the 2 stand-alone parcels known presently as city of Concord
tax map 37, block 6, lots 17 and 19 together with the buildings and
other improvements situated on such parcels, and known as the main
campus of the New Hampshire hospital shall remain in its entirety the
property of the state of New Hampshire, except such land as determined
necessary for use by the city of Concord for approved municipal services
may be conveyed in accordance with RSA 10:4 unless RSA 227-C:6 applies.
If RSA 227-C:6 applies, such land shall be conveyed in accordance with
RSA 227-C:9. The commissioner of administrative services, with the
approval of the long range capital planning and utilization committee,
shall designate the use of and be responsible for maintaining, with the
exception of the interior maintenance and maintenance of grounds of
certain properties pursuant to RSA 21-I:11, I(c)(1), and leasing any
buildings on the main campus of the New Hampshire hospital in accordance
with the following priorities: (1) department of health and human
services and its lessees, (2) state departments, and (3) other
government or nonprofit organizations performing a state-related
function. RSA 10 shall not apply to the 2 stand-alone parcels known
presently as city of Concord tax map 37, block 6, lots 17 and 19 or any
building or other improvements situated on such parcels, and any
proposed disposal of either or both of such parcels shall be subject to
the provisions of RSA 4:40.

**Source.** 1987, 381:1. 1995, 310:181. 2005, 291:22. 2012, 254:2, eff.
June 18, 2012. 2014, 327:37, eff. Aug. 2, 2014.

### Section 4:39-b

 **4:39-b Approval of State Agency Leases Exceeding 5 Years. –** Any
lease of land, buildings, or space to be used by any state agency, as
defined in RSA 21-G:5, III, and which exceeds a term of 5 years,
including all options, shall be reviewed and approved by the long range
capital planning and utilization committee established in RSA 17-M prior
to submission to the governor and council for approval.

**Source.** 1998, 276:5, eff. June 26, 1998.

### Section 4:39-c

 **4:39-c Disposal of Highway or Turnpike Funded Real Estate. –**
Disposal of real estate purchased with state or federal highway funds,
or both, or with turnpike funds shall occur as follows:
                                             
 I. Upon recommendation of the commissioner of the department of
transportation to dispose of or lease property purchased with state or
federal highway funds or both, or turnpike funds, the request for
disposal or leasing shall be reviewed and approved by the long range
capital planning and utilization committee before submission to the
governor and council for approval. Upon determination that the property
is no longer needed by the state, the governor and council shall first
offer it to the government of the town, city, or county in which the
property is located. If the town, city, or county refuses the offer, the
governor and council may sell, convey, transfer, or lease the real
property.
                                             
 II. Sales of real property under this section shall be at not less
than current market value of the subject property, as may be determined
by the governor and council. If the town, city, or county decides to
resell the property, it shall first offer the property to the state at
the market value at the time of sale.
                                             
 III. The proceeds from a sale, conveyance, transfer, or lease under
this section shall be credited to either the highway fund or the
turnpike fund, whichever fund provided money for the original purchase.
                                             
 IV. This section shall not apply to the exchange of state-owned
lands for other lands of equal or greater value, which are under the
jurisdiction of the department of transportation and used by the
department during right-of-way negotiations, or to the sale of buildings
that need to be moved to clear such rights-of-way for public projects
found necessary under other state laws.

**Source.** 2005, 12:1. 2007, 100:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 4:39-d

 **4:39-d Leasing of State-Owned Real Estate on Public Waters. –**
Beginning January 1, 2010 the following shall apply to new leases:
                                             
 I. Portions of real estate owned by the state that are on the shores
of public waters, as defined by RSA 271:20, and managed by a state
agency, except for the lands managed by the bureau of rail and transit
in the department of transportation according to RSA 228:57-a, may be
leased for private, noncommercial use by owners of adjacent
residentially developed properties that are either fully constructed or
for which owners can demonstrate incurring substantial liabilities in a
reasonable good faith reliance on the absence of controlling law or
regulation, known as vested rights, prior to January 1, 2011. The
following shall constitute sufficient evidence of vested rights:
                                             
 (a) The activities are specifically identified in a building
permit application that has been approved by the appropriate municipal
board or official with authority over building permits prior to January
1, 2011; or
                                             
 (b) At a minimum, a concrete foundation, or its equivalent, for
the primary structure was installed prior to January 1, 2011.
                                             
 II. Any property owner meeting the requirements of this section may
request in writing to be allowed to lease such property from the state.
However, when the adjacent property is owned by more than one
individual, such as a condominium association, the association, only as
a single entity, may request the lease. In no case shall more than one
access point to the leased property be allowed.
                                             
 III. In addition to paragraph I, portions of real estate owned by
the state and managed by a state agency that are on the shores of public
waters as defined by RSA 271:20, may be leased by persons who can
demonstrate the intent to provide a public use or benefit by utilizing
the state land, provided the proposed lease is reviewed in accordance
with all relevant procedures related to the disposal of state-owned
property and provided the lease is compliant with all statutory
requirements for the use of the land.
                                             
 IV. Leases shall be for a period of not more than 5 years.
                                             
 V. Leases may be renewed after the initial lease period has expired,
provided that the use of the leased property remains noncommercial and
private, payments have been made by the lessee according to the lease,
all statutory conditions are met, and the lessee is compliant with all
state and federal permit requirements. Such lease renewals shall not be
for more than 5 years at a time, unless extended by authorization of the
long range capital planning and utilization committee and the governor
and council. This paragraph shall apply to all lease renewals regardless
of their date of origin.
                                             
 VI. Leases and renewals under this section shall be subject to all
other requirements related to the disposal or lease of state-owned
property, including but not limited to RSA 4:39-c and RSA 4:40. Nothing
in this section shall be interpreted as limiting the ability of the
state to impose reasonable conditions and restrictions or to determine a
reasonable price with respect to any leased property.

**Source.** 2009, 254:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 4:39-e

 **4:39-e Real Property Owned or Leased by State Agencies; Reporting
Requirement. –**
                                             
 I. On or before July 1, 2013, and biennially thereafter, each state
agency, as defined in RSA 21-G:5, III, shall make a report identifying
all real property owned or leased by the agency. For each parcel owned
by the agency, the report shall include any reversion provisions,
conservation or other easements, lease arrangements with third parties,
and any other agreement that may affect the future sale of the property.
For each parcel leased by the agency, the report shall include the lease
term.
                                             
 II. Each state agency shall file the report with the governor, the
senate president, the speaker of the house of representatives, the
chairperson of the senate capital budget committee, the chairperson of
the house public works and highways committee, the chairperson of the
long range capital planning and utilization committee established in RSA
17-M:1, and the commissioner of the department of administrative
services.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of the department of administrative services
shall develop a standard format for agencies to use in submitting the
report required under this section. The form of the report shall not be
considered a rule subject to the provisions of RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 2012, 254:1, eff. June 18, 2012.

### Section 4:40

 **4:40 Disposal of Real Estate. –** Disposal of state owned real
estate shall occur as follows:
                                             
 I. Except as provided in RSA 4:39-c, RSA 228:31-b, and RSA 204-D,
upon recommendation of the head of any state department having
jurisdiction over the same, all requests for the disposal or leasing of
state-owned properties shall be reviewed and approved by the long range
capital planning and utilization committee, with advice from the council
on resources and development, prior to submission to the governor and
council for approval. Upon determination that the property is no longer
needed by the state, the governor and council shall first offer it to
the town, city, or county in which the property is located. If the town,
city, or county refuses the offer, the governor and council may sell,
convey, transfer, or lease the real property.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. Sales of real property under this section shall be at not less
than a current market value of the subject property as may be determined
by the governor and council. If the town, city, or county decides to
resell the property, it shall first offer the property to the state at
the market value at the time of sale.
                                             
 III-a. All state agencies shall charge an administrative fee for the
disposal of real property under this section. The administrative fee
shall be at least 
                                             $1,100 and shall be subject to the approval of the
long range capital planning and utilization committee, except that the
committee may waive or approve a fee less than 
                                             $1,100 in appropriate
circumstances, provided the authority of the committee to waive or lower
the fee shall be applied in a fair and consistent manner. The revenue
from the administrative fees shall be deposited into the general,
highway, turnpike, or fish and game fund, depending on which fund
initially purchased the property, except that for disposals of real
property by the department of resources and economic development the
administrative fee shall be deposited into the separate account within
the forest improvement fund, as provided in RSA 227-G:5, II(b), for the
purchase and improvement of areas suitable for state reservations.
                                             
 IV. This section shall not apply to sale of institutional lands as
provided by RSA 10:4, to real estate given or bequeathed to the state
under provisions of trust or in settlement of public assistance claims
or liens, or to state lands or their products required to be held to
procure a continuance of federal conservation work; provided, however,
that the state-capitol-region planning commission shall be provided
written notice 60 days before any sale in the city of Concord or Concord
area. This section shall also not apply to the exchange of state-owned
lands for other lands of equal or greater value, which are under the
jurisdiction of a department and used by such department during
right-of-way negotiations or to the sale of buildings that need to be
moved to clear such right-of-way for public projects found necessary
under other state laws.
                                             
 V. No state-owned property adjacent to or providing access to a
river or river segment shall be recommended for disposal by the council
on resources and development except upon the review and recommendation
of the advisory committee established in RSA 483:8.

**Source.** 1931, 105:1. 1935, 140:3. RL 27:34. RSA 4:40. 1982, 42:222.
1983, 428:5. 1986, 224:1. 1987, 381:2. 1988, 250:3, 8. 1990, 233:9.
1991, 116:3; 302:1. 1993, 25:1. 2005, 12:2; 212:4; 291:23, 26. 2006,
98:1; 307:1. 2008, 351:1, eff. Sept. 5, 2008.

Conveyance of Property Under Water
----------------------------------

### Section 4:40-a

 **4:40-a Grant of Right. –** The governor and council, upon petition
and upon recommendation of the department of environmental services, and
after consultation with the fish and game commission and such other
state agencies as may be involved, may, for such consideration as they
deem just, convey sand and gravel which is on the bed of any navigable
water or great pond, in accordance with the provisions of this
subdivision. For the purposes of this section great pond is defined as a
public water of more than 10 acres.

**Source.** 1959, 113:2. 1979, 392:3. 1996, 296:34, eff. Aug. 9, 1996.

### Section 4:40-b

 **4:40-b Petition. –** Every petition for such sand or gravel shall
be referred to the department of environmental services. The department,
after due notice to abutters and others as deemed necessary and upon
investigation, shall make its recommendations to the governor and
council. If the department shall recommend that the petition be granted
such recommendation shall include appropriate specifications and
conditions necessary to the protection of public rights and to the
protection of the rights and privileges of persons owning land in the
vicinity of the area from which the sand or gravel is to be taken.

**Source.** 1959, 113:2. 1979, 392:3. 1996, 296:34, eff. Aug. 9, 1996.

### Section 4:40-c

 **4:40-c Deed. –** The grant of the governor and council shall be
evidenced by an instrument in writing, executed by the governor and
council and attested by the secretary of state and recorded in the
county where the property is located.

**Source.** 1959, 113:2, eff. July 19, 1959.

### Section 4:40-d

 **4:40-d Payments. –** Any payment received by the state as
determined by the governor and council under the provisions of RSA
4:40-a for sand or gravel taken from the bed of a great pond or of any
navigable river shall be paid over to the state treasurer and shall be
available for general revenue of the state.

**Source.** 1959, 113:2. 1969, 148:2, eff. July 21, 1969.

### Section 4:40-e

 **4:40-e Penalty. –** Whoever removes sand and gravel from the bed
of any navigable water or great pond in violation of any provisions of
RSA 4:40-a, RSA 4:40-b, and RSA 4:40-c, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1969, 148:1. 1973, 529:2, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

Compensation of Governor and Councilors
---------------------------------------

### Section 4:41

 **4:41 Governor's Salary. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1961, 221:6, eff. July 1,
1961.
                                             ]

### Section 4:42

 **4:42 Councilors' Compensation. –** The members of the governor's
council shall be paid a salary as prescribed in RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** RS 228:23. CS 224:22. 1866, 4311:1. GS 271:17, 21. 1876,
45:1. GL 289:17, 21. PS 286:21. 1905, 110:1. PL 19:36. RL 27:46. 1953,
265:1. RSA 4:42. 1957, 274:15. 1977, 600:35, eff. July 1, 1977.

Miscellaneous Provisions
------------------------

### Section 4:43

 **4:43 Naming of Certain Buildings and Formations. –**
                                             
 I. No state park, bridge, mountain, road, river, or body of water
under the control of the state, shall be renamed without legislative
approval.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph I, if real estate is
acquired by the state by gift or by purchase, and one of the
requirements of the acquisition is that the real estate be named after a
particular person or place, the real estate shall be so named without
legislative approval.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development may name certain buildings within the state park system,
subject to the approval of governor and council.

**Source.** 1971, 100:1. 1995, 60:1, eff. July 8, 1995.

### Section 4:44

 **4:44 Hearing Prior to Confirmation of Judicial Appointment. –**
Prior to making any judicial appointment with the governor under the
provisions of the constitution, the executive council shall hold a
public hearing to allow any member of the public who so desires to offer
testimony on the prospective judicial appointee. Notice of the hearing
shall be provided at least 7 days prior to the date of the hearing in at
least 2 newspapers of statewide circulation. Prior to making the
judicial appointment, the executive council shall consider the testimony
made at the public hearing.

**Source.** 1997, 159:2, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 4:45

 **4:45 State of Emergency Declaration; Powers. –**
                                             
 I. The governor shall have the power to declare a state of
emergency, as defined in RSA 21-P:35, VIII, by executive order if the
governor finds that a natural, technological, or man-made disaster of
major proportions is imminent or has occurred within this state, and
that the safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this state require an
invocation of the provisions of this section. The general court shall
have the same power to declare a state of emergency by concurrent
resolution of the house and senate. An executive order or concurrent
resolution declaring a state of emergency shall specify the:
                                             
 (a) Nature of the emergency;
                                             
 (b) Political subdivisions or geographic areas subject to the
declaration;
                                             
 (c) Conditions that have brought about the emergency; and
                                             
 (d) Duration of the state of emergency, if less than 21 days.
                                             
 II. (a) A state of emergency shall terminate automatically 21 days
after its declaration unless it is renewed under the same procedures set
forth in paragraph I of this section. The governor may, by executive
order, renew a declaration of a state of emergency as many times as the
governor finds is necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of this state.
                                             
 (b) If the governor finds that maintaining the state of emergency
is no longer justified, the governor shall issue an executive order
terminating the state of emergency.
                                             
 (c) The legislature may terminate a state of emergency by
concurrent resolution adopted by a majority vote of each chamber. The
governor's power to renew a declaration of a state of emergency shall
terminate upon the adoption of a concurrent resolution under this
subparagraph; provided, however, that such resolution shall not preclude
the governor from declaring a new emergency for different circumstances
under paragraph I of this section.
                                             
 III. During the existence of a state of emergency, and only for so
long as such state of emergency shall exist, the governor shall have and
may exercise the following additional emergency powers:
                                             
 (a) To enforce all laws, rules, and regulations relating to
emergency management and to assume control of any or all emergency
management forces and helpers in the state.
                                             
 (b) To sell, lend, lease, give, transfer, receive, or deliver
materials or perform services for emergency management purposes on such
terms and conditions as the governor shall prescribe and without regard
to the limitations of any existing law, and to account to the state
treasurer for any funds received for such property.
                                             
 (c) To provide for and compel the evacuation of all or part of
the population from any stricken or threatened area or areas within the
state and to take such steps as are necessary for the receipt and care
of such evacuees.
                                             
 (d) Subject to the provisions of the state constitution, to
remove from office any public officer having administrative
responsibilities under RSA 21-P:34 through 21-P:48. Such removal shall
be upon charges after service upon such person of a copy of such charges
and after giving him or her an opportunity to be heard in his or her
defense. Pending the preparation and disposition of charges, the
governor may suspend such person for a period not exceeding 30 days. A
vacancy resulting from removal or suspension pursuant to this section
shall be filled by the governor until it is filled as otherwise provided
by law.
                                             
 (e) To perform and exercise such other functions, powers, and
duties as are necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection
of the civilian population.
                                             
 (f) To declare an emergency temporary location or locations for
the seat of state government at such place or places within this state
as the governor may deem advisable under the circumstances and to take
such action and issue such orders as may be necessary for an orderly
transaction of the affairs of state government to such emergency
temporary location or locations. Such emergency temporary location or
locations shall remain the seat of government until the legislature
shall by law establish a new location or locations or until the state of
emergency is declared to be ended by the governor and the seat of
government is returned to its normal location.

**Source.** 2002, 257:4, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 4:46

 **4:46 Taking of Private Property; Compensation and Use. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever a state of emergency is declared or invoked and the
taking of real or personal property is required, the governor with the
advice and consent of the executive council may, by warrant specifying
the particular real property and the personal property by specification
of the types, quantities, and general location, together with the names
of the owners, when known, authorize the commissioner of safety, by his
or her agents, to:
                                             
 (a) Take possession of any private real estate and the
improvements on it for a limited period.
                                             
 (b) Take title in the name of the state to any such improvement
when the exigencies of the situation require its destruction.
                                             
 (c) Take possession or title in the name of the state to:
                                             
 (1) Any high explosives.
                                             
 (2) Any horses, vehicles, motor vehicles, aircraft, ships,
boats, or any other means of conveyance, including the rolling stock of
railroads or of motor bus transportation.
                                             
 (3) Any cattle, poultry, provisions for man or beast,
clothing, bedding, medicines, and medical supplies in excess of the
reasonable needs of the owner and the owner's household, during the
expected duration of the emergency.
                                             
 (4) Any fuel for heating or other necessary purposes.
                                             
 (5) Any gasoline or other means of engine propulsion, or any
communications equipment or systems.
                                             
 I-a. Under no circumstances shall this section be construed to
authorize the taking, confiscation, or seizure of firearms, ammunition,
or ammunition components.
                                             
 I-b. This section shall not apply to personal property owned by or
intended for use by individuals or families.
                                             
 II. Takings under this section shall be strictly limited to the
necessities of the situation. The person proposing to take possession of
any such property in the name of the state shall present to the owner or
person in possession or control of the property a copy of the warrant
under which the person purports to act certified by the commissioner of
safety. Upon taking possession or control of such property the person
shall present a receipt specifically listing the property so taken and
specifically referring to the warrant authorizing the taking.
                                             
 III. Whenever possession of any real estate or title to any personal
property is taken under this section, its owner or possessor,
hereinafter referred to as the claimant, shall be entitled to damages on
account of such taking. Upon the taking of any such property, the chief
justice of the superior court is authorized to appoint a commission of 3
suitable persons to assess fair and just compensation in cases in which
the amount cannot be determined by agreement. The chief justice shall
fix the per diem compensation of the members of the commission and fill
any vacancies which may occur. The commission shall determine what sum
shall justly compensate the claimant for the property so taken and may
in the performance of its duties hire, and the state shall pay for the
services of, such skilled and disinterested appraisers as the commission
shall deem necessary to assist it in the performance of its duty.
                                             
 IV. Any claimant aggrieved by the award made by the commission may
appeal to the superior court from the decision within 60 days from the
granting of the award. All final awards of judgments entered against the
state in such proceedings and the fees and expenses of the commission
shall be promptly paid by the state treasurer, on warrant of the
governor and council, from any money in the general fund of the treasury
not otherwise appropriated.
                                             
 V. The property taken under this section shall be used in such
manner as the governor, with the advice and consent of the executive
council, shall deem in the best interests of the state, its inhabitants
or the United States, which manner may include the sale at the
prevailing market price or the gratuitous distribution of the articles
enumerated in subparagraphs I(c)(3), (4) and (5). All moneys derived
from the sale of any such property shall be paid over to the state
treasurer and deposited in the general fund of the state.
                                             
 VI. Any person who willfully takes possession of, or attempts to
take possession of, property, purporting to act under this section but
without authority to so act, whether by false pretense or otherwise,
upon conviction, shall be guilty of a class B felony if a natural
person, or guilty of a felony if any other person, and 1/2 of any fine
imposed shall be paid to the owner of the property and 1/2 to the
county.

**Source.** 2002, 257:4. 2003, 319:99, 100. 2006, 124:1, 2. 2012, 229:1,
2, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 4:47

 **4:47 Emergency Management Powers. –** The governor shall have
emergency management authority as defined in RSA 21-P:35, V, and
pursuant to such authority may exercise emergency management powers
including:
                                             
 I. The power to enter into mutual aid agreements with other states
relative to emergency management issues.
                                             
 II. The power to provide for emergency lines of succession to such
appointive offices in the state government as the governor in his or her
discretion deems to be necessary to insure reasonable continuity of
state government in the event of a disaster.
                                             
 III. The power to make, amend, suspend and rescind necessary orders,
rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this subdivision in
the event of a disaster beyond local control.
                                             
 IV. The power to cooperate with the President of the United States
and the commanders of the United States armed forces, the Emergency
Management Agency of the United States, and other appropriate federal
officers and agencies of other states in matters pertaining to the
emergency management of the state and nation, including the direction
and control of:
                                             
 (a) Drills, mobilization of emergency management forces, and
other tests and exercises;
                                             
 (b) Warnings and signals for drills or actual emergencies and the
mechanical devices to be used in connection with them; and
                                             
 (c) The evacuation and reception of the civilian population.

**Source.** 2002, 257:4, eff. July 1, 2002.
