---
title: CHAPTER 5 DEPARTMENT OF STATE
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 5
                                             
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
-------------------

Department and Secretary of State
---------------------------------

### Section 5:1

 **5:1 Department; Secretary; Election and Bond; Transition. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a department of state under the
executive direction of the secretary of state. The secretary of state
shall be chosen biennially in the manner directed in the constitution
and in accordance with RSA 14:2-b and shall hold office until a
successor is elected and assumes the duties of the office. The secretary
of state's duties shall be those of both a legislative branch as well as
an executive branch officer. The penal sum of his bond shall be

                                             $10,000, and the sureties upon it must be satisfactory to the governor
and council.
                                             
 II. The term of office for the new secretary of state shall begin on
the first Wednesday following the first Tuesday in January. The new
secretary of state shall assume the duties of office upon taking the
oath of office.
                                             
 III. It shall be the duty of the outgoing secretary of state to make
available to the new secretary of state all official documents and vital
information necessary for a full and complete understanding of the
operation of the department of state.

**Source.** Const. II, 67, 70. GS 13:1. GL 14:1. PS 15:1. PL 14:1. RL
21:1. 1950, 5, part 4:1. RSA 5:1. 1976, 45:10. 1989, 72:1. 1994, 4:1,
eff. May 27, 1994.

### Section 5:2

 **5:2 Salary of Secretary. –** The annual salary of the secretary of
state shall be that prescribed by RSA 94:1-4.

**Source.** RL 21:11. 1943, 207:1. 1953, 265:1, eff. July 1, 1953.

### Section 5:2-a

 **5:2-a Senior Deputy Secretary of State. –** The secretary of state
may appoint a senior deputy secretary of state who shall serve for not
more than 90 days in any one fiscal year. The senior deputy secretary of
state appointed under this section shall exercise the duties and
functions delegated to him, and all duties and functions exercised by
him while so acting shall have the same validity and effect as though
performed by the secretary of state.

**Source.** 1977, 210:1. 1989, 254:1, eff. July 25, 1989.

### Section 5:3

 **5:3 Clerks and Assistants. –** Subject to the state personnel
regulations, and within the limits of available appropriations and
funds, the secretary of state may employ a chief clerk and such other
clerks and assistants as may be necessary. If a subordinate classified
employee's salary exceeds the maximum salary for an unclassified
supervisor, the secretary of state is authorized to increase the
unclassified supervisor's salary in the amount provided in RSA 94:1-a,
III.

**Source.** 1921, 118:2. PL 14:14. 1931, 77:1. RL 21:14. 1950, 5, part
2:2. 2006, 275:7, eff. June 15, 2006.

### Section 5:4

 **5:4 Preservation of Papers. –** The secretary shall arrange
methodically, fold uniformly, file, and label all the papers in his
office belonging to the state, preserve the same carefully, and give
copies thereof, duly authenticated, whenever required and paid for such
copies.

**Source.** Const. II, 68. RS 11:4. CS 11:4. GS 13:5. GL 14:5. PS 15:4.
PL 14:2. RL 21:2.

### Section 5:4-a

 **5:4-a Display of Historical Documents. –** The secretary of state
shall, during certain times within his discretion, put on public display
in rooms 118 and 119 of the state house the authentic copy of the
declaration of independence and bill of rights which he has in his
possession. This document shall be displayed under conditions which
ensure its security and protection from theft, damage, or destruction.
When the document is not on public display, it shall be under the care
of the secretary of state.

**Source.** 1979, 366:1. 1985, 202:1, eff. July 30, 1985.

### Section 5:5

 **5:5 Seal; Certification. –** He shall have the custody of the
state seal; and copies of records and papers in his office, certified by
him or his deputy and authenticated by the state seal, shall be evidence
in like manner as the originals.

**Source.** RS 11:1. CS 11:1. GS 13:10. GL 14:10. PS 15:5. PL 14:3. RL
21:3.

### Section 5:5-a

 **5:5-a Facsimile Seal. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1959, 217:2, eff. Aug. 16,
1959.
                                             ]

### Section 5:6

 **5:6 Election Items. –** The secretary of state shall prepare and
distribute the election-related items as provided in the election laws.

**Source.** RS 11:2. CS 11:2. GS 13:3. GL 14:3. 1885, 94:4. PS 15:7. PL
14:4. RL 21:4. RSA 5:6. 1979, 436:2, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 5:6-a

 **5:6-a Election Procedure Manual. –** The secretary of state shall
prepare and distribute an election procedure manual as provided in RSA
652:22.

**Source.** 1977, 526:1. 1979, 436:3, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 5:6-b

 **5:6-b Assistance; Benefits. –** The secretary of state shall have
authority to employ such additional assistants as may be required in
carrying out the provisions of the election laws, and all necessary
expense thereof shall be paid by the state. All full-time employees and
officials in this department shall be eligible for annual and sick
leave.

**Source.** 1979, 436:4. 1988, 121:11, eff. Oct. 1, 1988.

### Section 5:6-c

 **5:6-c Printing. –** The secretary of state is authorized to
contract for printing in connection with his duties under the election
laws. The provisions of RSA 8 relative to competitive bidding for state
purchases shall not apply to contracts entered into by the secretary of
state hereunder.

**Source.** 1979, 436:4, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 5:6-d

 **5:6-d Election Fund. –**
                                             
 I. There is established in the office of the state treasurer a
nonlapsing fund to be known as the election fund which shall be kept
distinct and separate from all other funds. The election fund is
established to meet the requirements of section 254(b) of the Help
America Vote Act, Public Law 107-252.
                                             
 II. The treasurer shall deposit in the election fund all monies
received by the state pursuant to the Help America Vote Act of 2002,
Public Law 107-252. The treasurer shall also deposit in the election
fund such other funds received under state or federal law, or donated to
the state by private parties, for the purposes of conducting elections,
voter and election official education, election law enforcement, and
related information technology projects and improvements, and shall
credit any interest or income earned on monies on deposit to the fund.
                                             
 III. The secretary of state is authorized to accept, budget, and,
subject to the limitations of this paragraph, expend monies in the
election fund received from any party for the purposes of conducting
elections, voter and election official education, the purchase or lease
of equipment that complies with the Help America Vote Act of 2002,
Public Law 107-252, or with RSA 659:13, V, reimbursing the department of
safety for the actual cost of voter identification cards, election law
enforcement, and improvements to related information technology,
including acquisition and operation of an automated election management
system. The secretary of state shall not expend any monies in the
election fund unless the balance in the fund following such expenditures
shall be at least 12 times the estimated annual cost of maintaining the
programs established to comply with the Help America Vote Act of 2002,
Public Law 107-252.
                                             
 IV. All monies in the election fund shall be continually
appropriated to the department of state and shall not lapse.
                                             
 V. The treasurer, upon approval of the secretary of state shall pay
the expenses of planning, equipping, administering, staffing,
maintaining, and improving the election services provided by the
secretary of state and related services provided by the department of
safety, the department of health and human services, and the department
of justice out of any monies in the election fund, subject to the
limitations established in paragraph III, notwithstanding any other
provision of law.
                                             
 VI. The secretary of state shall include appropriations from the
election fund in the department budget submitted pursuant to RSA 9:4.
                                             
 VII. The treasurer shall, upon request of the secretary of state,
establish separate accounts within the election fund in order to
segregate funds according to funding source.

**Source.** 2003, 266:1. 2009, 144:218. 2010, 180:2; 317:69; 330:12.
2012, 284:3, eff. June 27, 2012; 284:8, eff. Sept. 1, 2015.

### Section 5:7-9

 **5:7 to 5:9 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 353:1, eff. Aug. 24,
1971.
                                             ]

### Section 5:10

 **5:10 Office Fees. –** Except as otherwise provided, the following
fees shall be paid to the secretary of state for the use of the state:
For every commission issued to a justice of the peace or to a notary
public, 
                                             $75, 
                                             $25 of which shall be deposited into the fund established
by RSA 5:10-b; for every certificate pertaining to the existence of a
corporation, trade name, or other business entity, or writ served on the
same, 
                                             $5; for every such certificate in long form, 
                                             $10; for every
apostille provided under the Hague Convention of 1961 and for every
certificate for a notary public or justice of the peace, 
                                             $10; for every
other certificate under seal of the state, 
                                             $5; for engrossing private
acts, 
                                             $1 for each page of 240 words; for expedited service of every 10
documents or any part thereof, 
                                             $25.

**Source.** RS 229:23. CS 245:23. GS 272:24. GL 290:24. PS 287:29. 1893,
64:2. 1919, 59:1. 1921, 84:1. PL 14:15. RL 21:15. 1949, 265:12. RSA
5:10. 1977, 563:35. 1987, 393:7. 1990, 3:19. 2003, 319:19. 2005, 118:7.
2010, 180:3, eff. June 21, 2010.

### Section 5:10-a

 **5:10-a Handling Charge. –** If the secretary of state collects a
fee electronically for any registration, any document, or any other
purpose, the secretary of state shall collect a handling charge for each
fee paid electronically, including by Internet or facsimile, by adding

                                             $2 to the total fee.

**Source.** 2004, 248:66, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 5:10-b

 **5:10-b Notary Fee Account. –** There is established in the state
treasury a separate account to be known as the notary fee account. All
fees which are credited to this account shall be continually
appropriated to the secretary of state. The account shall be used by the
secretary of state to fulfill the duties established by RSA 455:17.
Twenty-five dollars of every application fee for a commission as a
notary public or justice of the peace under RSA 5:10 shall be credited
to this account. The fund shall be nonlapsing, except that any balance
remaining in the account over 
                                             $100,000 at the end of a fiscal biennium
shall lapse to the general fund.

**Source.** 2010, 180:4, eff. June 21, 2010.

### Section 5:11

 **5:11 Account of Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1994, 381:2, eff. June 9,
1994.
                                             ]

### Section 5:12

 **5:12 Reports. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 201:5, eff. Aug. 11, 1995.
                                             ]

### Section 5:13

 **5:13 Commissions and Boards Functioning Within Department. –** The
ballot law commission, the boxing and wrestling commission and the joint
board of licensure and certification shall each function within the
department of state as a separate organizational entity and with all the
powers and duties as heretofore provided, except as otherwise provided
by law.

**Source.** 1950, 5, part 4:2. RSA 5:13. 1985, 416:13. 1989, 37:1. 2007,
300:3. 2011, 224:107, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 5:13-a

 **5:13-a New Hampshire Real Estate Commission Administratively
Attached. –** The New Hampshire real estate commission established under
RSA 331-A:1-a shall be administratively attached, under RSA 21-G:10, to
the department of state.

**Source.** 1987, 287:3, eff. May 25, 1987.

### Section 5:13-b

 **5:13-b Real Estate Appraiser Board. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 224:108,
eff. July 1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 5:14

 **5:14 Licensing Board or Commission Regulations to be Available.
–** The secretary of state shall have available the rules and
regulations affecting the issuance of licenses or certificates of
registration by each professional or trade licensing or registering
board or commission enumerated in RSA 5:13; he shall require from the
secretary of each of said boards or commissions such information as will
enable him to carry out the purposes hereof.

**Source.** 1950, 5, part 4:2, eff. June 30, 1950.

### Section 5:15

 **5:15 Uniform Records for Licensing Boards and Commissions. –** So
far as practicable, and after consultation with the professional and
trade licensing and registering boards and commissions within the
department of state, the secretary of state shall prescribe uniform
procedures for all secretarial and recording activities of said boards
and commissions.

**Source.** 1950, 5, part 4:2, eff. June 30, 1950.

### Section 5:15-a

 **5:15-a Trade Agreement With Canada. –** The department of state,
in accordance with the Free Trade Agreement between the United States
and Canada, shall provide any corporate registration information
necessary under RSA 293-A for the purpose of promoting business, labor
and trade opportunities with Canada.

**Source.** 1989, 180:1, eff. July 16, 1989.

Deputy Secretary
----------------

### Section 5:16

 **5:16 Oath; Bond; Removal. –** The deputy secretary of state before
entering upon the duties of his office shall take the oaths required by
article 84 of the constitution, and give bond in the sum of 
                                             $10,000,
with sufficient sureties to the satisfaction of the governor and
council, for the faithful and punctual performance of such duties. He
may be removed by the secretary.

**Source.** Const. II, 69. 1857, 1969:2. 1866, 4269:1. GS 13:7. GL 14:7.
PS 15:2. PL 14:9. RL 21:9.

### Section 5:17

 **5:17 Duties. –** The deputy secretary of state shall exercise the
duties of the office of secretary of state while the latter is absent,
or unable from any cause to act.

**Source.** Const. II, 69. GS 13:9. GL 14:9. PS 15:3. PL 14:10. RL
21:10.

### Section 5:18

 **5:18 Salary. –** The annual salary of the deputy secretary of
state shall be that prescribed by RSA 94:1-4.

**Source.** 1866, 4269:2. GS 271:3. GL 289:3. PS 286:4. 1893, 1:1. 1909,
81:1, 2. 1915, 24:1. 1917, 220:8. 1919, 117:1. 1921, 118:1. PL 14:13.
1927, 133:1. RL 21:13. 1953, 265:1, eff. July 1, 1953.

State Contracts
---------------

### Section 5:18-a

 **5:18-a Requirements. –** In addition to any other requirements, no
contract for personal services, under which the total of payments equals

                                             $2,500 or more, in lump sum or installments, between the state and a
nonresident corporation, partnership or association or between the state
and a resident doing business under a name other than his own, shall be
valid unless the contract shall have attached to it evidence of
registration with the secretary of state as required under RSA 293-A,
305-A or 349. This requirement shall not apply to a nonresident
corporation not organized for profit, except that each contract between
the state and a resident or nonresident corporation, partnership or
association shall have attached to the contract evidence of authority of
the parties to execute and be bound by the contract.

**Source.** 1969, 85:1. 1975, 215:1. 1989, 256:1, eff. May 26, 1989.
2013, 68:1, eff. Aug. 5, 2013.

Province Records
----------------

### Section 5:19

 **5:19 Preservation. –** The records of all the courts of the
province of New Hampshire and all the records of deeds and all the
probate records, and all the original papers of the province of New
Hampshire prior to the time the act for the division of said province
into counties took effect, shall be kept by the secretary of state in
the division of archives and records management.

**Source.** 1897, 55:1. 1899, 63:1, 2. PL 14:16. RL 21:16. RSA 5:19.
1994, 381:1. 2003, 97:4, eff. Aug. 5, 2003.

### Section 5:20

 **5:20 Copies. –** The secretary of state, whenever requested and
paid for so doing, shall furnish copies of any of said records, and such
copies, when certified by the secretary or his deputy and authenticated
by the seal of the state, shall be evidence in like manner as the
originals.

**Source.** 1899, 63:3. PL 14:17. RL 21:17.

### Section 5:21

 **5:21 Fee. –** The fee for furnishing copies of records as provided
in the preceding section shall be 
                                             $1 for each page of 240 words.

**Source.** 1949, 265:13, eff. June 22, 1949.

Facsimile Signature
-------------------

### Section 5:22

 **5:22 Facsimile Signature. –** The secretary of state, the deputy
secretary of state, or the designee of either may affix a facsimile
signature to any record or certificate required or permitted to be
issued by them.

**Source.** 1977, 407:36, eff. Sept. 3, 1977.

Assistant Secretaries of State
------------------------------

### Section 5:23

 **5:23 Assistant Secretary of State; Office Supervisor. –**
                                             
 I. The secretary of state may appoint assistant secretaries of state
within the limits of the appropriation made for the department of state
who shall serve at the pleasure of the secretary of state. The salary of
an assistant secretary of state shall be set by the secretary of state
in accordance with the provisions of RSA 94:1-4.
                                             
 II. If there is a vacancy in the office of an assistant secretary of
state appointed under paragraph I, the secretary of state may instead
appoint an office supervisor in accordance with state personnel rules.
The appropriation for the vacant assistant secretary of state position
shall be used to fund the position of office supervisor. The office
supervisor shall be a classified employee and shall be classified at
least labor grade 22. The office supervisor shall perform such duties as
may be assigned by the secretary of state.

**Source.** 1977, 600:18. 1985, 292:3. 1987, 275:1. 1989, 254:2, eff.
July 25, 1989.

### Section 5:24

 **5:24 Duties. –** An assistant secretary of state shall perform
such duties as may be assigned to him by the secretary of state.

**Source.** 1977, 600:18, eff. Oct. 26, 1977.

Archives and Records Management
-------------------------------

### Section 5:25

 **5:25 Declaration of Policy. –** The legislature declares that a
program for the efficient and economical management of state and local
records will promote economy, efficiency, and integrity in the
day-to-day record-keeping activities of the state government and will
facilitate and expedite government operations. The legislature further
declares that the interests of the state and of posterity require the
establishment of archives in which may be preserved records, papers, and
documents having permanent and historical value.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1. 2006, 275:1, eff. June 15, 2006.

### Section 5:26

 **5:26 Short Title. –** This subdivision shall be known as "Archives
and Records Management Act.''

**Source.** 1987, 353:1. 2003, 97:2, eff. Aug. 5, 2003.

### Section 5:27

 **5:27 Division Established. –** There shall be a division of
archives and records management in the department of state, under the
executive direction of the state archivist.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1. 2003, 97:2, eff. Aug. 5, 2003.

### Section 5:28

 **5:28 Appointment of Director. –** The secretary of state, with the
approval of governor and council, shall appoint the director of the
division of archives and records management, who shall be known as the
state archivist and who shall be an unclassified state employee. The
director shall have a minimum of a master's degree in library science or
history or 10 years prior experience as an archivist or experience in a
related field. The term of office for the state archivist shall be for 4
years. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term. The salary of
the state archivist shall be as specified in RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1. 1989, 65:1. 2003, 97:2, eff. Aug. 5, 2003.

### Section 5:29

 **5:29 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Agency'' means any department, office, commission, board, or
other unit, however designated, or the executive branch of state
government.
                                             
 II. "Archives'' means records having permanent or historical value.
                                             
 III. "Director'' means the director of the division of archives and
records management of the department of state.
                                             
 IV. "Local record'' means a record of any county, city, town,
district, or authority or of any public corporation or political entity
whether organized and existing under charter or under general law,
unless the record is designated or treated as a state record under state
law.
                                             
 V. "Record'' means document, book, paper, manuscript, drawing,
photograph, map, sound recording, video recording, electronic record,
microform, or other material, regardless of physical form or
characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or in connection with
the transaction of official business. Library and museum material made
or acquired and preserved solely for library use or exhibition purposes,
extra copies of documents preserved only for convenience or reference,
and stocks of publications and of processed documents are "nonrecord
materials'' and are not included within this definition of records.
                                             
 VI. "Electronic record'' means information that is created or
retained in a digital format.
                                             
 VII. "Records center'' means the depository of records and
archives.
                                             
 VIII. "State record'' means:
                                             
 (a) A record of a department, office, commission, board, or other
agency, however designated, of the state government;
                                             
 (b) A record of the state legislature;
                                             
 (c) A record of any court of record, whether of statewide or
local jurisdiction; or
                                             
 (d) Any other record designated or treated as a state record
under state law.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1. 2003, 97:4. 2006, 275:2, eff. June 15, 2006.

### Section 5:30

 **5:30 Duties of Director. –** The director shall, with due regard
for the functions of the agencies concerned, and subject to the approval
of the secretary of state:
                                             
 I. Establish standards, procedures, and techniques for effective
management of state records.
                                             
 II. Make continuing surveys of paperwork operations and recommend
improvements in current records management practices including the use
of space, equipment, and supplies employed in creating, maintaining,
storing, and servicing records.
                                             
 III. Establish standards for the preparation of schedules providing
for the retention of state records of continuing value and for the
prompt and orderly disposal of state records no longer possessing
sufficient administrative, legal, or fiscal value to warrant their
further keeping.
                                             
 IV. Establish standards and formulate procedures for the transfer of
records having permanent and historical value to the archives.
                                             
 V. Require such reports from agencies as are required for the
administration of the program.
                                             
 VI. Provide guidance to municipal officials in the arrangement,
description, conservation, preservation, and accessibility of municipal
archives.
                                             
 VII. Collect, arrange, transcribe, and cause to be printed such
portions of the early state and provincial records as he may deem
expedient in such style, form, and printed quality as he may determine.
                                             
 VIII. Provide for the deposit at the records center of photo
reproductions of unrecorded documents pertaining to the affairs of
public importance of any town or division of the state prior to 1975
which are accompanied by an affidavit recording the source of the
document.
                                             
 IX. Require town officials having custody of town or parish records,
plans, documents, or public papers from prior to the year 1910, to
deposit the same at the archives for the purpose of being copied and
indexed as specified in RSA 41:64.
                                             
 X. Maintain a descriptive inventory and photographic reproduction
collection of all portraits and artifacts that belong to the state.
                                             
 XI. Maintain, publish, and edit documents which encourage the study
of the history of New Hampshire and its constitution through its
documented and artifactual heritage.
                                             
 XII. Establish and maintain a central microfilming laboratory and
establish micrographic standards for public records.
                                             
 XIII. Determine which records deposited at the records center shall
be microfilmed.
                                             
 XIV. Determine the original records to be destroyed upon review and
approval of the microfilm of such records.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1. 1989, 65:2. 2006, 275:3, eff. June 15, 2006.

### Section 5:31

 **5:31 Records Center; Rules. –** The director, subject to the
supervision of the secretary of state, shall have charge of the records
center. He shall, subject to the provisions of RSA 5:40, adopt rules
governing:
                                             
 I. The organization of the records center.
                                             
 II. Transfer of records to the records center.
                                             
 III. The inventory of materials in the records center.
                                             
 IV. The means of access and reference to records and archives at the
records center.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1, eff. July 24, 1987.

### Section 5:32

 **5:32 Building and Facilities. –** The state records and archives
shall control all space in the state records and archives center. The
department of administrative services, division of plant and property
shall maintain the state records and archives center in suitable repair
and condition for use by the division of archives and records
management.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1. 2003, 97:4, eff. Aug. 5, 2003. 2014, 327:38,
eff. Aug. 2, 2014.

### Section 5:33

 **5:33 Agency Heads. –** The head of each agency shall:
                                             
 I. Establish and maintain an active, continuing program for the
economical and efficient management of the records of the agency,
consistent with the rules adopted by the director and under the
director's supervision.
                                             
 II. Make and maintain records containing adequate and proper
documentation of the organization, functions, policies, decisions,
procedures, and essential transactions of the agency designed to furnish
information to protect the legal and financial rights of the state and
of persons directly affected by the agency's activities.
                                             
 III. Submit to the director, in accordance with the standards
established by him in rules adopted under RSA 5:40, schedules proposing
the length of time each state record series warrants retention for
administrative, legal, or fiscal purposes after it has been received by
the agency. The head of each agency shall submit lists of state records
in his custody that are of permanent and historical value to the state.
He shall likewise submit lists of state records in his custody that are
not needed in the transaction of current business and that do not have
sufficient administrative, legal, or fiscal value to warrant their
further keeping.
                                             
 IV. Cooperate with the director in the conduct of surveys made by
him pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision.
                                             
 V. Comply with the rules and procedures adopted by the director.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1, eff. July 24, 1987.

### Section 5:34

 **5:34 Construction of Subdivision. –** Nothing in this subdivision
shall be construed to divest agency heads of the authority to determine
the nature and form of the records required in the administration of
their several departments, or to compel the removal of records deemed
necessary by them in the performance of their statutory duties. Any
records made confidential by law shall be so treated in the records
center.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1, eff. July 24, 1987.

### Section 5:35

 **5:35 Local Records. –** The director shall accept for storage in
the state archives such local records as the municipal records board
established under RSA 33-A:4-a may require.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1. 2006, 275:4, eff. June 15, 2006.

### Section 5:35-a

 **5:35-a Congressional Records. –** The director shall accept for
preservation and storage any papers or records donated to the state by a
member of the New Hampshire congressional delegation from their service
in the United States Senate or House of Representatives. Such records
shall be placed in a New Hampshire depository selected by the
congressman or senator, with the approval of the director, and shall be
preserved and disclosed under such terms and conditions as the
congressman or senator and the director deem appropriate.

**Source.** 2010, 365:1, eff. Sept. 21, 2010.

### Section 5:35-b

 **5:35-b Records of the Governor. –** Within one year of leaving
office, the governor, in consultation with the director, shall donate a
selection of official papers and records to the state. Such records
shall be placed in a New Hampshire depository selected by the governor,
with the approval of the director, and shall be preserved and disclosed
under such terms and conditions as the governor and director deem
appropriate.

**Source.** 2010, 365:1, eff. Sept. 21, 2010.

### Section 5:36

 **5:36 Assistance to Legislative and Judicial Branches. –** Under
the same provisions specified in RSA 5:33, the director shall assist and
advise in the establishment of records management programs in the
legislative and judicial branches of state government and shall, as
required by them, provide program services similar to those available to
the executive branch of state government pursuant to the provisions of
this subdivision.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1. 2006, 275:4, eff. June 15, 2006.

### Section 5:37

 **5:37 Records Not to be Damaged or Destroyed. –** All records made
or received by or under the authority of or coming into the custody,
control, or possession of public officials of this state in the course
of their public duties are the property of the state and shall not be
mutilated, destroyed, transferred, removed, or otherwise damaged or
disposed of, in whole or in part, except as provided by law.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1, eff. July 24, 1987.

### Section 5:38

 **5:38 Disposal of Records. –** Unless otherwise provided by law
with respect to particular departments or particular records, records
not having a permanent or historical value may be destroyed at the end
of 4 years from their making, provided that the rules of the director,
as adopted under RSA 5:40, may provide that designated records may be
destroyed at an earlier period or require their retention for a longer
period.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1. 1996, 239:1, eff. Aug. 9, 1996.

### Section 5:39

 **5:39 Transfer of State Records. –** Subject to the limitations of
the constitution, the secretary of state may transfer any of his records
to the records center and he may transfer reports of state agencies to
the state library.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1, eff. July 24, 1987.

### Section 5:40

 **5:40 Procedures Manual. –** The director, under the supervision of
the secretary of state, shall establish a manual of uniform procedures
necessary and proper to effectuate the purpose of this subdivision. Such
procedures and any subsequent revisions, when approved by the governor
and council, shall be binding upon all officers and employees of the
state.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1. 2006, 275:5, eff. June 15, 2006.

### Section 5:41

 **5:41 Records From Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. –** All
records of the Rockingham county registry of deeds recorded as
Rockingham county registry of deeds volumes 101-239, inclusive, which
do, in fact, contain records of transfers of land now located in other
counties of the state, shall be removed by the division of archives and
records management from the county building in Exeter to the records and
archives center, at a time mutually agreed upon by the director and the
Rockingham county register of deeds. The purpose of this section is to
remove from the Rockingham county registry of deeds all records
concerning real property now located in counties other than Rockingham
county.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1. 2003, 97:4, eff. Aug. 5, 2003.

State Historical Records Advisory Board
---------------------------------------

### Section 5:42

 **5:42 State Historical Records Advisory Board Established. –**
There is hereby established the state historical records advisory board
composed of the state archivist who shall be chairman of the state
historical records advisory board and at least 7 members to be appointed
by the governor and council. The term of office for each of said
appointed members shall be for 3 years. Each member shall hold office
until his successor is appointed and qualified. In case of a vacancy
other than by expiration of the term, the appointment shall be for the
balance of the unexpired term.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1, eff. July 24, 1987.

### Section 5:43

 **5:43 Qualifications. –** A majority of the appointed members of
the board shall be persons of recognized professional qualifications and
experienced in the administration of historical records or in a field of
research which makes extensive use of such records. The composition of
the board shall be as broadly representative as possible of the public
and private archival and research institutions and organizations of the
state.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1, eff. July 24, 1987.

### Section 5:44

 **5:44 Compensation. –** The members of the state historical records
advisory board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed
their reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties
under this subdivision.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1, eff. July 24, 1987.

### Section 5:45

 **5:45 Duties. –** The state historical records advisory board shall
serve as a central advisory body for historical records, planning for
projects developed and carried out under the program established under
RSA 5:25 in the state and in compliance with the National Historical
Publications and Records Commission. The board may:
                                             
 I. Sponsor surveys regarding the condition and needs of historical
records in the state.
                                             
 II. Solicit and develop plans for historical records projects.
                                             
 III. Review and make recommendations regarding historical records
projects proposed by institutions in the state.
                                             
 IV. Develop and revise state plans for historical records projects
according to established priorities.
                                             
 V. Review the operation and progress of approved historical records
projects in the state, financed by the National Historical Publications
and Records Commission, through the board.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1, eff. July 24, 1987.

### Section 5:46

 **5:46 Cooperation With Other Bodies. –** The state historical
records advisory board is authorized to cooperate with cities, towns,
private groups, and institutions in the state and with agencies of state
government, with respect to matters of interest in collecting and
preserving historical records.

**Source.** 1987, 353:1, eff. July 24, 1987.

Local Government Records Management Improvement Program
-------------------------------------------------------

### Section 5:47

 **5:47 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Fund'' means the New Hampshire local government records
management improvement fund.
                                             
 II. "Local government'' means cities, towns, or unincorporated
places.
                                             
 III. "Local government records manager'' means the liaison between
the division of archives and records management and the municipalities
who shall coordinate the local government records management improvement
program.

**Source.** 2002, 145:2. 2003, 97:4, eff. Aug. 5, 2003.

### Section 5:48

 **5:48 Fund Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a special fund to be known as the New
Hampshire local government records management improvement fund. The fund
shall consist of such moneys as may be appropriated or federal and other
non-state source grants or funds received for the purposes of this
subdivision. The fund shall be managed by the state treasurer, shall be
nonlapsing, and shall be continually appropriated for the purposes of
this subdivision.
                                             
 II. Use of the fund shall be solely for the development and
continuance of a full-time local government records management component
in the state records management and archives program, and for grants to
local governments for records management improvement as provided under
RSA 5:51. Such programs shall be responsible for providing aid, advice,
and assistance to local governments concerning the proper management and
preservation of the public records in their custody and care, as state
law requires. Funds shall be expended to support grants for local
government records management improvement, and for administrative and
other costs associated with the provision of consultative and technical
services, including, but not limited to, education programming,
technical publications, website development, and micrographics and
digitization services.

**Source.** 2002, 145:2, eff. July 12, 2002.

### Section 5:49

 **5:49 Duties of Local Government Records Manager; Position
Established. –** There is established in the division of archives and
records management, department of state, the position of local
government records manager who shall be a classified state employee. The
local government records manager shall have the following duties:
                                             
 I. It shall be the responsibility of the local government records
manager to advise local governments on planning and administering
programs for the creation, maintenance, preservation, reproduction,
retention, and disposition of their records; to advise local governments
on the development of micrographics systems, automated data processing
systems, and other systems that rely on technology to create, store,
manage, and reproduce information or records; and to advise local
governments on the preservation and use of vital records with enduring
value for historical or other research purposes.
                                             
 II. It shall be the responsibility of the local government records
manager to advise the municipal records board concerning local
government records policies and procedures, state services and financial
support needed to assist or advise local officials, regulations
pertaining to local government records, and grants for local government
records management improvement pursuant to RSA 5:51.
                                             
 III. The local government records manager is authorized to employ
specialists in records management, archives, and administration, and
other specialists necessary to provide advisory, consultative, and
technical assistance to local governments from moneys available for this
purpose in the fund.
                                             
 IV. The local government records manager shall provide a quarterly
financial statement of the fund to members of the municipal records
board and an annual financial and narrative report of the program to the
state archivist for incorporation in the annual report of the division
of archives and records management submitted to the secretary of state.
Each year the municipal records board shall review and make
recommendations on a proposed operational and expenditure plan for the
fund prior to its adoption by the state archivist. The annual
expenditure plan shall be subject to the approval of the secretary of
state.

**Source.** 2002, 145:2. 2003, 97:4, eff. Aug. 5, 2003.

### Section 5:50

 **5:50 Grants Review Committee. –**
                                             
 I. The New Hampshire municipal records board, established in RSA
33-A:4-a, shall appoint a grants review committee that shall be
responsible for screening the grant applications for completeness,
conformity, soundness of budget, and relevance to objectives of the
program. The grants review committee shall review the applications and
make its recommendations on funding to the state archivist. The grants
review committee shall consist of the following:
                                             
 (a) Two members of the municipal records board, appointed by the
chairman.
                                             
 (b) The president of the New Hampshire Tax Collectors'
Association, or his or her representative.
                                             
 (c) The president of the New Hampshire City and Town Clerks'
Association, or his or her representative.
                                             
 (d) One individual having the combined office of town clerk and
tax collector, who shall be named jointly by the presidents of the New
Hampshire Tax Collectors' Association and the president of the New
Hampshire City and Town Clerks' Association.
                                             
 II. The terms of the municipal records board appointees to this
committee shall be concurrent with their terms to the municipal records
board. The terms of the presidents of the New Hampshire City and Town
Clerks' Association and the New Hampshire Tax Collectors' Association,
or their representatives, shall be concurrent with the terms as
president of their respective associations. The term of the individual
having the combined office of town clerk and tax collector shall be for
one year from the date of appointment, but that individual shall
continue to serve in said capacity until a successor is named or the
individual is reappointed.

**Source.** 2002, 145:2, eff. July 12, 2002.

### Section 5:51

 **5:51 Grants for Local Government Records Management Improvement.
–**
                                             
 I. The state archivist, upon consultation with the municipal records
board's grants review committee, is authorized to award grants for
records management improvement as provided under RSA 5:49 to local
governments, groups of cooperating local governments, or cooperative
ventures that include local governments.
                                             
 II. The municipal records board shall set forth criteria and
procedures necessary to award grants for records management improvement
from moneys available for this purpose in the fund. Such criteria may
include:
                                             
 (a) The development by the applicant of a written plan for a
records management program.
                                             
 (b) The condition of the records of the applicant.
                                             
 (c) The geographic location of the applicant so as to provide, to
the extent practicable, equitable geographic distribution of the
grants.
                                             
 (d) The particular design of the applicant's records management
program.
                                             
 (e) The applicant's arrangements for cooperative activities for a
records management program.

**Source.** 2002, 145:2, eff. July 12, 2002.
