---
title: 'CHAPTER 6-B INVESTMENT AND DEBT MANAGEMENT'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 6-B
                                             
INVESTMENT AND DEBT MANAGEMENT
------------------------------

### Section 6-B:1

 **6-B:1 Office of Investment and Debt Management. –** There is
established within the state treasury an office of investment and debt
management which shall be under the executive direction of a deputy
treasurer appointed by the treasurer. The deputy treasurer shall be a
person qualified by training and experience and shall serve at the
pleasure of the treasurer.

**Source.** 1983, 419:5, eff. June 24, 1983.

### Section 6-B:2

 **6-B:2 Duties of Office. –** The office of investment and debt
management shall, subject to any restrictions in RSA 6 and RSA 6-A,
assist the treasurer in performing functions and duties as follows:
                                             
 I. Analyze and manage short-term and long-term cash flow
requirements.
                                             
 II. Maximize the returns on state investments, considering cash flow
and liquidity requirements.
                                             
 III. Coordinate and monitor cash needs for investment and debt
activity.
                                             
 IV. Develop a long-term debt plan, including criteria for the
issuance of debt and an evaluation of how much total debt is justified.
                                             
 V. Evaluate revenue projections for each proposed revenue bond issue
and report findings to the governor and the capital budget overview
committee.
                                             
 VI. Advise the general court on all investment and debt matters,
including, but not limited to, new bond issues, the status of state
debt, and the status of state investments.
                                             
 VII. Report quarterly or more often if required to the governor and
council, the commissioner of administrative services and the joint
legislative fiscal committee the total amount of funds in the treasury,
the amount belonging to each separate fund, a summary of the funds on
deposit and the investments held, and the interest income earned
thereon, and any information pertaining to the duties of his office he
may think proper or the governor or legislature may require.
                                             
 VIII. Perform all other functions of the state treasury relative to
state investment and debt management, including, but not limited to, the
making of debt service payments, the sale of bonds, and the preparation
of policies for the investment of state funds for yearly review and
adoption by the state treasurer.

**Source.** 1983, 419:5. 1985, 399:3, I. 1996, 209:1, eff. Aug. 9, 1996.

### Section 6-B:3

 **6-B:3 Notification of Proposed Bond Issues. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any other provisions of state law, for the
purpose of coordinating state activity in the bond market, all state and
local governmental entities authorized by law to issue bonds, including,
but not limited to: all state agencies, the university system of New
Hampshire, the New Hampshire municipal bond bank, the New Hampshire
housing finance agency, all counties, cities, towns, village districts,
school districts, precincts, housing authorities, local development
corporations, and any special purpose districts or authorities shall
provide the office of investment and debt management with the
notification of intent to borrow or issue bonds at the earliest possible
date; provided, however, that such issuers shall, no later than 30 days
prior to the sale of any debt issue at public or private sale, give
written notice of the proposed sale to the office of investment and debt
management, by mail, postage prepaid. Failure to give this notice shall
not affect the validity of the sale.
                                             
 II. The treasurer may adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A concerning
the information to be included in and the form of notifications required
under paragraph I.

**Source.** 1983, 419:5. 1985, 357:7. 1997, 208:4, eff. Aug. 17, 1997.

### Section 6-B:4

 **6-B:4 Informational Clearinghouse. –** The treasurer through the
office of investment and debt management shall:
                                             
 I. Collect, maintain, and provide information on state and local
debt authorized, sold, and outstanding and serve as an information
center for all state and local debt issues.
                                             
 II. Upon request of any state or local government unit assist in the
planning, preparation, marketing and sale of new debt issues to reduce
costs and to ensure the protection of the issues and of the state's
credit.
                                             
 III. Maintain contact with state and municipal bond issuers,
underwriters, credit rating agencies, investors, and others to improve
the market for state and local government debt issues.
                                             
 IV. Recommend changes in state law and local practices to improve
the sale and servicing of state and local debt.

**Source.** 1985, 357:7, eff. June 18, 1985.
