---
title: 'CHAPTER 6-D DRINKING WATER AND GROUNDWATER TRUST FUND'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 6-D
                                             
DRINKING WATER AND GROUNDWATER TRUST FUND
-----------------------------------------

### Section 6-D:1

 **6-D:1 Drinking Water and Groundwater Trust Fund Established. –**
There is hereby established in the office of the treasurer the drinking
water and groundwater trust fund which shall be kept distinct and
separate from all other funds. After transferring 10 percent of the
funds to the revenue stabilization reserve account as provided in RSA
7:6-e, the remainder of all proceeds received by the state from *State
v. Exxon Corp., et al.,* in which the state sued for damages related to
MTBE contamination, shall be placed in the trust fund. The state
treasurer shall be the trustee of the trust fund, and shall invest the
trust fund in accordance with RSA 6:8. Any earnings on trust fund moneys
shall be added to the trust fund. All moneys in the trust fund shall be
nonlapsing and shall be continually appropriated to the state treasurer.
The state treasurer shall disburse funds from the trust fund solely for
the purposes and in the manner set forth in RSA 485-F.

**Source.** 2016, 11:1, eff. Mar. 31, 2016.

### Section 6-D:2

 **6-D:2 Annual Report. –** The state treasurer shall prepare and
file an annual report regarding the status of the trust fund with the
New Hampshire drinking water and groundwater advisory commission
established pursuant to RSA 485-F:4.

**Source.** 2016, 11:1, eff. Mar. 31, 2016.
