---
title: CHAPTER 6 STATE TREASURER AND STATE ACCOUNTS
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 6
                                             
STATE TREASURER AND STATE ACCOUNTS
----------------------------------

State Treasurer
---------------

### Section 6:1

 **6:1 Election; Transition. –**
                                             
 I. The state treasurer shall be chosen biennially in the manner
directed in the constitution and in accordance with RSA 14:2-b and shall
hold office until a successor is elected and assumes the duties of the
office.
                                             
 II. The term of office for the new state treasurer shall begin on
the first Wednesday following the first Tuesday in January. The new
state treasurer shall assume the duties of office upon taking the oath
of office.
                                             
 III. It shall be the duty of the outgoing state treasurer to make
available to the new treasurer all official documents and vital
information necessary for a full and complete understanding of the
operation of the office of state treasurer.

**Source.** Const. II, 67. RS 12:1. CS 12:1. GS 14:1. GL 15:1. PS 16:1.
PL 15:1. RL 22:1. 1949, 107:1. RSA 6:1. 1976, 45:11. 1989, 72:2, eff.
June 18, 1989.

### Section 6:2

 **6:2 Salary. –** The annual salary of the state treasurer shall be
that prescribed by RSA 94:1-4.

**Source.** RS 228:3. CS 244:3. GS 271:4. 1874, 68:1. GL 289:4. PS
286:5. 1901, 56:1. 1917, 220:2. 1919, 8:1. 1921, 118:1. PL 15:22. RL
22:22. 1953, 265:1, eff. July 1, 1953.

### Section 6:3

 **6:3 Bond. –** Before entering upon the duties of the office, the
state treasurer shall give bond in the sum of 
                                             $200,000, with sufficient
sureties, to be approved by the governor and council, conditioned for
the faithful discharge of the duties of the office of state treasurer.
Upon the failure of the legislature to elect a state treasurer on the
first Wednesday of December of the biennium, the state treasurer
previously elected shall give a new bond in the sum of 
                                             $200,000 with
sureties, to be approved by the governor and council, which bond shall
be conditioned upon the satisfactory discharge of the duties of said
office until a successor is elected.

**Source.** RS 12:2. CS 12:2. GS 14:2. GL 15:2. PS 16:2. PL 15:2. RL
22:1. 1949, 107:2. 1951, 252:1. RSA 6:3. 1973, 493:1. 1976, 45:12. 1997,
95:1. 2008, 120:1, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 6:3-a

 **6:3-a Rulemaking. –** The treasurer may adopt rules under RSA
541-A and after a public hearing pursuant to:
                                             
 I. Payments to the treasurer.
                                             
 II. Deposits and investments.
                                             
 III. Disbursements.
                                             
 IV. Custodial duties.
                                             
 V. Administration of RSA 471-C.
                                             
 VI. Notifications required under RSA 6-B:3.
                                             
 VII. Access to confidential records.

**Source.** 1983, 419:13. 1986, 204:4, 5. 1997, 208:1, eff. Aug. 17,
1997.

### Section 6:4

 **6:4 Books and Accounts. –** The state treasurer shall provide, at
the expense of the state, suitable books, records, electronic files, and
other such documents, in which shall be entered detailed and correct
records of all sums of money received into and paid from the treasury
and of all other official acts pursuant to RSA 5:33.

**Source.** RS 12:3, 4. CS 12:3, 4. GS 14:3, 4. GL 15:3, 4, 13. PS 16:3.
1925, 165:1. PL 15:3. RL 22:3. RSA 6:4. 1973, 493:2. 2008, 120:2, eff.
Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 6:4-a

 **6:4-a Insurance. –** The state treasurer may procure registered
mail, certified mail or other shipping insurance to protect the state
against losses, due to fire or other casualty, of negotiable securities
shipped or mailed from and by the treasurer's office.

**Source.** 1969, 353:1. 2008, 120:2, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 6:5

 **6:5 Assistants. –** Subject to the state personnel regulations,
and within the limits of available appropriations and funds, the state
treasurer may employ such clerical assistance as may be necessary.

**Source.** 1915, 58:5. PL 15:4. RL 22:4. 1950, 5, part 2:3. 2008,
120:2, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 6:6

 **6:6 Destruction of Documents. –** The state treasurer may destroy
documents, cancelled checks, papers, and electronic records filed in the
office of the treasurer pursuant to RSA 5:33.

**Source.** 1921, 11:1, 2. PL 15:5. RL 22:5. 1953, 16:1. 2008, 120:2,
eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 6:6-a

 **6:6-a Facsimile Signature. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1959, 217:2, eff. Aug.
16, 1959.
                                             ]

### Section 6:7

 **6:7 Bank Deposits. –** The treasurer may deposit any portion of
public moneys, in the treasurer's possession, in federally insured banks
chartered under the laws of New Hampshire or the federal government,
with a branch within the state. At the discretion of the treasurer,
balances may be collateralized if those balances are deemed to be
significant in relation to the equity position of the federally insured
bank. Other conditions being equal, those federally insured banks shall
receive preference which allow interest on balances. As used in this
section the term "public moneys'' shall include the general funds of the
state and any funds of which the state treasurer acts as custodian or
agent.

**Source.** 1903, 125:1. 1905, 68:1. PL 15:6. 1927, 3:1. 1937, 104:1. RL
22:6. RSA 6:7. 1955, 248:1. 1977, 90:1. 1986, 204:3. 1987, 49:1. 1997,
208:2. 2008, 120:2, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 6:7-a

 **6:7-a Cost of Bank Services. –** The state treasurer may pay for
the cost of bank services, securities transactions fees, and investment
management fees from income generated by the treasury department. If the
income generated is insufficient to pay for the cost of bank services,
security transaction fees, and investment management fees, payment may
be made from funds not otherwise appropriated until such time as the
income generated is sufficient to pay for the costs and fees. If the
income generated is insufficient to pay for the costs and fees at the
end of the fiscal year, the governor may draw a warrant from funds not
otherwise appropriated in an amount to cover the deficiency.

**Source.** 1993, 39:1. 1998, 150:4. 2010, 7:6, eff. July 3, 2010.

### Section 6:8

 **6:8 Investment of Funds. –**
                                             
 I. All funds over which the state has exclusive control, aside from
such sums of money as the treasurer may deem necessary to hold or
deposit for meeting current expenses, shall be invested by the
treasurer, with the approval of the governor and council, in obligations
of the United States government, in obligations of any county
government, municipal government, or district or division thereof within
the state of New Hampshire, in obligations which are legal investments
for depository banks pursuant to RSA 383-B:3-303, in participation units
in the public deposit investment pool established pursuant to RSA
383:22, or in deposits, including money market accounts, or certificates
of deposit, or repurchase agreements, and all other types of interest
bearing accounts, of federally insured banks chartered under the laws of
New Hampshire or the federal government with a branch within the state.
                                             
 II. The treasurer may also invest public funds in interest-bearing
deposits which meet all of the following conditions:
                                             
 (a) The funds are initially invested through a federally insured
bank chartered under the laws of New Hampshire or the federal government
with a branch within the state, selected by the treasurer.
                                             
 (b) The selected bank arranges for the redeposit of funds which
exceed the federal deposit insurance limitation of the selected bank in
deposits in one or more federally insured financial institutions located
in the United States, for the account of the treasurer.
                                             
 (c) The full amount of principal and any accrued interest of each
such deposit is covered by federal deposit insurance.
                                             
 (d) The selected bank acts as custodian with respect to each such
deposit for the account of the treasurer.
                                             
 (e) On the same date that the funds are redeposited by the
selected bank, the selected bank receives an amount of deposits from
customers of other federally insured financial institutions equal to or
greater than the amount of the funds initially invested through the
selected bank by the treasurer.

**Source.** 1903, 125:2. PL 15:7. RL 22:7. RSA 6:8. 1969, 245:1. 1973,
224:1. 1991, 268:3. 1999, 1:3. 2001, 2:1. 2008, 120:3. 2010, 7:1, eff.
July 3, 2010. 2013, 97:1, eff. Aug. 19, 2013. 2015, 272:46, eff. Oct. 1,
2015. 2016, 230:12, eff. Aug. 8, 2016.

### Section 6:8-a

 **6:8-a Agreement With Banks Authorized. –** The treasurer is
authorized to enter into an agreement with a bank or banks for the
purpose of providing a payment and custodial service for bonds and
coupons issued by the state. The agreement shall provide that the said
bank or banks will maintain an accounting of all bonds and coupons paid
and will provide periodic statements indicating the unpaid items. The
agreement shall further provide that the bank or banks will hold the
paid bonds and coupons until they may be destroyed pursuant to this
section. After the close of each fiscal year, the bank or banks shall
provide for the destruction of those bonds and coupons which were paid
in the fiscal year ending one year prior to the fiscal year just closed
and shall file a destruction certificate with the state treasurer and
the secretary of state.

**Source.** 1973, 144:5; 493:7, eff. July 1, 1973.

### Section 6:8-b

 **6:8-b Agreements Relating to Registered Bonds and Notes. –**
                                             
 I. In connection with the issuance by the state of original or
replacement bonds or notes in registered form, the treasurer is
authorized to contract for and engage the services of banks, trust
companies, banking or financial institutions or other persons within or
without the state to perform authentication, registration, transfer,
exchange and record or book entry functions, and prepare and maintain
reports and accounts and perform related duties relative to the payment
of those bonds or notes and the interest thereon. The treasurer may also
enter into agreements with custodian banks and financial intermediaries
and nominees of any of them in connection with the establishment and
maintenance by others of a central depository system for the transfer of
bonds and notes or of interests therein.
                                             
 II. Any agreement entered into under this section shall include
provisions for indemnifying the state for losses sustained by it on
account of the negligence of a designated bank, trust company, banking
or financial institution or on account of the failure of such designated
bank, trust company, banking or financial institution to perform
faithfully its duties and obligations under the agreement. The agreement
may include additional provisions, necessary or desirable, to protect
the state and may provide for the limitation of liabilities of the
parties, indemnification or payment of liquidated damages.

**Source.** 1983, 468:1. 2008, 120:4, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 6:8-c

 **6:8-c Swap Agreements. –**
                                             
 I. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Obligations'' means bonds, notes or other evidences of
indebtedness, or lease, installment purchase, or other similar
agreements or certificates of participation therein.
                                             
 (b) "Swap agreement'' means:
                                             
 (1) An agreement, including terms and conditions incorporated
by reference therein, which is a rate swap agreement, basis swap,
forward rate agreement, commodity swap, interest rate option, forward
foreign exchange agreement, rate cap agreement, rate floor agreement,
rate collar agreement, currency swap agreement, cross-currency rate swap
agreement, currency option, or any other similar agreement, including
any option to enter into any of the foregoing;
                                             
 (2) Any combination of the agreements in subparagraph (1); or
                                             
 (3) A master agreement for any of the agreements in
subparagraphs (1) and (2), together with all supplements.
                                             
 II. The treasurer, with the approval of the governor and council,
may from time to time enter into and amend any swap agreements that the
treasurer determines to be necessary or desirable for the purpose of
managing an interest rate, currency, commodity price, investment or
similar risk that arises in connection with, or is incidental to, the
issuance, carrying or securing of obligations or the acquisition or
carrying of investments. Swap agreements entered into by the state shall
contain such provisions, including payment, term, security, default and
remedy provisions, and shall be with such parties, as the treasurer
shall determine to be necessary or desirable after due consideration to
the creditworthiness of those parties.
                                             
 III. In connection with entering into any swap agreement the
treasurer, with the approval of the governor and council, may enter into
credit enhancement or liquidity agreements on behalf of the state, with
such payment, security, default, remedy, and other terms and conditions
as the treasurer determines.

**Source.** 1993, 305:3, eff. Aug. 22, 1993.

### Section 6:9

 **6:9 Examining Committee. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 144:6, I, eff. July
21, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 6:10

 **6:10 Disbursements. –** The treasurer shall pay, out of any moneys
not otherwise appropriated, all sums due by virtue of general or special
appropriations of the legislature, on warrants drawn by the governor,
and the principal or interest on all loans which may at any time become
due. All bills and obligations of the state shall be paid from the
office of the treasurer. In the performance of this duty, the treasurer
shall accept checks prepared by the office of information technology.
The chief information officer shall be responsible for any overpayment,
duplicate payment, or any other unauthorized payment resulting from the
use of such checks caused intentionally or inadvertently by any
personnel, or failure or error of programming, or procedures of office
of information technology.

**Source.** RS 12:5. CS 12:5. GS 14:5. GL 15:5. PS 16:4. 1919, 14:7. PL
15:9. RL 22:9. RSA 6:10. 1973, 493:3. 2008, 120:5, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 6:10-a

 **6:10-a Checks to be Void. –** The state treasurer is authorized
and directed to cancel of record, and refuse to honor, all state checks,
except those drawn on special funds created under RSA 282-A, which have
not been presented for payment within one year from the date of issue.
The records of all checks outstanding, as maintained by the state
treasurer during the period prior to cancellations, shall be exempt from
the provisions of RSA 91-A.

**Source.** 1963, 84:1. 1993, 124:1. 1997, 208:3, eff. Aug. 17, 1997.

### Section 6:10-b

 **6:10-b Disposition of Funds. –** All state funds held on deposit
for the payment of such checks shall, upon cancellation of the record of
the checks by the treasurer, be reported as unclaimed property, to the
extent that such amounts are not determined to be de minimus by the
state treasurer, and be held subject to the provisions of RSA 471-C.

**Source.** 1963, 84:1. 1997, 208:3. 2008, 120:6, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 6:10-c

 **6:10-c Payment. –** Upon the application of the person entitled
thereto, the state treasurer, with the approval of the governor and
council, shall pay to such person, out of any funds in the treasury not
otherwise appropriated, the sum represented by any such check.

**Source.** 1963, 84:1, eff. July 16, 1963.

### Section 6:10-d

 **6:10-d Reimbursements. –** Whenever the treasurer shall pay a
general or special appropriation from the general fund on behalf of any
state agency and the source of funds for such appropriation is from a
fund separate from the general fund, such agency shall reimburse the
treasurer concurrently. If such agency fails to reimburse the treasurer
concurrently, the treasurer may transfer funds from the agency's account
to cover the payment and lost interest.

**Source.** 1989, 252:1, eff. July 25, 1989.

### Section 6:11

 **6:11 Payments to Treasurer. –**
                                             
 I. The treasurer shall establish deposit procedures for all state
departments and institutions receiving money for the state. Such
procedures shall include, but shall not be limited to, deposits to a
department's or institution's bank accounts, related transfers to
treasury bank accounts, electronically collecting state moneys, and
concurrence of the treasurer for the opening of department and
institution bank accounts.
                                             
 II. If more than 
                                             $500 is in the possession of any state department
or institution such funds shall be on deposit in the related
department's bank account or in a treasury bank account. The treasurer
shall transfer moneys from state departments and institutions to the
treasurer's account in the most expeditious manner possible, including,
but not limited to, the use of electronic transfers. If any facility of
any state department or institution is in a location where there is no
bank or other depository institution within 10 miles of that facility,
that state department or institution shall make deposits at least on a
weekly basis or when funds remitted total 
                                             $1,500 or more.
                                             
 III. All state departments and institutions, except the university
system of New Hampshire, the building projects revolving fund of the
state board of education, and the supreme court for the purposes of the
escrow account for judicial branch facility improvements under RSA
490:26-c, receiving money for the state shall deposit the full amount of
all such moneys into a state treasurer's bank account or into a state
department's bank account from which the treasurer shall collect funds
by automated means, unless the treasurer determines that such means
cannot be implemented or concurs with department procedures for deposits
and collection.
                                             
 IV. All state departments and institutions, except those state
departments and institutions which are exempted in RSA 6:11, III, which
are not depositing directly into a treasury bank account or which are
not included in a treasury electronic collection system may deposit
state moneys into a department's bank account and shall either:
                                             
 (a) Remit to treasury daily all moneys in excess of an amount
established by each department with the concurrence of the treasurer;
or
                                             
 (b) Deposit all moneys at the department of treasury daily in
accordance with rules established under RSA 6:3-a, I.
                                             
 V. All state departments and institutions, except those state
departments and institutions which are exempted in RSA 6:11, III,
depositing moneys directly into a treasury bank account shall prepare
and submit to treasury the appropriate accounting documentation. Such
departments and institutions shall make every effort to ensure that the
documentation is received by treasury on the same day as the day of
deposit.
                                             
 VI. All state departments and institutions depositing moneys into a
department's bank account shall, in a timely manner, prepare and submit
to treasury the appropriate accounting documentation related to
treasury's daily automated collections as provided in RSA 6:11, III or a
department's remittances as provided in RSA 6:11, IV(a).
                                             
 VII. All payments due to the state of New Hampshire for services
provided shall be paid for in United States dollars. Any payment
received in any other currency shall be returned to the payor. All
outstanding obligations are subject to the terms and conditions of said
payment. Exceptions to the provisions of this paragraph are subject to
the approval of the treasurer.

**Source.** 1913, 154:1. 1921, 162:1. 1925, 163:1. PL 15:10. RL 22:10.
1953, 210:3. RSA 6:11. 1965, 239:13. 1967, 379:7. 1971, 44:1; 370:1.
1975, 252:1. 1976, 8:1. 1979, 144:1. 1982, 9:1. 1983, 419:3. 1985,
399:3, I. 1994, 74:1. 1999, 137:1. 2008, 120:7. 2009, 14:4, eff. June
16, 2009. 2013, 160:2, eff. June 28, 2013.

### Section 6:11-a

 **6:11-a Return of Checks, Drafts and Money Orders; Fee. –**
                                             
 I. Any payment received by any state department or institution for a
fee, license, or product which is returned to the state department or
institution as uncollectable shall be returned to the sender and not
deposited with the state treasurer. Whenever payment of any fee or for
any other purpose is returned to any state department or institution as
uncollectable, the department or institution may charge a fee of 
                                             $25 or
5 percent of the face amount of the check, whichever is the greater,
plus all protest and bank fees, in addition to the amount of the initial
payment to the person presenting the payment to the department or
institution to cover the costs of collection.
                                             
 II. A payment received by any state department or institution for a
fee, license, or product shall be returned to the sender and not
deposited with the state treasurer and any application received by a
state department or institution may be returned to the sender under any
of the following circumstances:
                                             
 (a) The amount of the payment is incorrect.
                                             
 (b) The application is required to be submitted with the payment
of a fee and is not so submitted or is improperly or incorrectly
submitted.
                                             
 (c) A license applicant has not complied with one or more
statutory requirements entitling him to make such application.
                                             
 (d) The requested product is unavailable.
                                             
 III. The department or institution may charge a fee, if appropriate,
of at least 
                                             $25 plus all protest and bank fees, if any, to the person
presenting an application or payment which is unacceptable to a state
department or institution, as provided in paragraph II.

**Source.** 1977, 105:1. 1983, 419:4, 17. 1993, 124:2, 3; 322:1, 2.
2008, 120:8, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 6:12

 **6:12 Application of Receipts. –**
                                             
 I. The requirement that the state treasurer shall establish and
maintain an account or fund separately in the accounting records of the
state shall be met by the department of administrative services in the
following manner:
                                             
 (a) The department of administrative services shall establish and
maintain an account or fund in the accounting system of the state.
                                             
 (b) Moneys received by the state treasurer, as provided in RSA
6:11, shall be accounted for in the state's accounting system as general
revenue of the state, with the exception of the following dedicated
funds or accounts:
                                             
 (1) Moneys received by the state lottery commission, which
shall be credited to the sweepstakes special fund.
                                             
 (2) Moneys received by the fish and game department, which
shall be credited to the fish and game fund.
                                             
 (3) Fines received for violations of RSA 214:12 and any
monetary damages recovered pursuant to RSA 211:74, which shall be
credited to the fish and game fund.
                                             
 (4) Fees collected by the department of safety under RSA
107-B, which shall be credited to the New Hampshire nuclear planning and
response fund.
                                             
 (5) All moneys received from the division of motor vehicles
which are derived from registration fees, operators' licenses, gasoline
road tolls or any other special charges or taxes with respect to the
operation of motor vehicles or the sale or consumption of motor vehicle
fuels, or any other fee collected by the division of motor vehicles, but
not including any revenue from fines and forfeitures assessed against
any violator of any state law relative to the use and operation of motor
vehicles, after deducting the amount allowed by the legislature for
maintaining the division of motor vehicles, which shall be credited to
the department of transportation for maintenance of highways.
                                             
 (6) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (7) Costs charged back to the state or its agencies, counties,
cities or towns which are incurred by the division of state police of
the department of safety, which shall be credited to the department of
transportation for the maintenance of highways.
                                             
 (8) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (9) Revenues from fees, rentals, and the sale of products from
lands under the jurisdiction of the department of resources and economic
development, which shall be credited as provided under RSA 227-G.
                                             
 (10) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (11) Fees collected by the public utilities commission of
railroads and public utilities for money paid out by the commission to
experts and assistants not in its regular employ, which fees shall be
appropriated to reimburse the state for money so paid out.
                                             
 (12) Moneys received under RSA 457:29, which shall be credited
to the special fund for domestic violence programs.
                                             
 (13) The share of the normal yield tax going to the department
of resources and economic development under RSA 79:14, which shall be
credited to the unincorporated towns and unorganized places forest
conservation fund.
                                             
 (14) Moneys received for sending children to the special
education program of the youth services center pursuant to RSA
186-C:20.
                                             
 (15) Money received under RSA 143:11 and 184:85, which shall
be credited to the public health services special fund.
                                             
 (16) Moneys received under RSA 188-F, which shall be credited
as provided in that chapter.
                                             
 (17) Money received under RSA 481:32, which shall be credited
to the dam maintenance fund established under RSA 482:55.
                                             
 (18) Money received under RSA 434:36, which shall be credited
to the apple marketing account.
                                             
 (19) Money received under RSA 318-B:17-b, V, which shall be
credited as specified in RSA 318-B:17-b, V to:
                                             
 (A) The drug forfeiture fund;
                                             
 (B) The state law enforcement agency account; or
                                             
 (C) The department of health and human services office of
alcohol and drug abuse prevention account.
                                             
 (20) Moneys received under RSA 125-F:11, II and IV, which
shall be credited to the radiation long-term care fund.
                                             
 (21) The money received under RSA 78-A:26, I(b) and RSA
230:52, II, which shall be credited to the division of travel and
tourism development, department of resources and economic development.
                                             
 (22) Money received under RSA 400-A:29-a, II, which shall be
credited to the insurance department's continuing education advisory
council reimbursement fund.
                                             
 (23) The assessments collected under RSA 188-F:31 and 651:63,
V and the surcharges on state commissary purchases under RSA 622:7-b
designated for the victims' assistance fund which shall be credited to
the victims' assistance fund until that fund exceeds 
                                             $900,000, at which
time moneys in excess of 
                                             $900,000 shall be credited to the general
fund.
                                             
 (24) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (25) The money received under RSA 125-F:8-a, which shall be
credited to the New Hampshire low-level radioactive waste management
fund.
                                             
 (26) Additional fees received under RSA 263:34-i, which shall
be credited to the motorcycle rider safety fund established in RSA
263:34-e.
                                             
 (27) Money received under RSA 485-A:7-a and 7-c, which shall
be deposited in the wastewater plant operator certification fund
established in RSA 485-A:7-a, II.
                                             
 (28) Moneys received by state agencies through recycling
programs established pursuant to RSA 21-I:14-a, I which shall be
credited to the recycling fund established under RSA 21-I:14-a, II.
                                             
 (29) Moneys received from the levying of civil penalties or
fees by the department of safety under RSA 21-P:16-24, which shall be
credited to the revolving fund established in RSA 21-P:21.
                                             
 (30) The money received under RSA 21-I:60, which shall be
credited to the special recycling fund established under RSA 21-I:60.
                                             
 (31) Moneys received as operational permit fees under RSA
485:41, VIII, which shall be credited to the operational permits
account.
                                             
 (32) The fees collected under RSA 310-B, which shall be
credited, appropriated and disbursed as provided under RSA 310-B.
                                             
 (33) Money received in accordance with RSA 216-A:3-i which
shall be credited to the state park fund.
                                             
 (34) Moneys received under RSA 125-C:12, IV-d and V which
shall be credited to the air resources fund established in RSA 125-C:12,
IV-d.
                                             
 (35) Moneys received under RSA 147-A:4, RSA 147-A:6, RSA
147-A:16, RSA 147-A:17, RSA 147-A:17-a, RSA 147-B:8, and RSA 147-B:11,
which shall be credited to the hazardous waste cleanup fund established
under RSA 147-B:3.
                                             
 (36) Moneys received by the commissioner of the department of
health and human services, for the purchase of vaccines, which shall be
credited to the vaccine purchase fund established in RSA 141-C:17-a.
                                             
 (37) Money received by the commissioner of safety under RSA
263:56-d, which shall be credited to the default bench warrant fund.
                                             
 (38) Moneys received by the department of state under RSA
5-C:14, RSA 5-C:34, RSA 5-C:10, and RSA 5-C:11, which shall be credited
to the vital records improvement fund established in RSA 5-C:15.
                                             
 (39) Moneys received under RSA 126-A:5, X, which shall be
credited to the commissioner, department of health and human services.
                                             
 (40) Moneys received under RSA 106-H which shall be credited
to the enhanced 911 system fund established in RSA 106-H:9.
                                             
 (41) The fees collected by the secretary of state under RSA
660:1 which shall be credited to the recount administrative account
established under RSA 660:31.
                                             
 (42) Moneys received under RSA 233-A:13 and RSA 270-E: 5,
II(d) which shall be credited to the statewide public boat access fund
established in RSA 233-A:13.
                                             
 (43) Moneys received by the department of agriculture,
markets, and food under RSA 466:9 which shall be credited to the fund
established in RSA 466:9, II.
                                             
 (44) One-half the registration fees collected under RSA 435:20
and all fees collected under RSA 433-A:6, which shall be credited to the
agricultural product and scale testing fund, established under RSA
435:20, IV.
                                             
 (45) Money received under RSA 146-C:12, II which shall be
credited to the oil pollution control fund established in RSA
146-A:11-a.
                                             
 (46) Moneys received by the department of resources and
economic development for the forest management and protection fund
established under RSA 227-G:5.
                                             
 (47) Moneys received under RSA 436:112, which shall be
credited to the CEM fund.
                                             
 (48) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (49) Moneys received under RSA 126-H, which shall be credited
to the healthy kids fund established in RSA 126-H:7.
                                             
 (50) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (51) The moneys collected under RSA 130-A, which shall be
credited to the lead poisoning prevention fund established in RSA
130-A:15.
                                             
 (52) Money received under RSA 21-J:24-a, which shall be
credited to the revolving fund established for municipal officers and
employees education and training.
                                             
 (53) Moneys that are credited to the investor education fund
pursuant to RSA 421-B:6-601(h).
                                             
 (54) Moneys received under RSA 4:9-b for the design,
construction and maintenance of a law enforcement memorial, which shall
be credited to the special account established in that section.
                                             
 (55) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (56) Moneys deposited in the motor vehicle industry board fund
established in RSA 357-C:12.
                                             
 (57) Moneys received pursuant to RSA 651:63, V designated for
the department of corrections shall be deposited into an account to fund
the operating appropriation of the division of field services,
department of corrections.
                                             
 (58) Moneys deposited in the navigation safety fund
established in RSA 270-E:6-a.
                                             
 (59) Moneys received under RSA 466:4, I(c), RSA 466:6, III,
and RSA 437-A which shall be credited to the companion animal neutering
fund, established in RSA 437-A:4-a.
                                             
 (60) The designated portion of moneys received under RSA
261:97-a, which shall be credited to the conservation number plate fund
established in RSA 261:97-b.
                                             
 (61) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (62) Money received under RSA 485-A:4, XVI-c, which shall be
deposited in the sampling and analysis of sludge or biosolids samples
fund.
                                             
 (63) Moneys collected pursuant to RSA 430:50, II which shall
be deposited in the integrated pest management fund.
                                             
 (64) Moneys deposited in the harbor dredging and pier
maintenance fund established in RSA 12-G:46.
                                             
 (65) Money received under RSA 77-A, RSA 77-E, RSA 78, RSA
78-A, RSA 78-B, RSA 83-F, and from the sweepstakes fund, which shall be
credited to the education trust fund under RSA 198:39.
                                             
 (66) Moneys received under RSA 433-B:2 and 433-B:3, which
shall be deposited in the ginseng regulation fund established in RSA
433-B:4.
                                             
 (67) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (68) Moneys collected pursuant to RSA 227-C:28, which shall be
deposited in the barn preservation fund.
                                             
 (69) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (70) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (71) Funds received pursuant to RSA 6:12-b, which shall be
maintained pursuant to the provisions of RSA 6:12-b.
                                             
 (72) Moneys deposited in the alcohol abuse prevention and
treatment fund established in RSA 176-A:1.
                                             
 (73) Moneys deposited in the fire standards and training and
emergency medical services fund established in RSA 21-P:12-d.
                                             
 (74) Moneys deposited in the training fund established by RSA
282-A:138-a.
                                             
 (75) Moneys received for deposit in the travel and tourism
development fund established by RSA 12-A:43-a, I.
                                             
 (76) Moneys collected pursuant to RSA 430:31-b, II which shall
be deposited in the pesticides training program fund.
                                             
 (77) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (78) Moneys deposited in the land conservation investment
program trust fund under RSA 162-C:10.
                                             
 (79) Moneys deposited in the publications revolving fund under
RSA 4-C:9-a.
                                             
 (80) Moneys deposited in the historical fund under RSA 177:8.
                                             
 (81) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (82) Moneys deposited in the court facilities escrow fund
under RSA 490:26-c.
                                             
 (83) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (84) Moneys deposited in the judicial branch salary and
benefit adjustment fund under RSA 491-A:2.
                                             
 (85) Moneys deposited in the law library revolving fund under
RSA 490:25.
                                             
 (86) Moneys deposited in the supreme court publications and
materials revolving fund under RSA 490:18-a.
                                             
 (87) Moneys deposited in the New Hampshire national guard
recruitment and retention scholarship fund under RSA 110-B:60.
                                             
 (88) Moneys deposited in the Pease Development Authority
Airport Fund under RSA 12-G:36.
                                             
 (89) Moneys deposited in the audit set aside fund under RSA
124:18.
                                             
 (90) Moneys deposited in the salary adjustment fund under RSA
99:4.
                                             
 (91) Moneys deposited in the state and municipal employee
personnel education and training fund under RSA 21-I:42, XVII.
                                             
 (92) Moneys deposited in the surplus distribution section
administrative assessments fund under RSA 21-I:11, I(a)(6)(B).
                                             
 (93) Moneys deposited in the eastern states exposition
building fund under RSA 425:18.
                                             
 (94) Moneys deposited in the pesticides control fund under RSA
430:34, V.
                                             
 (95) Moneys deposited in the special account for agriculture
development rights under RSA 432:30, I.
                                             
 (96) Moneys deposited in the driver training fund under RSA
263:52.
                                             
 (97) Moneys deposited in the insurance administration fund
under RSA 400-A:39.
                                             
 (98) Moneys deposited in the contingent fund under RSA
282-A:140.
                                             
 (99) Moneys deposited in the unemployment compensation and
employment service administration fund under RSA 282-A:138.
                                             
 (100) Moneys deposited in the unemployment compensation fund
under RSA 282-A:103.
                                             
 (101) Moneys deposited in the automated information system
account under RSA 201-A:19, II.
                                             
 (102) Moneys deposited in the damaged and lost book account
under RSA 201-A:19, I.
                                             
 (103) Moneys deposited in the state art fund under RSA
19-A:9.
                                             
 (104) Moneys deposited in the Cannon Mountain capital
improvement fund under RSA 12-A:29-c.
                                             
 (105) Moneys deposited in the Hampton Beach parking meter fund
under RSA 216:3, II.
                                             
 (106) Moneys deposited in the international trade promotion
fund under RSA 12-A:31.
                                             
 (107) Moneys deposited in the mining and reclamation fund
under RSA 12-E:8, III.
                                             
 (108) Moneys deposited in the Mount Washington fund under RSA
227-B:9.
                                             
 (109) Moneys deposited in the New Hampshire economic
development fund under RSA 12-A:2-e.
                                             
 (110) Moneys deposited in the OHRV and snowmobile fund under
RSA 215-A:3, VII and RSA 215-C:2, VIII.
                                             
 (111) Moneys deposited in the travel and tourism revolving
fund under RSA 12-A:15-a.
                                             
 (112) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (113) Moneys deposited in the firemen's relief fund under RSA
402:66.
                                             
 (114) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (115) Moneys deposited in the New Hampshire excellence in
higher education endowment trust fund under RSA 6:38.
                                             
 (116) Moneys deposited in the trust fund for the New Hampshire
land and community heritage investment trust program under RSA 227-M:7.
                                             
 (117) Moneys deposited in the nuclear decommissioning
financing committee account under RSA 162-F:18.
                                             
 (118) Moneys deposited in the nuclear decommissioning
financing fund under RSA 162-F:19.
                                             
 (119) Moneys deposited in the revenue stabilization reserve
account under RSA 9:13-e, II.
                                             
 (120) Moneys deposited in the children's benefit fund under
RSA 621:30, I.
                                             
 (121) Moneys deposited in the resident personal funds fund
under RSA 621:30, II.
                                             
 (122) Moneys deposited in the special projects fund under RSA
621:30, III.
                                             
 (123) Moneys deposited in the certificate program fund under
RSA 332-E:4, III.
                                             
 (124) Moneys deposited in the environmental services education
and training assistance fund under RSA 21-O:1-a.
                                             
 (125) Moneys deposited in the lab equipment and replacement
fund under RSA 131:3-a.
                                             
 (126) Moneys deposited in the lake restoration and
preservation fund under RSA 487:25.
                                             
 (127) Moneys deposited in the oil discharge and disposal
cleanup fund under RSA 146-D:3.
                                             
 (128) Moneys deposited in the oil pollution control fund under
RSA 146-A:11-a.
                                             
 (129) Moneys deposited in the pollution prevention revolving
fund under RSA 21-O:22.
                                             
 (130) Moneys deposited in the water pollution control and
drinking water revolving loan fund under RSA 486:14.
                                             
 (131) Moneys deposited in the wetlands and shorelands review
fund under RSA 482-A:3, III.
                                             
 (132) Moneys deposited in the water pollution control
facilities' replacement fund under RSA 485-A:51.
                                             
 (133) Moneys deposited in the long-term care assistance fund
under RSA 167:94.
                                             
 (134) Moneys deposited in the Benjamin Thompson trust fund
under RSA 11:6.
                                             
 (135) Moneys deposited in the university system of New
Hampshire fund under RSA 187-A:7.
                                             
 (136) Moneys deposited in the department of education printed
materials revolving fund under RSA 186:13, XII.
                                             
 (137) Moneys deposited in the sign language interpreter's
certification revolving fund under RSA 200-C:20-a.
                                             
 (138) Moneys deposited in the Nesmith Trust Fund under RSA
186-B:8.
                                             
 (139) Moneys deposited in the special teacher competence fund
under RSA 186:7-a.
                                             
 (140) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (141) Moneys deposited in the New Hampshire technical
institute student activity center account under 1995, 52:1.
                                             
 (142) Moneys deposited in the consumer credit administration
license fund under RSA 399-A:24.
                                             
 (143) Moneys deposited in the New Hampshire emergency response
and recovery fund established by RSA 21-P:46.
                                             
 (144) Moneys deposited in the asbestos management and control
funds maintained by the department of environmental services under RSA
141-E:12.
                                             
 (145) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (146) Moneys deposited in the vital records user fee fund
under RSA 126:30.
                                             
 (147) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (148) Moneys deposited in the aeronautics maintenance and
operations fund under RSA 422:6.
                                             
 (149) Moneys deposited in the class III railroad and cog
railroad capital rail line rehabilitation and equipment revolving loan
fund under RSA 228:66-a.
                                             
 (150) Moneys deposited in the rural airport capital revolving
loan fund under RSA 423:11.
                                             
 (151) Moneys deposited in the special railroad fund under RSA
228:68.
                                             
 (152) Moneys deposited in the department of safety inventory
fund under RSA 228:25.
                                             
 (153) Moneys deposited in the Cheshire bridge toll account
under 1988, 251:4-a, as inserted by 1991, 318:5 and amended by 2000,
69:2.
                                             
 (154) Moneys deposited in the equipment inventory fund under
RSA 228:24-b.
                                             
 (155) Moneys deposited in the highway and bridge betterment
account under RSA 235:23-a.
                                             
 (156) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (157) Moneys deposited in the motor fuel inventory fund under
RSA 228:24-a.
                                             
 (158) Moneys deposited in the turnpike system revenue and
reserve accounts under the November 9, 1987 bond resolution.
                                             
 (159) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (160) Moneys deposited in the fish and game search and rescue
fund under RSA 206:42.
                                             
 (161) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (162) Moneys deposited in the nongame species account under
RSA 212-B:6.
                                             
 (163) Moneys deposited in the prepaid fish and game license
fund under RSA 214:9-c, IV and RSA 214:9-cc, IV.
                                             
 (164) Moneys deposited in the publications, specialty items
and fund raising revolving fund under RSA 206:22-a.
                                             
 (165) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (166) Moneys deposited in the member annuity savings fund and
the state annuity accumulation fund under RSA 100-A:16.
                                             
 (167) Funds received pursuant to RSA 6:12-c, which shall be
maintained under the terms of the referenced trust or agency fund.
                                             
 (168) Funds received pursuant to RSA 6:12-d, which shall be
maintained under the terms of the referenced custodial or escrow
account.
                                             
 (169) Moneys deposited in the municipal and regional training
fund under RSA 4-C:9-a, II.
                                             
 (170) Moneys deposited in the criminal records check account
under RSA 106-B:7, II.
                                             
 (171) Moneys deposited in the air resources fund under RSA
125-C:12, V.
                                             
 (172) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (173) Moneys deposited in the brownfields cleanup revolving
loan fund under RSA 147-F:20.
                                             
 (174) Moneys deposited in the dependent children support
enforcement administrative expense account under RSA 161-C:25.
                                             
 (175) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (176) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (177) Moneys deposited in the bookstore account under RSA
188-F:19.
                                             
 (178) Moneys deposited in the school building authority
account under RSA 195-C:1.
                                             
 (179) Moneys deposited in the state library donations and
gifts fund under RSA 201-A:10, I.
                                             
 (180) Moneys deposited in the pheasant stamp account under RSA
206:35-a.
                                             
 (181) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (182) Moneys deposited in the fish food sales revenue account
under RSA 206:35-c.
                                             
 (183) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (184) Moneys deposited in the operation game thief account
under RSA 207:62.
                                             
 (185) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (186) Moneys deposited in the wildlife habitat account under
RSA 214:1-f, V.
                                             
 (187) Moneys deposited in the fisheries habitat account under
RSA 214:1-g, II.
                                             
 (188), (189) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (190) Moneys deposited in the supply depot inventory account
under RSA 219:21.
                                             
 (191) Moneys deposited in the disabled persons' employment
fund under RSA 21-I:44-f.
                                             
 (192) Moneys deposited in the land and community heritage
investment program administrative fund under RSA 227-M:7-a.
                                             
 (193) Moneys deposited in the highway surplus account under
RSA 228:11.
                                             
 (194) Moneys deposited in the department of transportation
inventory fund under RSA 228:24.
                                             
 (195) Moneys deposited in the municipal maintenance and repair
special account under RSA 228:49, II.
                                             
 (196) Moneys deposited in the eastern New Hampshire turnpike
toll account under RSA 237:24.
                                             
 (197) Moneys deposited in the central New Hampshire turnpike
toll account under RSA 237:40.
                                             
 (198) Moneys deposited in the turnpike renewal and replacement
account under RSA 237:49-a.
                                             
 (199) Moneys deposited in the turnpike system toll account
under RSA 237:9.
                                             
 (200) Moneys deposited in the tri-state lotto prize account
under RSA 287-F:9.
                                             
 (201) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (202) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (203), (204) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (205) Moneys deposited in the default fund under RSA
597:38-a.
                                             
 (206) Moneys deposited in the industries inventory account
under RSA 622:28-a.
                                             
 (207) Moneys deposited in the employee benefit adjustment
account under RSA 9:17-c.
                                             
 (208) Moneys deposited in the substance abuse treatment fund
under RSA 172:14.
                                             
 (209) Moneys received pursuant to RSA 5:48, which shall be
credited to the New Hampshire local government records management
improvement fund established in RSA 5:48.
                                             
 (210) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (211) Moneys deposited in the laboratory accreditation fund
under RSA 485:46.
                                             
 (212) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (213) Moneys deposited in the education credentialing fund
under RSA 186:11, X.
                                             
 (214) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (215) Moneys deposited in the department of fish and game's
stamp and permit fund under RSA 214:9-e, IV.
                                             
 (216) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (217) Moneys deposited in the radiation user and laboratory
fees fund under RSA 125-F:8-b.
                                             
 (218) Moneys deposited in the national guard's chargeable
transient quarters (QTC) and billeting fund and the army national guard
state training center program management fund under RSA 110-B:32-a.
                                             
 (219) Moneys deposited in the Connecticut Lakes headwaters
tract monitoring endowment fund under RSA 216:7.
                                             
 (220) Moneys deposited in the Connecticut Lakes headwaters
natural areas stewardship endowment account under RSA 216:9.
                                             
 (221) Moneys deposited in the Connecticut Lakes headwaters
tract road maintenance endowment fund under RSA 216:10.
                                             
 (222) Moneys deposited in the department of cultural resources
donations fund under RSA 21-K:4-a.
                                             
 (223) Moneys received under RSA 216-J:4 which shall be
credited to the Hampton Beach master plan fund.
                                             
 (224) Moneys deposited in the state jobs grant fund under RSA
162-O:3.
                                             
 (225) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (226) Moneys deposited in the election fund under RSA 5:6-d.
                                             
 (227) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (228) Fees collected by the department of education, division
of higher education pursuant to RSA 188-G:9.
                                             
 (229) Moneys received by the postsecondary education
commission under RSA 292:8-kk, II.
                                             
 (230) Moneys deposited in the public interest payphone fund
established in RSA 374:22-q.
                                             
 (231) Moneys deposited in the fish and game department gifts
and donations account under RSA 206:33-a.
                                             
 (232) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (233) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (234) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (235) Moneys received under RSA 228-A, which shall be
deposited in the federal highway grant anticipation bond trust fund.
                                             
 (236) Moneys deposited in the state house visitor's center
revolving fund under RSA 17-E:7.
                                             
 (237) Moneys deposited in the civil services legal fund
established in RSA 525-A:2.
                                             
 (238) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (239) Moneys received pursuant to RSA 454-B:5 which shall be
credited to the federal lien registration fund in RSA 454-B:5-a.
                                             
 (240) Moneys deposited in the natural heritage bureau fund
established in RSA 217-A:7-a.
                                             
 (241) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (242) Moneys received from fees charged for newborn screening
tests under RSA 132:10-a, which shall be credited to the newborn
screening fund.
                                             
 (243) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (244) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (245) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (246) Moneys used for scholarships to orphans of veterans
program established in RSA 193:19.
                                             
 (247) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (248) Moneys deposited in the fish and game department
wildlife legacy initiative account under RSA 206:33-d.
                                             
 (249) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (250) Moneys deposited in the legislative youth advisory
council fund established in RSA 19-K:5.
                                             
 (251) Moneys received under RSA 487:37, II which shall be
credited to the New Hampshire healthy tidal waters and shellfish
protection fund established under RSA 487:37.
                                             
 (252) Moneys deposited in the aquatic resource compensatory
mitigation fund established by RSA 482-A:29.
                                             
 (253) Moneys deposited in the renewable energy fund
established under RSA 362-F:10.
                                             
 (254) Moneys deposited in the game management account
established in RSA 206:34-b.
                                             
 (255) Moneys deposited in the homeless housing and access
revolving loan fund, established in RSA 126-A:63.
                                             
 (256) Moneys deposited in the terrain alteration fund, under
RSA 485-A:17, II-a.
                                             
 (257) All funds deposited in the employee and retiree benefit
risk management fund established pursuant to RSA 21-I:30-e.
                                             
 (258) Moneys deposited in the estate administration fund
established under RSA 167:13, IV.
                                             
 (259) Moneys deposited in the comprehensive cancer plan fund
established under RSA 126-A:64.
                                             
 (260) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (261) Moneys deposited in the New Hampshire Rx advantage
program fund pursuant to RSA 161-L:5.
                                             
 (262) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (263) Moneys deposited in the medico-legal investigation fund
pursuant to RSA 611-B:28.
                                             
 (264) Moneys deposited in the mediation and arbitration fund,
established under RSA 490-E:4.
                                             
 (265) Moneys deposited in the debt recovery fund by the
treasurer under RSA 7:15-a, IV.
                                             
 (266) All moneys deposited in the regional transportation
coordination fund under RSA 239-B:5
                                             
 (267) Moneys deposited in the workers' compensation fraud fund
established by RSA 281-A:2, VI(c).
                                             
 (268) Moneys deposited in the milk producers emergency relief
fund established under RSA 184:107.
                                             
 (269) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (270) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (271) Moneys deposited in the energy efficiency fund
established in RSA 21-I:19-f.
                                             
 (272) Moneys deposited in the energy efficiency fund
established in RSA 125-O:23.
                                             
 (273) Moneys deposited in the ICF separate account established
in RSA 84-D:5.
                                             
 (274) Moneys deposited in the stormwater utility fund
established under RSA 149-I:10-a.
                                             
 (275) Moneys deposited in the Pease development authority
ports and harbors fund established in RSA 12-G:37.
                                             
 (276) Moneys deposited in the recycling fund established under
RSA 9-C:6.
                                             
 (277) Moneys deposited in the women, infants, and children
program (WIC) fund, established under RSA 132:12-e.
                                             
 (278) Moneys deposited in the room and board scholarship fund
established under RSA 187-A:20-a, II.
                                             
 (279) Moneys deposited in the public works employee memorial
account established in RSA 4:9-j.
                                             
 (280) Revenues deposited in the Skyhaven airport maintenance
and operations fund established in RSA 422:39.
                                             
 (281) Moneys deposited in the subsurface systems fund, under
RSA 485-A:30, I-b.
                                             
 (282) Funds deposited in the motor vehicle air pollution
abatement fund established in RSA 125-S:3.
                                             
 (283) Moneys deposited into the New Hampshire workforce
opportunity fund established in RSA 12-A:61.
                                             
 (284) Moneys deposited in the judicial branch information
technology fund established under RSA 490:26-h.
                                             
 (285) Moneys deposited in the liquor commission fund
established in RSA 176:16.
                                             
 (286) Moneys deposited into the Hampton Beach capital
improvement fund established under RSA 216:3, IV(a).
                                             
 (287) Moneys deposited in the rivers management and protection
fund established in RSA 483:13.
                                             
 (288) Moneys deposited in the CART provider and sign language
interpreter net tuition repayment fund established in RSA 200-M:4.
                                             
 (289) Moneys deposited in the probation and parole receipts
fund established in RSA 504-A:13, IV(b).
                                             
 (290) Moneys deposited in the state historic sites fund under
RSA 12-A:10-f.
                                             
 (291) Moneys deposited in the "adverse events'' fund
established under RSA 151:40, II.
                                             
 (292) Moneys deposited in the septage management fund, under
RSA 485-A:30, I-c.
                                             
 (293) Moneys deposited into the mosquito control fund
established under RSA 141-C:25.
                                             
 (294) Moneys deposited in the southeast watershed alliance
fund established in RSA 485-E:8.
                                             
 (295) Moneys deposited into the dam maintenance revolving loan
fund established under RSA 482:55-a.
                                             
 (296) Moneys accruing to blind services through vending
machine income under RSA 186-B:14.
                                             
 (297) Moneys deposited into the chancellor's scholarship
endowment trust fund established under RSA 187-A:20-a, III.
                                             
 (298) Moneys deposited into the AIDS drug assistance program
fund established under RSA 141-F:12.
                                             
 (299) Moneys deposited for the sole purpose of constructing
the September 11 memorial under RSA 4:9-f.
                                             
 (300) The designated portion of fees collected under RSA 5:10
which shall be credited to the notary fee account established by RSA
5:10-b.
                                             
 (301) Moneys deposited in the New Hampshire medal of honor
fund, established in RSA 110-B:81-b.
                                             
 (302) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (303) Moneys deposited in the natural heritage bureau fund
established in RSA 217-A:7-a.
                                             
 (304) Civil fines collected under RSA 151:16-b, which shall be
deposited as provided in such section.
                                             
 (305) Moneys deposited in the meat inspection program fund
established under RSA 427:32-b.
                                             
 (306) Moneys deposited in the cold case homicide unit fund
established in RSA 21-M:8-m, III.
                                             
 (307) Moneys deposited in the department of labor restricted
fund established in RSA 273:1-b.
                                             
 (308) Moneys deposited in the state aeronautical fund pursuant
to RSA 422:35.
                                             
 (309) Moneys deposited in the state park gifts and donations
fund established in RSA 216-A:3-o.
                                             
 (310) Moneys deposited in the health care associated
infections fund under RSA 151:36, V.
                                             
 (311) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (312) The higher education fund established in RSA 21-N:8-a,
III.
                                             
 (313) Moneys deposited in the non-TANF financial assistance
program fund under RSA 167:77-e, II.
                                             
 (314) Moneys deposited in the registry identification card and
certificate fund established in RSA 126-X:11.
                                             
 (315) Moneys deposited into the recreation camp and youth
skill camp fund established in RSA 485-A:24-a.


                                             [Paragraph I(b)(316) is repealed by 2013, 273:4, I, effective on the
date when all moneys in the New Hampshire disaster fund have been
disbursed as provided by 2013, 173:5.
                                             ]


                                             
 (316) Moneys designated for the New Hampshire disaster relief
fund, established in RSA 21-P:46-a.


                                             [Paragraph I(b)(317) repealed by 2014, 3:12, VI, effective December 31,
2018.
                                             ]


                                             
 (317) Moneys deposited in the New Hampshire health protection
trust fund established under RSA 126-A:5-b.


                                             [Paragraph I(b)(318) repealed by 2014, 185:5, II, effective June 30,
2020.
                                             ]


                                             
 (318) Moneys deposited in the New Hampshire state house
bicentennial education and commemoration fund established under RSA
17-R:3.
                                             
 (319) Moneys deposited in the site evaluation committee fund
established in RSA 162-H:21.
                                             
 (320) Moneys received under RSA 126-Y, which shall be credited
to the palliative care center for health care consumers and providers
fund, established in RSA 126-Y:4.


                                             [Paragraph I(b)(321) repealed by 2014, 253:3, II, effective November 1,
2016.
                                             ]


                                             
 (321) Moneys deposited in the commission to study mental
health implementation in New Hampshire fund, established under RSA
135-C:63-b, III(b).
                                             
 (322) Moneys deposited in the limited privilege license fund
established in RSA 263:42, V(b).


                                             [Paragraph I(b)(323) effective as provided in 2014, 290:4.
                                             ]


                                             
 (323) Moneys deposited in the state infrastructure bank fund
established in RSA 21-L:21.
                                             
 (324) The robotics education fund established in RSA
188-E:24.
                                             
 (325) Moneys deposited in the division of economic development
fund under RSA 12-A:67.
                                             
 (326) Moneys received for the purposes of RSA 137-L, which
shall be credited to the New Hampshire POLST registry fund established
in RSA 137-L:3, V.
                                             
 (327) Moneys deposited into the John G. Winant Memorial
special account established in RSA 4:9-l.
                                             
 (328) Moneys deposited in the salt application fund
established in RSA 489-C:5, IV.
                                             
 (329) Moneys deposited in the payment and procurement card
fund under RSA 9-D:3.
                                             
 (330) Moneys deposited into the grants in aid to health care
providers servicing medically underserved populations fund established
in RSA 404-C:17, IV(b).
                                             
 (331) Moneys deposited in the transitional housing unit
maintenance fund established in RSA 21-H:14-d.
                                             
 (332) Moneys deposited in the emergency vehicle warning sign
fund established in RSA 265:37-c.


                                             [Paragraph I(b)(333) repealed by 2016, 293:6, II, effective July 1,
2023.
                                             ]


                                             
 (333) Moneys deposited under the FRM victims' contribution
recovery fund, established in RSA 359-P:2.
                                             
 II. The full amount allowed for the maintenance of each institution
and department shall be appropriated by each legislature for the
biennial period next following, and the money derived from the sale of
farm and minor industrial products of institutions shall be credited to
the appropriation for the institution from which derived.
                                             
 III. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Account'' means a formal record in the state's accounting
system that represents, in words, money, or other unit of measurement,
certain resources, claims to such resources, transactions, or other
events that result in changes to those resources and claims.
                                             
 (b) "Fund'' means a fiscal and accounting entity with a
self-balancing set of accounts recording cash and other financial
resources, together with all related liabilities and residual equity or
balances and changes therein, which are segregated for the purpose of
carrying on specific activities or attaining certain objectives in
accordance with special regulations, restrictions, or limitations. A
fund can also be a grouping of related funds that is used to maintain
control over resources that have been segregated for specific activities
or objectives.
                                             
 (c) "Dedicated fund or account'' means moneys collected by the
state from a specific source in the form of taxes, fees, licenses,
fines, donations, gifts, or other sources as designated by statute, a
requirement of federal law, or other legal arrangements that must be
spent for a specific program or purpose.
                                             
 (d) "Revolving fund or account'' means a fund or account that,
when initially established, is intended for repeated expending and
replenishment of resources for a specific program or purpose.
                                             
 (e) "Escrow fund or account'' means an arrangement whereby moneys
or other property are placed into the temporary safekeeping of a neutral
and uninterested third party and which may be released only upon the
fulfillment of certain predetermined conditions or by agreement of the
interested parties.
                                             
 (f) "Trust'' means an arrangement, usually with a formal written
agreement, contract, or will of deceased person, whereby money or other
property is placed under the legal ownership and control of a person,
the trustee, who is responsible for administering it, with specific
instructions about how the principal or corpus is to be managed,
invested, and disposed, for the benefit of others, the beneficiary or
beneficiaries.
                                             
 (g) "Trustee'' means a person named in a trust agreement, as a
trusted third party, to nominally own, protect, and manage moneys or
other assets for the benefit of a beneficiary in accordance with the
terms of the agreement. A trustee is usually charged with investing
prudently and productively on behalf of the beneficiary and may be
allowed some compensation or recovery of costs incurred in the
administration of a trust. Restrictions of a trust may include, but are
not limited to, commingling other moneys or assets with that of the
trust, entering into any transactions with the trust, and benefiting
from the trust. Only when the intention or the purpose of the trust is
fulfilled may a trustee be discharged of these duties.
                                             
 (h) "Agency fund or account'' means an arrangement whereby moneys
or other assets are received by the state as an agent for other
governmental units, other organizations, or individuals and are held in
a custodial capacity. The state, as a holder of these assets, agrees to
remit the assets, income from the assets, or both, to a specified
beneficiary at a specified time.
                                             
 (i) "Custodial fund or account'' means moneys or other assets
owned by a person or entity but which are entrusted to and controlled by
another, the custodian. The role of the custodian includes, but is not
limited to, holding such moneys or other assets in safekeeping,
arranging for the settlement of any purchases or sales of such assets,
collecting income from investments, and providing information to the
owners of such moneys or other assets.
                                             
 (j) "Endowment fund or account'' means moneys or other assets
usually donated with a stipulation that the principal or corpus be
invested and held in perpetuity or for a defined period of time and that
earnings from the investments be utilized for the benefit of others.
                                             
 (k) "Lapsing fund or account'' means moneys in funds or accounts
which, if not spent at the end of the fiscal year or biennium, revert
back to the general fund.
                                             
 (l) "Nonlapsing fund or account'' means moneys in funds or
accounts at the end of the fiscal year or biennium that do not revert
back to the general fund but remain in the fund or account to be used in
the next fiscal year and that are allowed to accumulate for use in
future years.

**Source.** 1913, 154:2. 1915, 39:1. 1917, 40:1. 1921, 162:2. 1925,
164:1. PL 15:11. 1927, 130:2. 1935, 140:2. 1937, 134:21; 151:9. RL
22:11. 1945, 95:1. 1950, 5, part 14:5. 1951, 199:5, par. 22c; 244:2. RSA
6:12. 1961, 166:3; 223:3. 1965, 239:14. 1967, 345:3. 1977, 523:2. 1979,
80:2. 1981, 223:3; 493:19; 500:2; 546:2; 549:3. 1982, 39:3; 42:7, 81.
1983, 23:2; 169:2; 234:2; 379:3; 383:2, 3; 421:14; 425:3; 449:28, 31.
1985, 327:6. 1986, 169:2, 3; 232:3. 1987, 209:10. 1988, 17:2; 105:2;
196:3; 286:2. 1989, 141:12; 331:2; 339:4; 398:16; 407:1; 408:80, 82, I,
II; 417:1. 1990, 163:5; 167:2; 197:7; 200:5; 229:13, XIII; 247:3;
253:15; 261:11. 1991, 30:1; 40:5; 226:3; 280:2; 289:2; 355:21, 23, 98;
366:3; 379:4. 1992, 165:2; 263:5; 265:3; 267:3; 289:12, 13, 47. 1993,
156:2; 180:2; 230:5; 312:4; 325:3; 329:13; 337:2; 354:3; 357:10; 358:90;
388:29. 1994, 3:1; 337:2; 370:2; 388:29. 1995, 130:4; 282:5, 13, I;
299:2, 3; 310:4, 5, 177, 181, 182. 1996, 233:7, I; 263:9; 269:4; 286:8,
9, 210:3. 1997, 141:2; 210:3; 332:6. 1998, 20:3; 89:20; 230:1; 288:8;
317:4; 323:2; 324:4; 355:1. 1999, 17:2; 22:2; 183:4; 193:1; 208:5;
261:1; 285:2; 317:7; 343:4. 2000, 94:1; 55:1; 56:4; 111:2; 316:8, I;
328:1. 2001, 91:2; 133:14; 138:1; 158:4; 167:2; 290:2; 293:11. 2002,
6:2; 145:4; 176:1; 198:1; 254:1, 2, 5, II, X-XII, 7; 272:12. 2003, 11:1;
60:5, I, II; 174:1; 176:2; 177:4; 202:3, I, II; 235:3; 242:18; 266:2;
308:2; 319:47, 55, 145, II. 2004, 38:1-3; 97:2; 105:2; 132:1; 149:4;
185:1, 4; 190:5; 263:2. 2005, 58:2; 118:8; 177:152, 155; 193:1; 210:2;
219:9; 236:8; 242:1; 249:1; 268:2; 273:17; 285:3; 293:2. 2006, 28:8, 9;
50:2; 172:3, 4, I; 244:2, 3, II; 260:2, 3; 270:2; 293:3; 313:2. 2007,
26:3; 134:5, I, II; 185:2; 220:2, 7, I-IV; 263:9, 31, 40, 56, 97, 98,
III, 116, I; 269:4; 296:4, 6; 297:10; 323:5, 9; 324:9; 344:7, 8, II;
346:3; 351:3; 362:10; 381:3. 2008, 3:4; 21:6, I; 112:3; 120:9; 166:1;
182:8; 253:10, 12; 295:16; 356:11, 12, V; 359:5. 2009, 13:1; 68:2; 76:2;
102:2; 109:2; 113:6; 144:7, 29, 46, 47, 92, 116, 119; 163:1-5, 10, I-IV;
201:16; 207:3; 220:2; 221:2; 242:3; 287:3. 2010, 59:2, IV; 180:5, 6;
183:7; 197:2; 224:2, 3, I; 343:11; 368:28, X; Sp. Sess., 1:11; Sp.
Sess., 1:26. 2011, 130:8; 224:12, II, 52, 68, 125, I-VII, 151, 152, 226,
374; 245:4, II; 258:6. 2012, 37:2, II, eff. July 1, 2012; 117:4, eff.
July 1, 2012; 144:4, II, eff. Jan. 1, 2013; 173:8, IV, eff. Mar. 31,
2013; 179:5, eff. June 11, 2012; 200:2, eff. Aug. 12, 2012; 228:1, eff.
Jan. 1, 2013; 237:7, III, eff. June 4, 2013; 281:9, eff. Jan. 1, 2013.
2013, 57:2, eff. Aug. 3, 2013; 144:37, I, II, 71, 139, eff. July 1,
2013; 144:140, II, eff. June 30, 2016; 164:6, eff. June 28, 2013; 175:2,
eff. Aug. 31, 2013; 187:1, II, eff. June 30, 2013; 242:2, eff. July 23,
2013; 250:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2014; 273:2, eff. July 24, 2013; 273:4, eff.
as provided by 2013, 273:5; 275:15, II, eff. July 1, 2013. 2014, 3:4,
eff. Mar. 27, 2014; 3:12, VI, eff. Dec. 31, 2016; 185:4, eff. July 11,
2014; 185:5, II, eff. June 30, 2020; 217:27, eff. July 1, 2014; 228:2,
eff. Sept. 12, 2014; 253:2, eff. July 22, 2014; 253:3, II, eff. Nov. 1,
2015; 263:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016; 290:3, eff. as provided in 2014, 290:4;
306:2, eff. Sept. 30, 2014; 316:2, eff. July 1, 2014; 327:39, eff. Aug.
2, 2014; 328:2, eff. July 1, 2015. 2015, 73:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2016; 119:2,
eff. Aug. 7, 2015; 142:11, 15, IV-VI; 229:21, eff. July 1, 2015; 253:5,
eff. Sept. 11, 2015; 263:15, eff. July 20, 2015; 273:4, eff. Jan. 1,
2016; 276:221, eff. July 1, 2015. 2016, 58:2; 61:1, eff. July 4, 2016;
293:3, eff. Aug. 20, 2016; 319:5, II, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 6:12-a

 **6:12-a Refunds. –** Whenever it shall appear that a state
department or agency has in the course of its administration received
funds from sources outside the state treasury designated as revenue,
which said funds have been paid into the treasury, and it is later found
that certain of said revenue so paid in is in excess of the amounts
which should legally be paid to the state, the head of the department or
agency concerned may certify the facts of such excess revenue to the
commissioner of administrative services and request a repayment thereof
to the persons entitled thereto. The governor, with the consent of the
council, may, in such instances, draw his warrants for the repayment of
such excess revenue from funds in the treasury not otherwise
appropriated and the commissioner of administrative services and the
treasurer shall credit such repayments to the proper revenue item for
the department or agency concerned.

**Source.** 1959, 65:1. 1985, 399:3, I, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 6:12-b

 **6:12-b Maintenance of Funds Collected Pursuant to Electric Utility
Restructuring Orders. –** On request of the public utilities commission,
the state treasurer shall maintain custody over funds collected by order
of the public utilities commission consisting of only that portion of
the system benefits charge directly attributable to programs for low
income customers as described in RSA 374-F:4, VIII(c). All funds
received by the state treasurer pursuant to this section shall be kept
separate from any other funds and shall be administered in accordance
with terms and conditions established by the public utilities
commission. Plans for the administration of such funds shall be approved
by the fiscal committee of the general court and the governor and
council prior to submission to the public utilities commission.
Appropriations and expenditures of such funds in fiscal years 2002 and
2003 shall be approved by the fiscal committee of the general court and
the governor and council prior to submission to the public utilities
commission. For each biennium thereafter, appropriations and
expenditures of such funds shall be made through the biennial operating
budget.

**Source.** 2000, 94:2. 2001, 158:46, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 6:12-c

 **6:12-c Trust and Agency Funds. –**
                                             
 I. The definitions in RSA 6:12 shall apply to this section.
                                             
 II. All moneys received or held by the state treasurer pursuant to
this section shall be kept separate from any other funds and accounts
and shall be administered in accordance with RSA 4:8 and the terms and
conditions of the referenced trust or account:
                                             
 (a) The Caroline A. Fox fund of the department of resources and
economic development.
                                             
 (b) The Japanese charitable fund of the state treasurer.
                                             
 (c) The Matthew Elliot memorial trust fund of the division of
juvenile justice services, department of health and human services.
                                             
 (d) The New Hampshire veterans' home benefit fund of the New
Hampshire veterans' home.
                                             
 (e) The Sam Whidden trust of the state university system.
                                             
 (f) The Harriet Huntress trust of the department of education.
                                             
 (g) The Hattie Livesey trust of the department of education.
                                             
 (h) The Laconia state school account.
                                             
 (i) The New Hampshire hospital account.
                                             
 (j) The tip-top house fund of the department of resources and
economic development.
                                             
 III. (a) The state treasurer may establish one or more other
post-employment benefits (OPEB) trusts for the payment of other
post-employment benefits for employees or officers of the state after
their termination of service. In this paragraph, the term "other
post-employment benefits'' means employee benefits other than pensions
that are received after employment ends, and may include such medical,
disability, or other health benefits, as are covered by Statement No. 45
of the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB). The term "trust''
means a trust qualified under GASB Statement No. 43.
                                             
 (b) Deposits to any fund under such a trust and any earnings on
those deposits shall be irrevocable and shall be held in trust for the
exclusive benefit of retirees and their beneficiaries in accordance with
the terms of the plans or programs providing other post-employment
benefits, except that funds governed by the trust may be withdrawn for
other purposes only when the state's liability owed to former officers
or employees for other post-employment benefits has been satisfied or
otherwise eliminated pursuant to subparagraph (d)(2). The assets of any
trust created pursuant to this paragraph shall be exempt from taxation
and execution, attachment, garnishment, or any other process. No public
officer, employee, or agency shall divert, use, or authorize the use of
such funds for any purpose other than as provided in law for other
post-employment benefits covered by the trust and administrative
expenses.
                                             
 (c) The state treasurer shall have the full power to invest,
reinvest, and manage the assets of the trust. The state treasurer shall
invest the assets of the trust with the care, skill, prudence, and
diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent person
acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in
the conduct of an enterprise of a like character and with like aims. The
state treasurer shall also diversify such investments so as to minimize
the risk of large losses unless under the circumstances it is clearly
prudent not to do so. The state treasurer may engage a trust
administrator, investment consultants, or other qualified professionals
to assist with management and investment of the funds of the trust and
may pay for these services out of the funds of the trust.
                                             
 (d) The state treasurer may withdraw money from the funds of a
trust created pursuant to this paragraph only:
                                             
 (1) As needed to pay other post-employment benefits owed to
former state officers and employees; or
                                             
 (2) When all other post-employment benefits liability owed to
former state officers or employees has been satisfied or otherwise
deceased.
                                             
 (e) The state treasurer shall complete and make available, not
later than 120 days after the close of each fiscal year, an annual
comprehensive financial report of the OPEB trust for the preceding
fiscal year. The comprehensive financial report shall be prepared in a
manner consistent with generally accepted accounting principals and
shall be audited annually by a qualified independent auditor selected by
the state treasurer.
                                             
 (f) When the balance of any trust established under this
paragraph reaches 
                                             $10,000,000, the state treasurer shall transfer
responsibility for administration of the trust to a board of trustees
comprised of the state treasurer and 3 members of the public. The
governor, the speaker of the house of representatives, and the senate
president shall each appoint one trustee, who shall be a qualified
person with substantial investment or financial experience, taking into
account factors such as educational background, business experience, and
professional licensure and designations. The trustees shall serve 3-year
terms and until a successor is appointed and qualified, except that the
initial appointment by the governor shall be for a term of one year, the
initial appointment by the speaker of the house of representatives shall
be for a term of 2 years, and the initial appointment by the senate
president shall be for a term of 3 years. No trustee, other than the
state treasurer, may serve more than 3 full terms.

**Source.** 2002, 254:3. 2009, 163:6, eff. Sept. 6, 2009. 2013, 144:141,
eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 6:12-d

 **6:12-d Custodial and Escrow Accounts. –**
                                             
 I. The definitions in RSA 6:12 shall apply to this section.
                                             
 II. All moneys received or held by the state treasurer pursuant to
this section shall be kept separate from any other funds and accounts
and shall be administered in accordance with the terms and conditions of
the referenced account:
                                             
 (a) The financial responsibility account of the department of
safety.
                                             
 (b) The road toll bonds account of the department of safety.
                                             
 (c) The special fund for active cases account of the department
of labor.
                                             
 (d) The special fund for second injuries account of the
department of labor.
                                             
 (e) The dissolution of corporation account of the state
treasurer.
                                             
 (f) The foreign escheated estates account of the state
treasurer.
                                             
 (g) The unclaimed and abandoned property account of the state
treasurer.
                                             
 (h) The Guy Thompson account of the New Hampshire veterans'
home.
                                             
 (i) The veterans' home members administrative account of the New
Hampshire veterans' home.
                                             
 (j) The water resources project accounts of the department of
environmental services.
                                             
 (k) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (l) The racing and charitable gaming escrow account of the racing
and charitable gaming commission.
                                             
 (m) The agriculture escrow account of the department of
agriculture, markets, and food.

**Source.** 2002, 254:3. 2009, 112:1; 163:7, 11. 2011, 224:125, VIII,
eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 6:12-e

 **6:12-e Reporting Requirements for Dedicated Funds. –** The
definitions established in RSA 6:12 shall apply to this section. The
administrator of each fund, account, or trust listed in RSA 6:12, RSA
6:12-b, RSA 6:12-c, and RSA 6:12-d shall complete and file an annual
report with the commissioner of administrative services on or before
September 15 of each fiscal year, covering the most recently ended
fiscal year. The commissioner of administrative services shall compile
these reports into a document known as the annual compilation of
dedicated funds report on or before November 15 of each year and forward
it to the governor, the president of the senate, the speaker of the
house of representatives, the legislative budget assistant, and the
relevant legislative policy committees of the house and senate as
indicated on said reports by the administrator of each fund, account, or
trust. The compilation shall be made available in a searchable
electronic format and an extractable modified version shall be available
for sorting. Each annual report shall be retained in the office of the
state comptroller and made available as requested, and shall include,
but not be limited to:
                                             
 I. A description of the activities the fund, account, or trust is
required or intended to carry out, and an identification of all revenue
sources available to said fund, account, or trust.
                                             
 II. The actual amount of revenue deposited into the fund, account,
or trust, the actual amount expended from said fund, account, or trust,
and the actual amount of transfers into or out of said fund, account or
trust, during the prior 4 fiscal years if said data is available in a
suitable format for each of those years.
                                             
 III. The balance of the fund, account, or trust at the close of the
prior 4 fiscal years if said data is available in a suitable format for
each of those years.
                                             
 IV. The amount of funds for each fund, account, or trust which has
been expended for or diverted to a purpose other than the original
purpose of the fund, account, or trust.

**Source.** 2002, 254:3. 2009, 163:8. 2010, Sp. Sess., 1:108. 2012,
143:1, eff. Aug. 6, 2012. 2014, 110:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 6:12-f

 **6:12-f Inclusion of All Dedicated Funds, Accounts, or Trusts. –**
                                             
 I. The definitions in RSA 6:12 shall apply to this section. Any
dedicated fund, account, or trust that is to be maintained separately
from the general fund shall be included in RSA 6:12, RSA 6:12-b, RSA
6:12-c, or RSA 6:12-d.
                                             
 II. The department to which such a dedicated fund, account, or trust
is assigned in the enabling statute shall be responsible for:
                                             
 (a) Submitting a request to the department of administrative
services to open an account in the state's financial records, indicating
that the assigned department has been assigned such a dedicated fund,
account, or trust in an enabling statute; and
                                             
 (b) Submitting a request to the state treasurer to open and
separately manage a new trust and agency fund, pursuant to RSA 6:12-c,
or a new custodial and escrow account, pursuant to RSA 6:12-d.
                                             
 III. By November 15, 2009, and each odd-numbered year thereafter, it
shall be the responsibility of the commissioner of administrative
services to submit a report of funds, accounts, or trusts identified by
requests under subparagraph II(b) and not included in RSA 6:12, RSA
6:12-b, RSA 6:12-c, or RSA 6:12-d to the legislative budget assistant
and the chairpersons of the ways and means committees of the senate and
house of representatives for introduction in the next legislative
session in order to include said funds, accounts, or trusts in RSA 6:12,
RSA 6:12-b, RSA 6:12-c, or RSA 6:12-d.

**Source.** 2002, 254:3. 2009, 163:9. 2012, 143:1, eff. Aug. 6, 2012.

### Section 6:12-g

 **6:12-g Annual Reporting Requirement for Certain Dedicated Funds.
–** Beginning October 1, 2009, and each October 1 thereafter, the
commissioner of the department of safety shall provide an annual report
relative to the utilization of funds deposited in the dedicated accounts
identified in this section. The report shall be filed with the governor,
the speaker of the house of representatives, the president of the
senate, and the chairpersons of the standing committees of the house and
senate responsible for criminal justice, ways and means, transportation,
and finance issues. The commissioner shall file an annual report that
includes the information specified for the following:
                                             
 I. The New Hampshire nuclear planning and response fund, established
in RSA 107-B:5 and identified in RSA 6:12, I(b)(4), the report for which
shall include:
                                             
 (a) A list of activities funded.
                                             
 (b) A list of fund recipients.
                                             
 (c) The amount of funds distributed under subparagraphs (a) and
(b).
                                             
 (d) The source of funds.
                                             
 II. The motorcycle rider safety fund, established in RSA 263:34-e
and identified in RSA 6:12, I(b)(26), the report for which shall
include:
                                             
 (a) A list of activities funded.
                                             
 (b) The number of participants in each activity.
                                             
 (c) A statistical analysis of motorcycle fatality and accident
rates over the last 10 years.
                                             
 (d) A list of fund recipients.
                                             
 (e) The amount of funds distributed under subparagraphs (a) and
(d).
                                             
 (f) The source of funds.
                                             
 III. The enhanced 911 system fund, established in RSA 106-H:9 and
identified in RSA 6:12, I(b)(40), the report for which shall include:
                                             
 (a) A list of activities funded.
                                             
 (b) A list of fund recipients.
                                             
 (c) The amount of funds distributed under subparagraphs (a) and
(b).
                                             
 (d) The source of funds.
                                             
 IV. The navigation safety fund, established in RSA 270-E:6-a and
identified in RSA 6:12, I(b)(58), the report for which shall include:
                                             
 (a) A list of activities funded.
                                             
 (b) A list of fund recipients.
                                             
 (c) The amount of funds distributed under subparagraphs (a) and
(b).
                                             
 (d) The source of funds.

**Source.** 2009, 85:1, eff. Aug. 9, 2009.

### Section 6:12-h

 **6:12-h Community College System Debt Service Fund. –** There is
hereby established in the office of the treasurer a fund to be known as
the community college system debt service fund, which shall be accounted
for separately from other funds. All moneys credited to the fund from
payments made to the treasurer by the community college system shall be
used exclusively for repayment of principal and interest on bonds issued
by the treasurer, the proceeds of which fund the construction or
renovation of capital projects undertaken by the community college
system of New Hampshire self-supporting campus facilities. The moneys in
the fund shall be nonlapsing and continually appropriated to the
treasurer.

**Source.** 2011, 224:360, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 6:12-i

 **6:12-i Joint Committee on Dedicated Funds. –**
                                             
 I. A joint committee on dedicated funds is hereby established to
review the finances and purpose of all dedicated funds on a rotating
basis every 5 years and recommend continuance, amendment, or repeal of
relevant provisions. The joint committee shall be composed of 3 members
of the house of representatives appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives, 2 from the ways and means committee and one from the
finance committee, and 2 members of the senate appointed by the senate
president, at least one of whom shall come from the ways and means
committee. The speaker of the house of representatives also shall
appoint 2 alternate members to the committee and the senate president
shall appoint one alternate member. The first meeting shall be within 60
days after the effective date of this paragraph and called by the
first-named house member.
                                             
 II. The joint committee shall file reports with recommendations for
legislation to modify or repeal certain funds and to add newly
discovered dedicated funds to RSA 6:12, I, on or before November 1 of
each year, with the speaker of the house, the senate president, the
governor, and the commissioner of revenue administration. Reports
required by this section shall be made available to the general public
on the general court's website.

**Source.** 2015, 192:1, eff. Sept. 4, 2015.

### Section 6:12-j

 **6:12-j Review and Reporting Requirement for Dedicated Funds. –**
                                             
 I. Every 5 years, the agency responsible for administration of a
fund or account listed in RSA 6:12 shall prepare a report that:
                                             
 (a) In addition to the information contained in the report
submitted under RSA 6:12-e, identifies all fund or account expenditures
during the prior 4 fiscal years by accounting unit; and
                                             
 (b) Demonstrates the continued need for the fund or account.
                                             
 II. The report shall be submitted on or before August 15 of the
reporting year to the ways and means committee in the house and senate,
the finance committee in the house and senate, the joint committee on
dedicated funds, the relevant policy committees in the house and senate,
and the legislative budget assistant.
                                             
 III. If the joint committee on dedicated funds, in consultation with
the relevant policy committee, determines that the fund or account no
longer serves the statutory purpose for which it was created, or that
the purpose has become obsolete, the joint committee shall submit
legislation to repeal, merge, or modify the fund or account in the next
legislative session.
                                             
 IV. The joint committee shall also annually request information of
the department of administrative services as to dedicated funds which
are not yet listed in RSA 6:12, I and submit legislation to add them to
this list.
                                             
 V. The reporting year for each agency responsible for a dedicated
fund shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) Year 1, beginning November 1, 2015, and every 5 years
thereafter:
                                             
 (1) The department of safety.
                                             
 (2) The police standards and training council.
                                             
 (3) The department of employment security.
                                             
 (4) The department of resources and economic development.
                                             
 (5) The department of state.
                                             
 (b) Year 2, beginning November 1, 2016, and every 5 years
thereafter:
                                             
 (1) The department of environmental services.
                                             
 (2) The liquor commission.
                                             
 (3) The department of justice.
                                             
 (4) The lottery commission.
                                             
 (5) The racing and charitable gaming commission.
                                             
 (6) The judicial branch.
                                             
 (c) Year 3, beginning November 1, 2017, and every 5 years
thereafter:
                                             
 (1) The department of agriculture, markets, and food.
                                             
 (2) The labor department.
                                             
 (3) The department of corrections.
                                             
 (4) Pease development authority.
                                             
 (5) The office of energy and planning.
                                             
 (6) The adjutant general.
                                             
 (7) The state treasurer.
                                             
 (8) The insurance department.
                                             
 (9) The department of transportation.
                                             
 (d) Year 4, beginning November 1, 2018, and every 5 years
thereafter:
                                             
 (1) The department of cultural resources.
                                             
 (2) The department of education.
                                             
 (3) The banking department.
                                             
 (4) The public utilities commission.
                                             
 (e) Year 5, beginning November 1, 2019, and every 5 years
thereafter:
                                             
 (1) The department of administrative services.
                                             
 (2) The general court.
                                             
 (3) The department of health and human services.
                                             
 (4) The fish and game department.
                                             
 VI. The joint committee on dedicated funds may submit legislation at
any time after the first review to exempt a fund or account from this
section which receives adequate and periodic review elsewhere.
                                             
 VII. This section shall not apply to trusts as defined in RSA 6:12,
III(f).

**Source.** 2015, 192:1, eff. Sept. 4, 2015.

### Section 6:13

 **6:13 Borrowing Money. –**
                                             
 I. When it is anticipated that there will not be sufficient general
funds in the treasury for the payment of obligations, the treasurer,
under the direction of the governor and council, is authorized to borrow
on the state's credit such sums as may be necessary, not to exceed the
amount authorized by the governor and council, provided that at no time
shall the indebtedness of the state, pursuant to the authority granted
by this section exceed the sum of 
                                             $200,000,000.
                                             
 II. Unless otherwise provided by the governor and council, the
treasurer shall have the authority to borrow at one time, or from time
to time, up to the aggregate amount authorized by the governor and
council under this section, and to determine the amounts, dates,
maturities, and other details of each borrowing.
                                             
 III. The treasurer, when authorized by the governor and council, may
enter into agreements with banks or other financial institutions, within
or without the state, in the form of lines or letters of credit or other
banking arrangements in connection with any indebtedness incurred under
this section or RSA 6-A:4. The agreement may include covenants and
provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights, security and
remedies of the lenders as, in the discretion of the treasurer, may be
reasonable and proper and not in violation of law. Notes issued under
this section or RSA 6-A:4 shall bear interest at such rate or rates as
the treasurer may deem proper, including rates variable from time to
time as determined by any index, banker's loan rate or other method
specified in any such agreement.

**Source.** 1851, 1142:1. CS 12:6. GS 14:6. GL 15:6. PS 16:6. 1905,
82:1. 1921, 30:1. PL 15:12. 1935, 7:1. RL 22:12. RSA 6:13. 1959, 63:1.
1965, 188:1. 1967, 114:1. 1971, 1:1; 557:71. 1973, 144:1. 1981 Sp.
Sess., 2:1, 2. 1983, 468:2. 1991, 378:1. 1992, 289:1. 1996, 257:8. 1999,
137:2, eff. June 21, 1999.

### Section 6:13-a

 **6:13-a Fish and Game Fund. –** When it is anticipated that there
will not be sufficient fish and game funds in the treasury for the
payment of obligations, the treasurer under the direction of the
governor and council is authorized to borrow on the state's credit for a
period of not more than one year, at the lowest net interest cost to the
state, such sums as may be necessary, provided that at no time shall the
indebtedness of the state pursuant to the authority granted by this
section exceed the sum of 
                                             $500,000. The short term loans authorized
hereunder shall be repaid from the fish and game fund.

**Source.** 1965, 188:2. 1973, 144:2. 1979, 96:3, eff. May 2, 1979.

### Section 6:13-b

 **6:13-b Highway Fund. –** When it is anticipated that there will
not be sufficient highway funds in the treasury for the payment of
obligations, the treasurer under the direction of the governor and
council is authorized to borrow on the state's credit for a period of
not more than one year, at the lowest net interest cost to the state,
such sums as may be necessary, provided that at no time shall the
indebtedness of the state pursuant to the authority granted by this
section exceed the sum of 
                                             $15,000,000. The short term loans authorized
hereunder shall be repaid from highway income or from federal
reimbursement for highway purposes.

**Source.** 1971, 353:2. 1973, 144:3, eff. July 21, 1973.

### Section 6:13-c

 **6:13-c Christa McAuliffe Planetarium Fund. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988,
160:7, eff. April 22, 1988.
                                             ]

### Section 6:13-d


                                             


                                             [RSA 6:13-d is repealed by 2014, 17:5, III effective as provided by
2014, 17:6.
                                             ]

 **6:13-d Authority to Borrow; Certain Transportation Projects. –**
                                             
 I. The state treasurer, as may be requested from time to time by the
commissioner of the department of transportation, is hereby authorized
to borrow upon the credit of the state not exceeding the sum of

                                             $200,000,000 and shall issue general obligation or revenue bonds, or
both, in the name and on behalf of the state of New Hampshire in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 6-A, to provide funds for the
widening of Interstate 93 from Salem, New Hampshire to Manchester, New
Hampshire. In addition, authorization is hereby granted to enter into
the federal credit program known as the Transportation Infrastructure
Finance and Innovation Act (TIFIA), 23 U.S.C. sections 601-609,
including appropriate covenants and conditions necessary to secure
favorable credit terms, including, without limitation, a pledge of
revenue collected from adjustments under RSA 260:32-a for rates that
exceed 
                                             $.18 per gallon, less required "Apportionment A'' distributions
under RSA 235:23, I, on said revenues and to be used for the purposes
set forth in RSA 260:32-b, II(a), III(a), and IV(a).
                                             
 II. Payment of principal and interest on the bonds issued under
paragraph I shall be paid when due from the highway funds collected and
appropriated in accordance with RSA 260:32-a for rates that exceed 
                                             $.18
per gallon and expended in accordance with RSA 260:32-b.

**Source.** 2014, 17:4, eff. July 1, 2015. 2015, 276:211, eff. July 1,
2015.

### Section 6:14

 **6:14 Exchange of Bonds. –** The treasurer is authorized to issue
registered bonds of 
                                             $100 each, and multiples thereof, in exchange for
coupon or other registered bonds of the state, respectively bearing the
same rate of interest as the bonds received in exchange, and payable at
the same time. If the payee of a registered bond duly assigns it to
another party, it shall be the duty of the treasurer or a designated
agent engaged under RSA 6:8-b to issue to the assignee thereof a new
bond as aforesaid, upon request and surrender of the old bond thus
assigned. The bonds so issued shall be signed by the treasurer,
countersigned by the governor, and attested, under the seal of the
state, by the secretary, subject to the provisions of RSA 93-A;
provided, that if a transfer agent or similar agent is engaged under RSA
6:8-b, the bonds may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the
treasurer, the governor and the secretary and the manual signature of a
duly authorized officer of said agent. The treasurer or designated agent
shall keep a record of the new bonds, showing the serial number, date,
and amount of each, and to whom and when payable.

**Source.** 1877, 18:1, 2, 3. GL 15:14, 15. PS 16:7. PL 15:13. RL 22:13.
RSA 6:14. 1983, 468:3, eff. June 30, 1983.

### Section 6:15

 **6:15 Cancelling Bonds. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 468:8, I, eff. June
30, 1983.
                                             ]

### Section 6:16

 **6:16 Forestry Funds. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2002, 254:5, IV, eff. July 1,
2002.
                                             ]

### Section 6:17

 **6:17 Reports. –** The state treasurer shall make an annual report
showing the details of receipts and disbursements, together with the
aggregate amount of funded debt of the state. It shall also show the
details of receipts and disbursements of all trust funds and/or funds
held by the treasurer as custodian. It shall contain a particular
statement of all transactions affecting the funds belonging to or held
in trust by the state, including new investments of any portion of the
same made during the preceding year.

**Source.** 1915, 58:5. PL 15:16. RL 22:16. RSA 6:17. 1973, 144:4. 2008,
120:10, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 6:18

 **6:18 Treasurer Relieved of Certain Accounting Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The state treasurer is hereby relieved of all duties in respect
to the keeping of records and accounts and of rendering reports except
such as are necessary to account for all moneys received, held in
custody, invested, and disbursed by the office of the treasurer, or by
depositories of public funds acting as fiscal agents of the state.
                                             
 II. Other provisions of law notwithstanding, the state treasurer is
hereby relieved of maintaining any accounts by appropriation or division
code and shall only maintain on the state's centralized financial system
the fund to which the money belongs.

**Source.** RL 23:15. RSA 6:18. 1975, 169:1. 2008, 120:10, eff. Aug. 2,
2008.

### Section 6:18-a

 **6:18-a Use of Facsimile Signature. –** When endorsing the state's
guarantee on any bond or note issued by any political subdivision of the
state, the state treasurer may cause such guarantee to be executed with
an engraved or printed facsimile of the treasurer's signature in lieu of
a signature. Such facsimile shall have the same effect as the manual
signature of the state treasurer.

**Source.** 1970, 8:1. 2008, 120:10, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 6:19

 **6:19 Removal of Treasurer. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008, 120:34, I, eff.
Aug. 2, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 6:20

 **6:20 Commissioner During Vacancy in Office. –** Upon the death,
resignation, or removal of the treasurer, the governor, with the advice
of the council, shall appoint some suitable person as commissioner, to
take charge of the money, books, electronic records, and papers in the
office, and to perform all the duties of treasurer until a treasurer is
elected and qualified. Before entering upon the discharge of the duties
of the treasurer, the commissioner shall give bond as provided for the
treasurer in RSA 6:3.

**Source.** RS 12:7. CS 12:8. GS 14:8. GL 15:8. PS 16:14. PL 15:18. RL
22:18. 2008, 120:11, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

Deputy State Treasurers
-----------------------

### Section 6:21

 **6:21 Appointments; Removal; Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The state treasurer shall appoint 2 deputies who shall hold
office while the treasurer remains in office unless sooner removed. The
treasurer may remove either deputy at pleasure, and the governor and
council may remove either of the deputies for cause as they may remove
the treasurer. A commissioner shall appoint deputies to hold office in
like manner.
                                             
 II. The treasurer shall designate one deputy as chief deputy who
shall perform such duties as may be assigned by the treasurer. During
the absence or disability of the treasurer, the chief deputy shall
perform all duties of the office of treasurer. The other deputy shall
perform such duties as may be assigned by the treasurer.

**Source.** 1891, 6:1. PS 16:15. PL 15:19. RL 22:19. RSA 6:21. 1983,
419:8. 1999, 137:3, eff. June 21, 1999.

### Section 6:22

 **6:22 Oath; Bond. –** Before entering upon the duties of their
offices, the deputy treasurers shall be sworn and shall be bonded in
accordance with RSA 93-B in the amount of 
                                             $40,000 each with sufficient
sureties, conditioned on the faithful discharge of the duties of their
offices. The bonds shall be filed and preserved in the office of the
secretary of state.

**Source.** 1891, 6:1. PS 16:16. 1903, 57:1. PL 15:20. RL 22:20. RSA
6:22. 1983, 419:9, eff. June 24, 1983.

### Section 6:23

 **6:23 Duties. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 137:6, I, eff. June 21, 1999.
                                             ]

### Section 6:24

 **6:24 Salaries. –** The annual salary of the chief deputy state
treasurer and deputy state treasurer shall be that prescribed by RSA
94:1-4 for deputy state treasurers.

**Source.** 1891, 6:4. PS 286:7. 1909, 81:1, 2. 1917, 220:3. 1919,
117:2. 1921, 118:1. PL 15:23. 1927, 133:2. RL 22:23. 1953, 265:1. RSA
6:24. 1983, 419:11, eff. June 24, 1983.

Receipts From Harness Race Fund
-------------------------------

### Section 6:24-a

 **6:24-a Sinking Fund. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1959, 181:2, eff. July 9,
1959.
                                             ]

Audit of Treasurer's Accounts, Etc.
-----------------------------------

### Section 6:25

 **6:25 Audit of Bonds and Coupons. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 144:6, II,
eff. July 21, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 6:26

 **6:26 Audit of Accounts. –** The legislative budget assistant shall
audit the accounts of the state treasurer as provided in RSA 14:31, II.

**Source.** RL 22:26. 1950, 5, part 6:1, par. 12(XI). 1953, 121:2.

### Section 6:27

 **6:27 Reports. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 144:6, II, eff. July 21,
1973.
                                             ]

Assistant State Treasurers
--------------------------

### Section 6:28

 **6:28 Appointment; Removal. –** The state treasurer may appoint 2
assistant state treasurers who shall hold office during good behavior.
The governor and council may remove an assistant for cause as they may
remove the treasurer.

**Source.** 1982, 42:51. 1993, 242:2, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 6:29

 **6:29 Oath; Bond. –** Before entering upon the duties of the
office, an assistant state treasurer shall be sworn and shall give bond
to the state in the sum of 
                                             $40,000, with sufficient sureties to be
approved by the governor and council, conditioned on the faithful
discharge of the duties of the office. The bond shall be filed and
preserved in the office of the secretary of state.

**Source.** 1982, 42:51. 1993, 242:2, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 6:30

 **6:30 Duties. –** Assistant state treasurers shall perform such
duties as may be assigned to them by the state treasurer. During the
absence or disability of the treasurer and deputy treasurer they shall
perform all the duties of the office of state treasurer.

**Source.** 1982, 42:51. 1993, 242:2, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 6:31

 **6:31 Salary. –** The annual salary of an assistant state treasurer
shall be that established by RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 1982, 42:51. 1993, 242:2, eff. July 1, 1993.

Investment of State Funds in Northern Ireland
---------------------------------------------

### Section 6:32-34

 **6:32 to 6:34 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008, 120:34, II, eff. Aug.
2, 2008.
                                             ]

State Leases
------------

### Section 6:35

 **6:35 State Leases. –** The 10-year limitation does not apply to
leases for state facility energy cost reduction projects pursuant to RSA
21-I:19-a through RSA 21-I:19-e, which shall be subject to the term
limitation applicable to energy performance contracts, as defined
therein. The treasurer may establish financing criteria to be met by any
state agency or department before entering into leases for equipment. In
no instance shall the term of such lease exceed 10 years. For purposes
of this section "leases'' shall include lease-purchase, sale and lease
back, installment sale, or other similar agreements entered into by
various agencies or departments to acquire such equipment from time to
time for the agencies or departments; provided that funding for such
equipment leases was specifically approved by the legislature in a
budget. Payment obligations under any lease entered into under this
section shall be subject to annual appropriation and shall not be
treated as debt obligations of the state. Nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit the treasurer from entering into financing agreements or
executing any related documents, including any document creating or
confirming any security interest retained by the seller or lessor of the
equipment.

**Source.** 1996, 1:1. 2000, 276:8. 2008, 120:12, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 6:36

 **6:36 Federal Tax Information Returns. –** Any information return
for tax-exempt governmental obligations to be filed with the United
States Internal Revenue Service, by or on behalf of the state or any
state agency or department resulting from a lease entered into under RSA
6:35, shall first be submitted to the state treasurer for review and
execution. This section shall not apply to any return filed for a state
authority, political subdivision, or other separate body politic and
corporate created by state law.

**Source.** 1996, 1:1, eff. April 12, 1996.

New Hampshire Excellence in Higher Education Endowment Fund
-----------------------------------------------------------

### Section 6:37

 **6:37 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Commission'' means the New Hampshire college tuition savings
plan advisory commission established in RSA 195-H.
                                             
 II. "Eligible educational institution'' means that which is defined
in section 529 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended.
                                             
 III. "Trust fund'' means the New Hampshire excellence in higher
education endowment trust fund as established in this chapter.

**Source.** 1999, 328:1, eff. Oct. 14, 1999.

### Section 6:38

 **6:38 New Hampshire Excellence in Higher Education Endowment Trust
Fund Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established in the office of the treasurer the
New Hampshire excellence in higher education endowment trust fund which
shall be kept distinct and separate from all other funds. Annual
assessments less any annual administrative costs received from the New
Hampshire college tuition savings plan established under RSA 195-H shall
be credited to the trust fund to provide scholarships for the benefit of
residents of the state pursuing programs of study at eligible
educational institutions within the state.
                                             
 II. The state treasurer shall be the trustee of the trust fund
established in this chapter, and shall invest the trust fund in
accordance with RSA 6:8. Any earnings on trust fund moneys shall be
added to the trust fund.
                                             
 III. All moneys in the trust fund shall be nonlapsing and shall be
continually appropriated to the commission for purposes of providing
education scholarships under this subdivision.

**Source.** 1999, 328:1, eff. Oct. 14, 1999. 2015, 237:2, eff. Sept. 11,
2015.

### Section 6:39

 **6:39 Administration. –**
                                             
 I. The trust fund shall be administered by the New Hampshire college
tuition savings plan advisory commission established in RSA 195-H:2.
                                             
 II. The commission shall have the authority to institute promotional
programs and to solicit and receive gifts or donations of any kind for
the purpose of supporting educational scholarships within the trust
fund. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the
commission may accept gifts to the trust fund including, but not limited
to, cash gifts and real or personal property, without the approval of
the governor and council.
                                             
 III. All gifts, grants, and donations of any kind shall be credited
to the trust fund.
                                             
 IV. The commission may enter into agreements with existing
departments or agencies, as it deems necessary, to administer the
scholarship application, qualification, and award process.
                                             
 V. No more than one percent of the total amount of scholarships
awarded from the trust fund in any fiscal year shall be used for
administrative expenses, except upon approval of the commission.

**Source.** 1999, 328:1, eff. Oct. 14, 1999.

### Section 6:40

 **6:40 Rulemaking. –** The commission shall adopt rules, pursuant to
RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Establishing minimum qualifications of scholarship applicants.
                                             
 II. Instituting a scholarship application process, which includes
but is not limited to requiring that all applicants complete a formal
scholarship application on appropriate forms to be developed by the
commission and time frames for the application process.
                                             
 III. Procedures for awarding and disbursing scholarships.
                                             
 IV. Procedures for determining the amount of funds available to
provide annual scholarships through the trust fund.
                                             
 V. Any other issue which the commission deems relevant to the
implementation and administration of the scholarship program.
                                             
 VI. Requiring disclosure regarding any scholarship funds, or portion
thereof, which are or may be returned to the trust fund.

**Source.** 1999, 328:1, eff. Oct. 14, 1999. 2015, 237:3, eff. Sept. 11,
2015.

### Section 6:41

 **6:41 Scholarships; Eligibility. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall determine all scholarship awards in a fair
and equitable manner to eligible residents of this state who have
satisfactorily met the minimum qualifications established by the
commission. Scholarships shall be granted on the basis of merit and
need.
                                             
 II. All scholarships awarded by the commission under this
subdivision shall be for the period of one academic year or equivalent
and in specified amounts of not less than 
                                             $100 per fiscal year within
the limits established by the commission.
                                             
 III. No scholarship shall be in excess of the tuition assessed to
the student for the academic period in which the scholarship is
received.
                                             
 IV. No person to whom a scholarship is awarded shall be restricted
as to the choice of institutions or programs within the state provided
the institution selected by the student is an eligible educational
institution. Scholarships may be used at public or private institutions
by full-time or part-time students enrolled in undergraduate or graduate
level programs.

**Source.** 1999, 328:1, eff. Oct. 14, 1999. 2015, 237:4, eff. Sept. 11,
2015.

### Section 6:42

 **6:42 Certification of Available Funds. –** By April 1 of each
year, the commission shall determine the funding level available for
scholarships for the next academic year and shall certify such amount to
the state treasurer.

**Source.** 1999, 328:1, eff. Oct. 14, 1999. 2015, 237:5, eff. Sept. 11,
2015.

### Section 6:43

 **6:43 Report. –** By November 1 of each year, the commission shall
prepare a report regarding the status of the trust fund. Such report
shall be submitted to the president of the senate, the speaker of the
house, the governor, and the state library, and shall be posted to the
state government Internet site.

**Source.** 1999, 328:1. 2008, 120:13, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.
