---
title: |
    CHAPTER 9-B STATE ECONOMIC GROWTH, RESOURCE PROTECTION, AND PLANNING
    POLICY
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 9-B
                                             
STATE ECONOMIC GROWTH, RESOURCE PROTECTION, AND PLANNING POLICY
---------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 9-B:1

 **9-B:1 Findings. –** The general court finds that:
                                             
 I. In addition to clean water and air, productive mountain, forest,
and agricultural open space land is one of the state's most valuable
assets, and is necessary for the economy and health and welfare of the
citizens. The maintenance of this asset is vital if the state is to
provide future generations with the same quality of life and environment
that we have traditionally enjoyed.
                                             
 II. Economic development is essential to the well-being and
prosperity of our citizens. However, when haphazard development sprawls
across the state's landscape, our collective well-being suffers.
Fortunately, economic development can take place in a form that
maximizes smart growth.
                                             
 III. The state can encourage development in accordance with this
chapter by regularly reviewing its operating procedures, granting
policies, and regulatory framework.
                                             
 IV. A coordinated and comprehensive planning effort by state
agencies on future development in the state is needed, which will not
only improve our economy, but also encourages smart growth by locating
development in appropriate growth areas and thus retaining as much open
space land as possible for the long-term.

**Source.** 2000, 292:6, eff. Aug. 20, 2000.

### Section 9-B:2

 **9-B:2 Policy. –** It shall be the policy of the state of New
Hampshire that state agencies act in ways that encourage smart growth.

**Source.** 2000, 292:6, eff. Aug. 20, 2000.

### Section 9-B:3

 **9-B:3 Definition. –** In this chapter, "smart growth'' means the
control of haphazard and unplanned development and the use of land which
results over time, in the inflation of the amount of land used per unit
of human development, and of the degree of dispersal between such land
areas. "Smart growth'' also means the development and use of land in
such a manner that its physical, visual, or audible consequences are
appropriate to the traditional and historic New Hampshire landscape.
Smart growth may include denser development of existing communities,
encouragement of mixed uses in such communities, the protection of
villages, and planning so as to create ease of movement within and among
communities. Smart growth preserves the integrity of open space in
agricultural, forested, and undeveloped areas. The results of smart
growth may include, but shall not be limited to:
                                             
 I. Vibrant commercial activity within cities and towns.
                                             
 II. Strong sense of community identity.
                                             
 III. Adherence to traditional settlement patterns when siting
municipal and public buildings and services.
                                             
 IV. Ample alternate transportation modes.
                                             
 V. Uncongested roads.
                                             
 VI. Decreased water and air pollution.
                                             
 VII. Clean aquifer recharge areas.
                                             
 VIII. Viable wildlife habitat.
                                             
 IX. Attractive views of the landscape.
                                             
 X. Preservation of historic village centers.

**Source.** 2000, 292:6, eff. Aug. 20, 2000.

### Section 9-B:4

 **9-B:4 Expenditure of State or Federal Funds. –** All state
agencies shall give due consideration to the state's policy on smart
growth under RSA 9-B:2 when providing advice or expending state or
federal funds, for their own use or as pass-through grants, for public
works, transportation, or major capital improvement projects, and for
the construction, rental, or lease of facilities. The intent of this
action is that new investments and grants for existing sites and
buildings in existing community centers will be given preference over
investments in outlying areas where that is a practical solution for the
use and community in question.

**Source.** 2000, 292:6, eff. Aug. 20, 2000.

### Section 9-B:5

 **9-B:5 Procedures for Review. –** The governor shall review actions
taken by state agencies relative to the provisions of RSA 9-B:4 to
ensure compliance with this chapter. The governor shall establish
procedures for review no later than December 1, 2000.

**Source.** 2000, 292:6, eff. Aug. 20, 2000.

### Section 9-B:6

 **9-B:6 Report to the General Court and the Governor. –** By October
1 of 2001, and every 4 years thereafter, the council on resources and
development, established in RSA 162-C, shall report to the general court
and the governor on the following:
                                             
 I. Progress by state agencies in complying with the expenditure
requirements under RSA 9-B:4.
                                             
 II. Progress by the state agencies represented on the council in
coordinating the activities to encourage smart growth.
                                             
 III. Efforts made to encourage development in accordance with this
chapter by regular review of state operating procedures, granting
policies, and regulatory framework.
                                             
 IV. Suggested policy changes or legislation that the council
believes would strengthen the state's ability to achieve the smart
growth goal of RSA 9-B:2.
                                             
 V. An assessment of how state agencies are complying with the goals
and objectives established in the statewide development plan, under RSA
9-A, and an identification of any suggested changes.

**Source.** 2000, 292:6. 2002, 229:6, 7, eff. July 1, 2002.
