---
title: 'CHAPTER 9-E OUTDOOR LIGHTING EFFICIENCY'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 9-E
                                             
OUTDOOR LIGHTING EFFICIENCY
---------------------------

### Section 9-E:1

 **9-E:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Fixture'' means the assembly that holds a lamp and may include
an assembly housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a
ballast, a reflector or mirror, and a refractor or lens.
                                             
 II. "Fully shielded luminaire'' means a luminaire that allows no
direct light emissions above a horizontal plane through the luminaire's
lowest light-emitting part.
                                             
 III. "Glare'' means direct light emitting from a luminaire that is
significantly greater than luminance to which the eyes are adapted which
causes reduced vision or momentary blindness.
                                             
 IV. "Illuminance'' means the unit measure of light at a surface.
                                             
 V. "Light trespass'' means light emitted by a luminaire that shines
beyond the boundaries of the property on which the luminaire is
located.
                                             
 VI. "Lumen'' means a unit of measure of luminous flux.
                                             
 VII. "Luminaire'' means the complete lighting system, including the
lamp and the fixture.
                                             
 VIII. "Lamp'' means the component of a luminaire that produces the
specific form of radiant energy that is observed as light.
                                             
 IX. "Permanent outdoor luminaire'' means any luminaire or system of
luminaires that is outdoors and intended to be used for 21 days or
longer.
                                             
 X. "State highway'' means any of the highways of the state
classified in RSA 229:5.

**Source.** 2009, 212:1, eff. Sept. 13, 2009.

### Section 9-E:2

 **9-E:2 State Purchase of Permanent Outdoor Lighting Design. –**
                                             
 I. No state funds shall be used to install or replace any permanent
outdoor luminaire unless:
                                             
 (a) The luminaire is a fully shielded luminaire when the rated
output of the luminaire is greater than 1,800 lumens.
                                             
 (b) The maximum illuminance at the designated surface does not
exceed the minimum illuminance level recommended for that purpose by the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America or the Federal Highway
Administration.
                                             
 (c) The director of the agency responsible for the funding of
such luminaire or having authority over the illuminated infrastructure
ensures that consideration is given to minimizing glare and light
trespass.
                                             
 II. The requirements of paragraph I shall not apply if:
                                             
 (a) Compliance would create a conflict with federal laws or
regulations;
                                             
 (b) The director of the agency responsible for funding the
installation of such luminaire or having authority over the illuminated
infrastructure determines that there is a compelling safety interest
that cannot be addressed by any other method;
                                             
 (c) With respect to roadway lighting on state highways, when in
specific instances the commissioner of transportation determines that
use of a fully shielded luminaire would compromise the safety of the
public utilizing the highway, increase the cost of the lighting plan or
lighting replacement for the highway, or violate any provision of
federal law; or
                                             
 (d) The luminaire shall be used to illuminate designated public
and historic structures, monuments, and flags of the United States of
America and the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 III. No public utility company may install or replace a permanent
outdoor luminaire for roadway lighting if the cost of operating such
luminaire is paid for by municipal funds, unless:
                                             
 (a) The luminaire is a fully shielded luminaire when the rated
output of the luminaire is greater than 1,800 lumens.
                                             
 (b) The maximum illuminance at the designated surface does not
exceed the minimum illuminance recommended for that purpose by the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America or the Federal Highway
Administration.
                                             
 (c) The governing body of a municipality may waive the provisions
of subparagraphs (a) and (b) when, after written notice from the public
utility company 30 days prior to the installation or replacement of the
luminaire, the governing body determines that a waiver is necessary for
the lighting application. Such notice shall be in such form as the
governing body shall prescribe and may include a description of the
lighting plan and a description of the efforts that have been made to
comply with the provisions of RSA 9-E:3. The governing body may consider
design safety, costs, and other factors deemed appropriate by the
governing body.

**Source.** 2009, 212:1, eff. Sept. 13, 2009.

### Section 9-E:3

 **9-E:3 New Hampshire Dark Sky Policy. –** It shall be the policy of
the state of New Hampshire to encourage municipalities to enact such
local ordinances and regulations as they deem appropriate to conserve
energy consumed by outdoor lighting; to minimize light pollution and
glare; and to preserve dark skies as a feature of rural character
wherever practicable.

**Source.** 2009, 212:1, eff. Sept. 13, 2009.

### Section 9-E:4

 **9-E:4 Part-Night Rate for Roadway and Area Lighting. –** To
encourage cost savings and energy conservation, the public utilities
commission shall, subject to its ratemaking authority under RSA 378,
develop a rate for part-night or midnight service for unmetered street
or area lighting. Such a rate shall be revenue neutral with respect to
utility distribution revenue.

**Source.** 2009, 212:1, eff. Sept. 13, 2009.

### Section 9-E:5

 **9-E:5 Report by Department of Transportation. –** The department
of transportation shall:
                                             
 I. Review and update its criteria for roadway lighting to ensure
that its current standards and procedures conform to commonly accepted
best practices.
                                             
 II. Explore how energy and maintenance costs can be reduced by
replacing existing luminaries with lower-wattage, fully shielded
luminaries or by eliminating roadway lighting altogether where
appropriate.
                                             
 III. Beginning November 1, 2009 and each November 1 thereafter,
submit an annual report of its activities and findings to the office of
energy and planning.

**Source.** 2009, 212:1, eff. Sept. 13, 2009.
