---
title: 'CHAPTER 9-F ONLINE ACCESS TO BUDGET INFORMATION AND REPORTS'
---

TITLE I
                                             
THE STATE AND ITS GOVERNMENT
============================

CHAPTER 9-F
                                             
ONLINE ACCESS TO BUDGET INFORMATION AND REPORTS
-----------------------------------------------

### Section 9-F:1

 **9-F:1 Online Access to Budget Information and Reports. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of administrative services shall make available
on the state website the information and reports required to be made
available to the public and to the general court under paragraphs II-III
of this section. All of this required information shall be accessible on
a single state transparency website to be created by the department of
information technology.
                                             
 II. The state transparency website shall include the following:
                                             
 (a) All expenditures by state agencies shall be published
monthly, no later than the 15th day of the following month. These
expenditures shall be reported:
                                             
 (1) In a total fund format, showing budgeted/revised budgeted
amounts spent for the month, for the year, and for the year to date.
Expenditure reports generated by the financial reporting system of the
state for agency use shall be used to satisfy this requirement.
                                             
 (2) In a check register format, including:
                                             
 (A) The amount of the payment.
                                             
 (B) The date of payment.
                                             
 (C) The person or entity to whom the payment was made.
                                             
 (D) The title and number of the accounting unit and class
code.
                                             
 (E) The title and number of the expense account.
                                             
 (b) Annual salaries of all full-time state employees, listed by
pay type category and in a searchable format that includes the state
agency, accounting unit, job title, position number, and whether the
position is vacant or filled.
                                             
 (c) Links to information posted to the websites of various state
agencies/entities for the following:
                                             
 (1) Audit reports from the office of the legislative budget
assistant.
                                             
 (2) Annual reports for individual agencies.
                                             
 (3) Agency budgets submitted in accordance with RSA 9:4.
                                             
 (4) The governor's budget in accordance with RSA 9:2.
                                             
 (d) State contracts entered into as a result of requests for
proposals.
                                             
 (e) Any other information as determined by the department of
information technology and the department of administrative services, in
consultation with the legislative oversight committee established in RSA
9-F:2.
                                             
 III. Annually on or before October 31, a report from each agency
shall be made available which shows the total amount expended during the
prior fiscal year for each program providing aid or assistance to
individuals. This annual report shall also document any changes in
eligibility criteria or payment amount or formulas. Each agency shall
prepare its annual report by analyzing and summarizing the content of
its statement of appropriation. Each agency shall submit its annual
report to the commissioner of administrative services on or before
September 1. For the fiscal year ending June 30, 2011, each agency shall
submit existing reports to fulfill the requirements of this paragraph.
Beginning in the fiscal year ending June 30, 2012 and in each year
thereafter, each agency's report shall be in a format developed by the
commissioner of administrative services in consultation with the
legislative oversight committee established by RSA 9-F:2.
                                             
 IV. (a) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the
public posting or dissemination of information exempt from public
disclosure under RSA 91-A or other law.
                                             
 (b) In submitting information to the state's financial system,
each agency shall be responsible for identifying information that is
confidential or otherwise exempt from public disclosure under RSA 91-A.
The department of administrative services shall, in consultation with
state agencies, establish the method by which an agency shall identify
information in the state's financial system that the agency has
determined is confidential or otherwise exempt from disclosure. The
department of administrative services shall not post such information on
the transparency website.

**Source.** 2010, 65:2. 2011, 75:1, 2. 2012, 146:1, eff. July 1, 2012;
266:1, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 9-F:2

 **9-F:2 Legislative Oversight Committee Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a legislative oversight committee to monitor
compliance with the requirements for online access to budget information
and reports under RSA 9-F:1. The committee shall be known as the state
transparency website oversight committee.
                                             
 II. (a) The members of the committee shall be as follows:
                                             
 (1) Four members of the house of representatives, appointed by
the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (2) One member of the senate, appointed by the president of
the senate.
                                             
 (b) Members of the committee shall receive mileage at the
legislative rate when attending to the duties of the committee.
                                             
 III. The committee shall monitor compliance with the requirements
for online access to budget information and reports under RSA 9-F:1. The
committee shall work with the department of administrative services and
the department of information technology to explore what components
reasonably can be added to the state website to provide increased
transparency and to establish reasonable timelines for implementation
based on staffing, funding, hardware, and software capacity. Among those
components to be discussed:
                                             
 (a) Expenditure information similar to that in RSA 9-F:1, II,
only on a general fund basis.
                                             
 (b) State grant information.
                                             
 (c) State contract information.
                                             
 (d) An online version of the state's checkbook.
                                             
 (e) A statewide searchable budget database.
                                             
 (f) Any other components which the committee determines will
increase transparency.
                                             
 IV. The members of the legislative oversight committee shall elect a
chairperson from among the members. The first meeting of the committee
shall be called by the first-named house member. The first meeting of
the committee shall be held within 45 days of the effective date of this
section. Three members of the committee shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 V. The legislative oversight committee shall submit an annual report
of its findings and any recommendations for proposed legislation to the
speaker of the house of representatives, the president of the senate,
the chairpersons of the house and senate finance and executive
departments and administration committees, the house clerk, the senate
clerk, the governor, and the state library on or before November 1.

**Source.** 2010, 65:2. 2012, 10:1, 2, eff. June 22, 2012. 2014, 297:1,
2, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.
