---
title: 'CHAPTER 401-C OWN RISK AND SOLVENCY ASSESSMENT'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 401-C
                                             
OWN RISK AND SOLVENCY ASSESSMENT
--------------------------------

### Section 401-C:1

 **401-C:1 Purpose and Scope. –**
                                             
 I. The purpose of this chapter is to provide the requirements for
maintaining a risk management framework and completing Own Risk and
Solvency Assessment (ORSA) and provide guidance and instructions for
filing an ORSA summary report with the insurance commissioner of this
state.
                                             
 II. The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all insurers
domiciled in this state unless exempt pursuant to RSA 401-C:6.
                                             
 III. The general court finds and declares that the ORSA summary
report will contain confidential and sensitive information related to an
insurer or insurance group's identification of risks material and
relevant to the insurer or insurance group filing the report. This
information will include proprietary and trade secret information that
has the potential for harm and competitive disadvantage to the insurer
or insurance group if the information is made public. It is the intent
of this chapter that the ORSA summary report shall be a confidential
document filed with the commissioner, that the ORSA summary report will
be shared only as stated in this chapter and to assist the commissioner
in the performance of his or her duties, and that in no event shall the
ORSA summary report be subject to public disclosure.

**Source.** 2013, 152:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 401-C:2

 **401-C:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. For the purpose of conducting an ORSA, "insurance group'' means
those insurers and affiliates included within an insurance holding
company system as defined in RSA 401-B.
                                             
 II. "Insurer'' shall have the same meaning as set forth in RSA
401-C:2, except that it shall not include agencies, authorities, or
instrumentalities of the United States, its possessions and territories,
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia, or a state or
political subdivision of a state.
                                             
 III. "Own risk and solvency assessment'' or "ORSA'' means a
confidential internal assessment, appropriate to the nature, scale, and
complexity of an insurer or insurance group, conducted by that insurer
or insurance group of the material and relevant risks associated with
the insurer or insurance group's current business plan, and the
sufficiency of capital resources to support those risks.
                                             
 IV. "ORSA guidance manual'' means the current version of the Own
Risk and Solvency Assessment Guidance Manual developed and adopted by
the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) and as
amended from time to time. A change in the ORSA guidance manual shall be
effective on the January 1 following the calendar year in which the
changes have been adopted by the NAIC.
                                             
 V. "ORSA summary report'' means a confidential high-level summary of
an insurer or insurance group's ORSA.

**Source.** 2013, 152:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 401-C:3

 **401-C:3 Risk Management Framework. –** An insurer shall maintain a
risk management framework to assist the insurer with identifying,
assessing, monitoring, managing, and reporting on its material and
relevant risks. This requirement may be satisfied if the insurance group
of which the insurer is a member maintains a risk management framework
applicable to the operations of the insurer.

**Source.** 2013, 152:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 401-C:4

 **401-C:4 ORSA Requirement. –** Subject to RSA 401-C:6, an insurer,
or the insurance group of which the insurer is a member, shall regularly
conduct an ORSA consistent with a process comparable to the ORSA
guidance manual. The ORSA shall be conducted no less than annually but
also at any time when there are significant changes to the risk profile
of the insurer or the insurance group of which the insurer is a member.

**Source.** 2013, 152:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 401-C:5

 **401-C:5 ORSA Summary Report. –**
                                             
 I. Upon the commissioner's request, and no more than once each year,
an insurer shall submit to the commissioner an ORSA summary report or
any combination of reports that together contain the information
described in the ORSA guidance manual, applicable to the insurer and/or
the insurance group of which it is a member. Notwithstanding any request
from the commissioner, if the insurer is a member of an insurance group,
the insurer shall submit the report or reports required by this section
if the commissioner is the lead state commissioner of the insurance
group as determined by the procedures within the Financial Analysis
Handbook adopted by the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners.
                                             
 II. The report shall include a signature of the insurer or insurance
group's chief risk officer or other executive having responsibility for
the oversight of the insurer's enterprise risk management process
attesting to the best of his or her belief and knowledge that the
insurer applies the enterprise risk management process described in the
ORSA summary report and that a copy of the report has been provided to
the insurer's board of directors or the appropriate committee thereof.
                                             
 III. An insurer may comply with paragraph I by providing the most
recent and substantially similar reports provided by the insurer or
another member of an insurance group of which the insurer is a member to
the commissioner of another state or to a supervisor or regulator of a
foreign jurisdiction, if that report provides information that is
comparable to the information described in the ORSA guidance manual. Any
such report in a language other than English shall be accompanied by a
translation of that report into the English language.

**Source.** 2013, 152:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 401-C:6

 **401-C:6 Exemption. –**
                                             
 I. An insurer shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter,
if:
                                             
 (a) The insurer has annual direct written and unaffiliated
assumed premium, including international direct and assumed premium but
excluding premiums reinsured with the Federal Crop Insurance Corporation
and Federal Flood Program, less than 
                                             $500,000,000; and
                                             
 (b) The insurance group of which the insurer is a member has
annual direct written and unaffiliated assumed premium including
international direct and assumed premium, but excluding premiums
reinsured with the Federal Crop Insurance Corporation and Federal Flood
Program, less than 
                                             $1,000,000,000.
                                             
 II. If an insurer qualifies for exemption pursuant to subparagraph
I(a), but the insurance group of which the insurer is a member does not
qualify for exemption pursuant to subparagraph I(b), then the ORSA
summary report that may be required pursuant to RSA 401-C:5 shall
include every insurer within the insurance group. This requirement may
be satisfied by the submission of more than one ORSA summary report for
any combination of insurers provided any combination of reports includes
every insurer within the insurance group.
                                             
 III. If an insurer does not qualify for exemption pursuant to
subparagraph I(a), but the insurance group of which it is a member
qualifies for exemption pursuant to subparagraphs I(b), then the only
ORSA summary report that may be required pursuant to RSA 401-C:5 shall
be the report applicable to that insurer.
                                             
 IV. An insurer that does not qualify for exemption pursuant to
paragraph I may apply to the commissioner for a waiver from the
requirements of this chapter based upon unique circumstances. In
deciding whether to grant the insurer's request for waiver, the
commissioner may consider the type and volume of business written,
ownership and organizational structure, and any other factor the
commissioner considers relevant to the insurer or insurance group of
which the insurer is a member. If the insurer is part of an insurance
group with insurers domiciled in more than one state, the commissioner
shall coordinate with the lead state commissioner and with the other
domiciliary commissioners in considering whether to grant the insurer's
request for a waiver.
                                             
 V. Notwithstanding the exemptions stated in this section:
                                             
 (a) The commissioner may require that an insurer maintain a risk
management framework, conduct an ORSA and file an ORSA summary report
based on unique circumstances including, but not limited to, the type
and volume of business written, ownership and organizational structure,
federal agency requests, and international supervisor requests.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner may require that an insurer maintain a risk
management framework, conduct an ORSA and file an ORSA summary report if
the insurer has risk-based capital for company action level event as set
forth in RSA 404-F:3, meets one or more of the standards of an insurer
deemed to be in hazardous financial condition, as defined in Ins 1500,
or otherwise exhibits qualities of a troubled insurer as determined by
the commissioner.
                                             
 VI. If an insurer that qualifies for an exemption pursuant to
paragraph I subsequently no longer qualifies for that exemption due to
changes in premium as reflected in the insurer's most recent annual
statement or in the most recent annual statements of the insurers within
the insurance group of which the insurer is a member, the insurer shall
have one year following the year the threshold is exceeded to comply
with the requirements of this chapter.

**Source.** 2013, 152:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 401-C:7

 **401-C:7 Contents of ORSA Summary Report. –**
                                             
 I. The ORSA summary report shall be prepared consistent with the
ORSA guidance manual subject to the requirements of paragraph II.
Documentation and supporting information shall be maintained and made
available upon examination or upon request of the commissioner.
                                             
 II. The review of the ORSA summary report, and any additional
requests for information, shall be made using similar procedures
currently used in the analysis and examination of multi-state or global
insurers and insurance groups.

**Source.** 2013, 152:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 401-C:8

 **401-C:8 Confidentiality. –**
                                             
 I. Documents, materials, or other information, including the ORSA
summary report, in the possession of or control of the insurance
department that are obtained by, created by or disclosed to the
commissioner or any other person under this chapter, is recognized by
this state as being proprietary and to contain trade secrets. All such
documents, materials, or other information shall be confidential by law
and privileged, shall not be subject to RSA 91-A, shall not be subject
to subpoena, and shall not be subject to discovery or admissible in
evidence in any private civil action. However, the commissioner is
authorized to use the documents, materials, or other information in the
furtherance of any regulatory or legal action brought as a part of the
commissioner's official duties. The commissioner shall not otherwise
make the documents, materials, or other information public without the
prior written consent of the insurer.
                                             
 II. Neither the commissioner nor any person who received documents,
materials, or other ORSA related information, through examination or
otherwise, while acting under the authority of the commissioner or with
whom such documents, materials, or other information are shared pursuant
to this chapter shall be permitted or required to testify in any private
civil action concerning any confidential documents, materials, or
information subject to paragraph I.
                                             
 III. In order to assist in the performance of the commissioner's
regulatory duties, the commissioner:
                                             
 (a) May, upon request, share documents, materials, or other ORSA
related information, including the confidential and privileged
documents, materials, or information subject to paragraph I, including
proprietary and trade secret documents and materials with other state,
federal, and international financial regulatory agencies, including
members of any supervisory college as defined in RSA 401-B:7, with the
NAIC and with any third party consultants designated by the
commissioner, provided that the recipient agrees in writing to maintain
the confidentiality and privileged status of the ORSA related documents,
materials, or other information and has verified in writing the legal
authority to maintain confidentiality; and
                                             
 (b) May receive documents, materials, or other ORSA related
information, including otherwise confidential and privileged documents,
materials, or information, including proprietary and trade secret
information or documents, from regulatory officials of other foreign or
domestic jurisdictions, including members of any supervisory college as
defined in RSA 401-B:7, and from the NAIC, and shall maintain as
confidential or privileged any documents, materials, or information
received with notice or the understanding that it is confidential or
privileged under the laws of the jurisdiction that is the source of the
document, material, or information.
                                             
 (c) Shall enter into a written agreement with the NAIC or a
third-party consultant governing sharing and use of information provided
pursuant to this chapter, consistent with this subsection that shall:
                                             
 (1) Specify procedures and protocols regarding the
confidentiality and security of information shared with the NAIC or a
third-party consultant pursuant to this chapter, including procedures
and protocols for sharing by the NAIC with other state regulators from
states in which the insurance group has domiciled insurers. The
agreement shall provide that the recipient agrees in writing to maintain
the confidentiality and privileged status of the ORSA related documents,
materials or other information and has verified in writing the legal
authority to maintain confidentiality;
                                             
 (2) Specify that ownership of information shared with the NAIC
or a third-party consultant pursuant to this chapter remains with the
commissioner and the NAIC's or third-party consultant's use of the
information is subject to the direction of the commissioner;
                                             
 (3) Prohibit the NAIC or third-party consultant from storing
the information shared pursuant to this chapter in a permanent database
after the underlying analysis is completed;
                                             
 (4) Require prompt notice to be given to an insurer whose
confidential information in the possession of the NAIC or a third-party
consultant pursuant to this chapter is subject to a request or subpoena
to the NAIC or a third-party consultant for disclosure or production;
                                             
 (5) Require the NAIC or a third-party consultant to consent to
intervention by an insurer in any judicial or administrative action in
which the NAIC or a third-party consultant may be required to disclose
confidential information about the insurer shared with the NAIC or a
third-party consultant pursuant to this chapter; and
                                             
 (6) In the case of an agreement involving a third-party
consultant, provide for the insurer's written consent.
                                             
 IV. The sharing of information and documents by the commissioner
pursuant to this chapter shall not constitute a delegation of regulatory
authority or rulemaking, and the commissioner is solely responsible for
the administration, execution, and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter.
                                             
 V. No waiver of any applicable privilege or claim of confidentiality
in the documents, proprietary and trade secret materials or other ORSA
related information shall occur as a result of disclosure of such ORSA
related information or documents to the commissioner under this section
or as a result of sharing as authorized in this chapter.
                                             
 VI. Documents, materials, or other information in the possession or
control of the NAIC or a third-party consultant pursuant to this chapter
shall be confidential by law and privileged, shall not be subject to RSA
91-A, shall not be subject to subpoena, and shall not be subject to
discovery or admissible in evidence in any private civil action.

**Source.** 2013, 152:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 401-C:9

 **401-C:9 Sanctions. –** Any insurer failing, without just cause, to
timely file the ORSA summary report as required in this chapter shall be
required, after notice and hearing, to pay a penalty of 
                                             $2,500 for each
day's delay, to be recovered by the commissioner and the penalty so
recovered shall be paid into the general revenue fund of this state. The
commissioner may reduce the penalty if the insurer demonstrates to the
commissioner that the imposition of the penalty would constitute a
financial hardship to the insurer.

**Source.** 2013, 152:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 401-C:10

 **401-C:10 Severability Clause. –** If any provision of this
chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is
held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or
applications of the chapter which can be given effect without the
invalid provisions or applications, and to that end the provisions of
this chapter are severable.

**Source.** 2013, 152:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.
