---
title: 'CHAPTER 402-F REINSURANCE INTERMEDIARIES'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 402-F
                                             
REINSURANCE INTERMEDIARIES
--------------------------

### Section 402-F:1

 **402-F:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Actuary'' means a person who is a member in good standing of the
American Academy of Actuaries.
                                             
 II. "Controlling person'' means any person, firm, association or
corporation who directly or indirectly has the power to direct or cause
to be directed, the management, control or activities of the reinsurance
intermediary.
                                             
 III. "Insurer'' means any person, firm, association or corporation
duly licensed in this state pursuant to the applicable provisions of the
insurance laws as an insurer.
                                             
 IV. "Licensed producer'' means an agent, broker or reinsurance
intermediary licensed pursuant to the applicable provisions of the
insurance laws.
                                             
 V. "Reinsurance intermediary'' means a reinsurance
intermediary-broker or a reinsurance intermediary-manager.
                                             
 VI. "Reinsurance intermediary-broker'' or "RB'' means a person,
other than an officer or employee of the ceding insurer, firm,
association or corporation who solicits, negotiates or places
reinsurance cessions or retrocessions on behalf of a ceding insurer
without acting as a reinsurance intermediary-manager (RM) on behalf of
such insurer.
                                             
 VII. "Reinsurance intermediary-manager'' or "RM'' means a person,
firm, association or corporation, whether known as an RM, manager, or
other similar term, who has authority to bind or manages all or part of
the assumed reinsurance business of a reinsurer, including the
management of a separate division, department or underwriting office,
and acts as an agent for such reinsurer , except the following:
                                             
 (a) An employee of the reinsurer.
                                             
 (b) A United States manager of the U.S. branch of an alien
reinsurer.
                                             
 (c) An underwriting manager that, pursuant to contract, manages
all or part of the reinsurance operations of the reinsurer, is under
common control with the reinsurer, subject to RSA 401-B, and that is not
compensated on the volume of premiums written.
                                             
 (d) The manager of a group, association, pool or organization of
insurers which engage in joint underwriting or joint reinsurance but
only if the group, association, pool, or organization of insurers , as
distinguished from its members, is subject to examination by the
insurance commissioner of the state in which the manager's principal
business office is located.
                                             
 VIII. "Reinsurer'' means a person, firm, association or corporation
duly licensed in this state pursuant to the applicable provisions of the
insurance law as an insurer with the authority to assume reinsurance.
                                             
 IX. "To be in violation'' means that the reinsurance intermediary,
insurer or reinsurer for whom the reinsurance intermediary was acting
failed to substantially comply with the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 X. "Qualified U.S. financial institution'' means an institution
that:
                                             
 (a) Is organized or, in the case of a U.S. office of a foreign
banking organization, licensed, under the laws of the United States or
any state thereof;
                                             
 (b) Is regulated, supervised and examined by U.S. federal or
state authorities having regulatory authority over banks and trust
companies; and
                                             
 (c) Has been determined by either the commissioner, or the
Securities Valuation Office of the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners, to meet such standards of financial condition and
standing as are considered necessary and appropriate to regulate the
quality of financial institutions whose letters of credit shall be
acceptable to the commissioner.

**Source.** 1991, 200:1. 1993, 254:6, eff. Jan. 1, 1994. 2007, 255:1,
eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 402-F:2

 **402-F:2 Licensure. –**
                                             
 I. No person, firm, association or corporation shall act as an RB in
this state if the RB maintains an office either directly or as a member
or employee of a firm or association, or an officer, director or
employee of a corporation:
                                             
 (a) In this state, unless the RB is a licensed producer or
reinsurance intermediary in this state; or
                                             
 (b) In another state, unless the RB is a licensed producer or
reinsurance intermediary in this state or another state having a law
substantially similar to this law.
                                             
 II. No person, firm, association or corporation shall act as an RM:
                                             
 (a) For a reinsurer domiciled in this state, unless the RM is a
licensed producer or reinsurance intermediary in this state.
                                             
 (b) In this state, if the RM maintains an office either directly
or as a member or employee of a firm or association, or an officer,
director or employee of a corporation in this state, unless the RM is a
licensed producer or reinsurance intermediary in this state.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may require a resident RM subject to paragraph
II to:
                                             
 (a) File a bond in an amount from an insurer acceptable to the
commissioner for the protection of the reinsurer; and
                                             
 (b) Maintain an errors and omissions policy in an amount
acceptable to the commissioner.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner may issue a reinsurance intermediary license to
any person, firm, association or corporation who has complied with the
requirements of this chapter. A license issued to a firm or association
will authorize all the members of such firm or association and any
designated employees to act as reinsurance intermediaries under the
license, and all such persons shall be named in the application and any
supplements to the application. A license issued to a corporation shall
authorize all of the officers, and any designated employees and
directors of the corporation, to act as reinsurance intermediaries on
behalf of the corporation, and all such persons shall be named in the
application and any supplements to the application.
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall issue a nonresident reinsurance
intermediary license if:
                                             
 (a) The person is currently licensed as a resident reinsurance
intermediary or insurance producer and in good standing in his or her
home state.
                                             
 (b) The person has submitted the proper request for licensure and
has paid the fees required by RSA 400-A:29.
                                             
 (c) The person has submitted or transmitted to the insurance
commissioner the application for licensure that the person submitted to
his or her home state, or in lieu of that application, a completed
application deemed appropriate by the commissioner.
                                             
 (d) The person's home state awards nonresident licenses to
residents of this state on the same basis.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner may refuse to issue a reinsurance intermediary
license if, in his or her judgment, the applicant, anyone named on the
application, or any member, principal, officer or director of the
applicant, is not trustworthy, or that any controlling person of such
applicant is not trustworthy to act as a reinsurance intermediary, or
that any of the foregoing has given cause for revocation or suspension
of such license, or has failed to comply with any prerequisite for the
issuance of such license. Upon written request, the commissioner shall
furnish a summary of the basis for refusal to issue a license, which
document shall be privileged and not subject to RSA 91-A.
                                             
 VII. Licensed attorneys at law of this state when acting in their
professional capacity as such shall be exempt from this section.

**Source.** 1991, 200:1. 1993, 254:7. 1997, 284:7, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.
2007, 255:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 402-F:3

 **402-F:3 Required Contract Provisions; Reinsurance
Intermediary-Brokers. –** Transactions between an RB and the insurer it
represents in such capacity shall only be entered into pursuant to a
written authorization, specifying the responsibilities of each party.
The authorization shall, at a minimum, provide that:
                                             
 I. The insurer may terminate the RB's authority at any time.
                                             
 II. The RB shall render accounts to the insurer accurately detailing
all material transactions, including information necessary to support
all commissions, charges and other fees received by, or owing, to the
RB, and remit all funds due to the insurer within 30 days of receipt.
                                             
 III. All funds collected for the insurer's account shall be held by
the RB in a fiduciary capacity in a bank that is a qualified U.S.
financial institution, as defined in RSA 402-F:1, X.
                                             
 IV. The RB shall comply with the written standards established by
the insurer for the cession or retrocession of all risks.
                                             
 V. The RB shall disclose to the insurer any relationship with any
reinsurer to which business will be ceded or retroceded.
                                             
 VI. The RB shall comply with RSA 402-F:4.

**Source.** 1991, 200:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992. 2007, 255:2, eff. Jan. 1,
2008.

### Section 402-F:4

 **402-F:4 Books and Records; Reinsurance Intermediary-Brokers. –**
                                             
 I. For at least 10 years after expiration of each contract of
reinsurance transacted by the RB, the RB shall keep a complete record
for each transaction showing:
                                             
 (a) The type of contract, limits, underwriting restrictions,
classes or risks and territory.
                                             
 (b) Period of coverage, including effective and expiration dates,
cancellation provisions and notice required of cancellation.
                                             
 (c) Reporting and settlement requirements of balances.
                                             
 (d) Rates used to compute the reinsurance premium.
                                             
 (e) Names and addresses of assuming reinsurers.
                                             
 (f) Rates of all reinsurance commissions, including the
commissions on any retrocessions handled by the RB.
                                             
 (g) Related correspondence and memoranda.
                                             
 (h) Proof of placement.
                                             
 (i) Details regarding retrocessions handled by the RB, including
the identity of retrocessionaires and percentage of each contract
assumed or ceded.
                                             
 (j) Financial records, including but not limited to, premium and
loss accounts.
                                             
 (k) When the RB procures a reinsurance contract on behalf of a
licensed ceding insurer:
                                             
 (1) Directly from any assuming reinsurer, written evidence
that the assuming reinsurer has agreed to assume the risk; or
                                             
 (2) If placed through a representative of the assuming
reinsurer, other than an employee, written evidence that such reinsurer
has delegated binding authority to the representative.
                                             
 II. The insurer shall have access and the right to copy and audit
all accounts and records maintained by the RB related to its business in
a form usable by the insurer.

**Source.** 1991, 200:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992. 2007, 255:2, eff. Jan. 1,
2008.

### Section 402-F:5

 **402-F:5 Duties of Insurers Utilizing the Services of a Reinsurance
Intermediary-Broker. –**
                                             
 I. An insurer shall not engage the services of any person, firm,
association or corporation to act as an RB on its behalf, unless the
person is licensed as required by RSA 402-F:2, I.
                                             
 II. An insurer may not employ an individual who is employed by an RB
with which it transacts business, unless the RB is under common control
with the insurer and subject to RSA 401-B.
                                             
 III. The insurer shall annually obtain a copy of statements of the
financial condition of each RB with which it transacts business.

**Source.** 1991, 200:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992. 2007, 255:2, eff. Jan. 1,
2008.

### Section 402-F:6

 **402-F:6 Required Contract Provisions; Reinsurance
Intermediary-Managers. –** Transactions between an RM and the reinsurer
it represents in such capacity shall only be entered into pursuant to a
written contract, specifying the responsibilities of each party, which
shall be approved by the reinsurer's board of directors. At least 30
days before such reinsurer assumes or cedes business through the
producer, a true copy of the approved contract shall be filed with the
commissioner for approval. The contract shall, at a minimum, provide
that:
                                             
 I. The reinsurer may terminate the contract for cause upon written
notice to the RM. The reinsurer may immediately suspend the authority of
the RM to assume or cede business during the pendency of any dispute
regarding the cause for termination.
                                             
 II. The RM shall render accounts to the reinsurer accurately
detailing all material transactions, including information necessary to
support all commissions, charges and other fees received by, or owing to
the RM, and remit all funds due under the contract to the reinsurer on
not less than a monthly basis.
                                             
 III. All funds collected for the reinsurer's account shall be held
by the RM in a fiduciary capacity in a bank that is a qualified U.S.
financial institution, as defined in RSA 402-F:1, X. The RM may retain
no more than 3 months' estimated claims payments and allocated loss
adjustment expenses. The RM shall maintain a separate bank account for
each reinsurer that it represents.
                                             
 IV. For at least 10 years after expiration of each contract of
reinsurance transacted by the RM, the RM shall keep a complete record
for each transaction showing:
                                             
 (a) The type of contract, limits, underwriting restrictions,
classes or risks and territory.
                                             
 (b) Period of coverage, including effective and expiration dates,
cancellation provisions and notices required of cancellation, and
disposition of outstanding reserves on covered risks.
                                             
 (c) Reporting and settlement requirements of balances.
                                             
 (d) Rates used to compute the reinsurance premium.
                                             
 (e) Names and addresses of reinsurers.
                                             
 (f) Rates of all reinsurance commissions, including the
commissions on any retrocessions handled by the RM.
                                             
 (g) Related correspondence and memoranda.
                                             
 (h) Proof of placement.
                                             
 (i) Details regarding retrocessions handled by the RM, as
permitted by RSA 402-F:8, IV, including the identity of
retrocessionaires and percentage of each contract assumed or ceded.
                                             
 (j) Financial records, including but not limited to, premium and
loss accounts.
                                             
 (k) When the RM places a reinsurance contract on behalf of a
ceding insurer:
                                             
 (1) Directly from any assuming reinsurer, written evidence
that the assuming reinsurer has agreed to assume the risk; or
                                             
 (2) If placed through a representative of the assuming
reinsurer, other than an employee, written evidence that such reinsurer
has delegated binding authority to the representative.
                                             
 V. The reinsurer shall have access and the right to copy all
accounts and records maintained by the RM related to its business in a
form usable by the reinsurer.
                                             
 VI. The contract cannot be assigned in whole or in part by the RM.
                                             
 VII. The RM shall comply with the written underwriting and rating
standards established by the insurer for the acceptance, rejection or
cession of all risks.
                                             
 VIII. Rates, terms and purposes of commissions, charges and other
fees which the RM may levy against the reinsurer as are set forth.
                                             
 IX. If the contract permits the RM to settle claims on behalf of the
reinsurer:
                                             
 (a) All claims shall be reported to the reinsurer in a timely
manner.
                                             
 (b) A copy of the claim file shall be sent to the reinsurer at
its request or as soon as it becomes known that the claim:
                                             
 (1) Has the potential to exceed the lesser of an amount
determined by the commissioner or the limit set by the reinsurer;
                                             
 (2) Involves a coverage dispute;
                                             
 (3) May exceed the RM's claims settlement authority;
                                             
 (4) Is open for more than 6 months; or
                                             
 (5) Is closed by payment of the lesser of an amount set by the
commissioner or an amount set by the reinsurer.
                                             
 (c) All claim files shall be the joint property of the reinsurer
and the RM. However, upon an order of liquidation of the reinsurer such
files shall become the sole property of the reinsurer or its estate, and
the RM shall have reasonable access to and the right to copy the files
on a timely basis.
                                             
 (d) Any settlement authority granted to the RM may be terminated
for cause upon the reinsurer's written notice to the RM or upon the
termination of the contract. The reinsurer may suspend the settlement
authority during the pendency of the dispute regarding the cause of
termination.
                                             
 X. If the contract provides for a sharing of interim profits by the
RM, interim profits shall not be paid until one year after the end of
each underwriting period for property business and 5 years after the end
of each underwriting period for casualty business, or a later period set
by the commissioner for specified lines of insurance, and not until the
adequacy of reserves on remaining claims has been verified pursuant to
RSA 402-F:8, III.
                                             
 XI. The RM shall annually provide the reinsurer with a statement of
its financial condition prepared by an independent certified
accountant.
                                             
 XII. The reinsurer shall periodically, at least semi-annually,
conduct an on-site review of the underwriting and claims processing
operation of the RM.
                                             
 XIII. The RM shall disclose to the reinsurer any relationship it has
with any insurer prior to ceding or assuming any business with such
insurer pursuant to this contract.
                                             
 XIV. Within the scope of its actual or apparent authority, the acts
of the RM shall be deemed to be the acts of the reinsurer on whose
behalf it is acting.

**Source.** 1991, 200:1. 1997, 284:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1998. 2007, 255:2,
eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 402-F:7

 **402-F:7 Prohibited Acts. –** The RM shall not:
                                             
 I. Cede retrocessions on behalf of the reinsurer, except that the RM
may cede facultative retrocessions pursuant to obligatory facultative
agreements if the contract with the reinsurer contains reinsurance
underwriting guidelines for such retrocession. The guidelines shall
include a list of reinsurers with which such automatic agreements are in
effect, and for each such reinsurer, the coverages and amounts or
percentages that may be reinsured, and commission schedules.
                                             
 II. Commit the reinsurer to participate in reinsurance syndicates.
                                             
 III. Appoint any producer without assuring that the producer is
lawfully licensed to transact the type of reinsurance for which he or
she is appointed.
                                             
 IV. Without prior approval of the reinsurer, pay or commit the
reinsurer to pay a claim, net of retrocessions, that exceeds the lesser
of an amount specified by the reinsurer or one percent of the
reinsurer's policyholders' surplus as of December 31 of the last
complete calendar year.
                                             
 V. Collect any payment from a retrocessionaire or commit the
reinsurer to any claim settlement with a retrocessionaire, without prior
approval of the reinsurer. If prior approval is given, a report must be
promptly forwarded to the reinsurer.
                                             
 VI. Jointly employ an individual who is employed by the reinsurer
unless such RM is under common control with the reinsurer subject to RSA
401-B.
                                             
 VII. Appoint a sub-RM.

**Source.** 1991, 200:1. 1993, 254:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1994. 2007, 255:2,
eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 402-F:8

 **402-F:8 Duties of Reinsurers Utilizing the Services of an RM. –**
                                             
 I. A reinsurer shall not engage the services of any person, firm,
association or corporation to act as an RM on its behalf unless the
person is licensed as required by RSA 402-F:2.
                                             
 II. The reinsurer shall annually obtain a copy of statements of the
financial condition of each RM which such reinsurer has engaged prepared
by an independent certified accountant in a form acceptable to the
commissioner.
                                             
 III. If an RM establishes loss reserves, the reinsurer shall
annually obtain the opinion of an actuary attesting to the adequacy of
loss reserves established for losses incurred and outstanding on
business produced by the RM. This opinion shall be in addition to any
other required loss reserve certification.
                                             
 IV. Binding authority for all retrocessional contracts or
participation in reinsurance syndicates shall rest with an officer of
the reinsurer who shall not be affiliated with the RM.
                                             
 V. Within 30 days of termination of a contract with an RM, the
reinsurer shall provide written notification of termination to the
commissioner.
                                             
 VI. A reinsurer shall not appoint to its board of directors any
officer, director, employee, controlling shareholder or subproducer of
its RM. This paragraph shall not apply to relationships governed by RSA
401-B.

**Source.** 1991, 200:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992. 2007, 255:2, eff. Jan. 1,
2008.

### Section 402-F:9

 **402-F:9 Examination Authority. –**
                                             
 I. A reinsurance intermediary shall be subject to examination by the
commissioner. The commissioner shall have access to all books, bank
accounts and records of the reinsurance intermediary in a form usable to
the commissioner.
                                             
 II. An RM may be examined as if it were the reinsurer.

**Source.** 1991, 200:1. 1993, 254:9. 1997, 284:9, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.
2007, 255:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 402-F:9-a

 **402-F:9-a Compliance with Orders. –**
                                             
 I. An RB or RM shall comply with any order of a court of competent
jurisdiction or a duly constituted arbitration panel requiring the
production of non-privileged documents by the RB or RM, or the testimony
of an employee or other individual otherwise under the control of the RB
or RM with respect to any reinsurance transaction for which it acted as
an RB or RM.
                                             
 II. Compliance shall be subject to the right of the RB or RM, and
the parties to the reinsurance transaction, to object to the court or
arbitration panel concerning the nature or scope of the documents or
testimony or the time within which it must comply with the order.
Failure to comply with the order shall be deemed to be a material
non-compliance with this chapter. However, in no event shall this
section be construed to require more than one appearance by the same
witness in a single action or arbitration.

**Source.** 2007, 255:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 402-F:10

 **402-F:10 Penalties and Liabilities. –**
                                             
 I. If the commissioner determines that the reinsurance intermediary
or any other person has not materially complied with this chapter, or
any rule or order adopted under this chapter, after notice and
opportunity to be heard, the commissioner may order:
                                             
 (a) For each separate violation, a civil penalty in an amount not
exceeding 
                                             $5,000.
                                             
 (b) Revocation or suspension of the reinsurance intermediary's
license; and
                                             
 (c) If it was found that because of such material non-compliance
that the insurer or reinsurer has suffered any loss or damage, the
commissioner may maintain a civil action brought by or on behalf of the
reinsurer or insurer and its policyholders and creditors for recovery of
compensatory damages for the benefit of the reinsurer or insurer and its
policyholders and creditors or seek other appropriate relief.
                                             
 II. If an order of rehabilitation or liquidation of the insurer has
been entered pursuant to RSA 402-C, and the receiver appointed under
that order determines that the reinsurance intermediary or any other
person has not materially complied with this chapter, or any rule or
order promulgated under this chapter, and the insurer suffered any loss
or damage therefrom, the receiver may maintain a civil action for
recovery of damages or other appropriate sanctions for the benefit of
the insurer.
                                             
 III. Nothing contained in this section shall affect the right of the
commissioner to impose any other penalties provided in the insurance
laws.
                                             
 IV. Nothing contained in this chapter shall in any manner limit or
restrict the rights of policyholders, claimants, creditors, or other
third parties or confer any rights to such persons.

**Source.** 1991, 200:1. 1997, 284:10. 2005, 206:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.
2007, 255:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 402-F:10-a

 **402-F:10-a Reciprocity. –**
                                             
 I. The insurance commissioner shall waive any requirements for a
nonresident license application with a valid license from the
applicant's home state, except the requirements imposed by RSA 402-F:2,
if the applicant's home state awards nonresident licenses to residents
of this state on the same basis.
                                             
 II. A nonresident reinsurance intermediary's satisfaction of any
applicable home state continuing education requirements, if any, for
licenses as insurance producers or reinsurance intermediaries shall
constitute satisfaction of the state's continuing education requirements
if the nonresident producer's home state recognizes the satisfaction of
its continuing education requirements imposed upon producers or
reinsurance intermediaries from this state on the same basis.

**Source.** 2007, 255:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 402-F:10-b

 **402-F:10-b Service of Process. –** A reinsurance intermediary, by
accepting licensure in this state, is deemed to have consented to the
jurisdiction of the commissioner and the courts of this state with
respect to all activities conducted under the license, and to have
designated the commissioner as its agent for service of process. Each
licensed reinsurance intermediary shall furnish the commissioner with
the name and address of a designated contact resident of this state to
whom notices or orders of the commissioner or process affecting the
reinsurance intermediary may be forwarded. The licensee shall promptly
notify the commissioner in writing of every change in this designated
contact for service of process, and such changes shall not become
effective until acknowledged by the commissioner.

**Source.** 2007, 255:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 402-F:11

 **402-F:11 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner may adopt rules, under
RSA 541-A which are reasonable and necessary for the implementation and
administration of this chapter, relative to:
                                             
 I. Qualifications and application review procedures for licensure
under RSA 402-F:2.
                                             
 II. License suspension and revocation procedures.
                                             
 III. Procedures for inspecting books, accounts, and records, under
RSA 402-F:9.
                                             
 IV. Hearings, appeals, and enforcement procedures.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1991, 200:1. 2002, 207:29, eff. July 15, 2002. 2012, 171:26,
XIX, eff. Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 402-F:12

 **402-F:12 Other Applicable Provisions. –** The provisions of title
XXXVII apply to reinsurance intermediaries.

**Source.** 1997, 284:11, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.
