---
title: 'CHAPTER 402-E MANAGING GENERAL AGENTS'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 402-E
                                             
MANAGING GENERAL AGENTS
-----------------------

### Section 402-E:1

 **402-E:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Actuary'' means a person who is a member in good standing of the
American Academy of Actuaries.
                                             
 II. "Insurer'' means any person, firm, association or corporation
duly licensed in this state as an insurance company pursuant to title
XXXVII.
                                             
 III. (a) "Managing general agent'' (MGA) means any person, firm,
association or corporation who negotiates and binds ceding reinsurance
contracts on behalf of an insurer or manages all or part of the
insurance business of an insurer, including the management of a separate
division, department or underwriting office, and acts as an agent for
such insurer whether known as a managing general agent, manager or other
similar term, who, with or without the authority, either separately or
together with affiliates, produces, directly or indirectly, and
underwrites an amount of gross direct written premiums equal to or more
than 5 percent of the policyholder surplus as reported in the last
annual statement of the insurer in any one quarter or year together with
one or more of the following:
                                             
 (1) Adjusts or pays claims in excess of 
                                             $200,000; or
                                             
 (2) Negotiates reinsurance on behalf of the insurer.
                                             
 (b) Notwithstanding subparagraph (a), the following persons shall
not be considered as MGAs for the purposes of this chapter:
                                             
 (1) An employee of the insurer.
                                             
 (2) A U.S. manager of the United States branch of an alien
insurer.
                                             
 (3) An underwriting manager which, pursuant to contract,
manages all insurance operations of the insurer other than those managed
by the insurer itself, is under common control with the insurer, subject
to RSA 401-B, the holding company regulatory act, and whose compensation
is not based on the volume of premiums written.
                                             
 (4) The attorney-in-fact authorized by and acting for the
subscribers of a reciprocal insurer or inter-insurance exchange under
powers of attorney.
                                             
 IV. "Underwrite'' means the authority to accept or reject risk on
behalf of the insurer.

**Source.** 1991, 95:1. 2003, 144:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 402-E:2

 **402-E:2 Licensure. –**
                                             
 I. No person, firm, association, corporation, or other entity shall
act as an MGA until an MGA license has been issued by the commissioner.
The license shall be renewed annually thereafter so long as the MGA
complies with applicable law and rules and upon remittance of the
renewal fee.
                                             
 II. No person, firm, association, or corporation shall act in the
capacity of an MGA with respect to risks located in this state for an
insurer licensed in this state, unless such person is a licensed
producer in this state.
                                             
 III. No person, firm, association, or corporation shall act in the
capacity of an MGA representing an insurer domiciled in this state with
respect to risks located outside this state unless such person is
licensed as a producer in this state, pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. Such license may be a nonresident license.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner may require a bond in an amount acceptable to
the commissioner for the protection of the insurer.
                                             
 V. The commissioner may require the MGA to maintain an errors and
omissions policy.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner may require financial and other data in form
and context satisfactory to the commissioner as part of the license
application process.

**Source.** 1991, 95:1. 1997, 284:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 402-E:3

 **402-E:3 Required Contract Provisions. –** No person, firm,
association or corporation acting in the capacity of an MGA shall place
business with an insurer unless there is in force a written contract
between the parties which sets forth the responsibilities of each party
and where both parties share responsibility for a particular function,
specifies the division of such responsibilities, and contains the
following minimum provisions:
                                             
 I. The insurer may terminate the contract for cause upon written
notice to the MGA. The insurer may suspend the underwriting authority of
the MGA during the pendency of any dispute regarding the cause for
termination.
                                             
 II. The MGA will render accounts to the insurer detailing all
transactions and remit all funds due under the contract to the insurer
on not less than a monthly basis.
                                             
 III. All funds collected for the account of an insurer shall be held
by the MGA in a fiduciary capacity in a bank which is a member of the
Federal Reserve System. This account shall be used for all payments on
behalf of the insurer. The MGA may retain no more than 3 months'
estimated claims payments and allocated loss adjustment expenses.
                                             
 IV. Separate records of business written by the MGA shall be
maintained. The insurer shall have access and rights to copy all
accounts and records related to its business in a form usable by the
insurer, and the commissioner shall have access to all books, bank
accounts and records of the MGA in a form usable to the commissioner.
                                             
 V. The contract shall not be assigned in whole or part by the MGA.
                                             
 VI. Appropriate underwriting guidelines, including:
                                             
 (a) The maximum annual premium volume;
                                             
 (b) The basis of the rates to be charged;
                                             
 (c) The types of risks which may be written;
                                             
 (d) Maximum limits of liability;
                                             
 (e) Applicable exclusions;
                                             
 (f) Territorial limitations;
                                             
 (g) Policy cancellation provisions; and
                                             
 (h) The maximum policy period.
                                             
The insurer may cancel or non-renew any policy of insurance subject to
the applicable laws and rules concerning the cancellation and nonrenewal
of insurance policies.
                                             
 VII. If the contract permits the MGA to settle claims on behalf of
the insurer:
                                             
 (a) All claims shall be reported to the company in a timely
manner.
                                             
 (b) A copy of the claim file shall be sent to the insurer at its
request or as soon as it becomes known that the claim:
                                             
 (1) Has the potential to exceed an amount determined by the
commissioner or exceeds the limit set by the company, whichever is
less.
                                             
 (2) Involves a coverage dispute.
                                             
 (3) May exceed the MGA's claims settlement authority.
                                             
 (4) Is open for more than 6 months.
                                             
 (5) Is closed by payment of an amount set by the commissioner
or an amount set by the company, whichever is less.
                                             
 (c) All claim files shall be the joint property of the insurer
and MGA. However, upon an order of liquidation of the insurer such files
shall become the sole property of the insurer or its estate; the MGA
shall have reasonable access to and the right to copy the files on a
timely basis.
                                             
 (d) Any settlement authority granted to the MGA may be terminated
for cause upon the insurer's written notice to the MGA or upon the
termination of the contract. The insurer may suspend the settlement
authority during the pendency of any dispute regarding the cause for
termination.
                                             
 (e) Any person who, in any manner or capacity other than purely
clerical, handles, services or adjusts claims for or on behalf of an MGA
shall be licensed as required by RSA 402-B.
                                             
 VIII. Where electronic claims files are in existence, the contract
shall address the timely transmission of the data.
                                             
 IX. If the contract provides for a sharing of interim profits by the
MGA, and the MGA has the authority to determine the amount of the
interim profits by establishing loss reserves or controlling claim
payments, or in any other manner, interim profits shall not be paid to
the MGA until one year after they are earned for property insurance
business and 5 years after they are earned on casualty business and not
until the profits have been verified pursuant to RSA 402-E:4.
                                             
 X. The MGA shall not:
                                             
 (a) Bind reinsurance or retrocessions on behalf of the insurer,
except that the MGA may bind facultative reinsurance contracts pursuant
to obligatory facultative agreements if the contract with the insurer
contains reinsurance underwriting guidelines including, for both
reinsurance assumed and ceded, a list of reinsurers with which such
automatic agreements are in effect, the coverages and amounts or
percentages that may be reinsured and commission schedules.
                                             
 (b) Commit the insurer to participate in insurance or reinsurance
syndicates.
                                             
 (c) Appoint any producer without assuring that the producer is
lawfully licensed to transact the type of insurance for which he is
appointed.
                                             
 (d) Without prior approval of the insurer, pay or commit the
insurer to pay a claim over a specified amount, net of reinsurance,
which shall not exceed one percent of the insurer's policyholders'
surplus as of December 31 of the last completed calendar year.
                                             
 (e) Collect any payment from a reinsurer or commit the insurer to
any claim settlement with a reinsurer, without prior approval of the
insurer. If prior approval is given, a report shall be promptly
forwarded to the insurer.
                                             
 (f) Permit its subproducer to serve on the insurer's board of
directors.
                                             
 (g) Jointly employ an individual who is employed with the
insurer.
                                             
 (h) Appoint a sub-MGA.

**Source.** 1991, 95:1. 1997, 284:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 402-E:4

 **402-E:4 Duties of Insurers. –**
                                             
 I. The insurer shall have on file an independent financial
examination, in a form acceptable to the commissioner, of each MGA with
which it has done business.
                                             
 II. If an MGA establishes loss reserves, the insurer shall annually
obtain the opinion of an actuary attesting to the adequacy of loss
reserves established for losses incurred and outstanding on business
produced by the MGA. This is in addition to any other required loss
reserve certification.
                                             
 III. The insurer, at least 2 times each year, shall conduct an
on-site review of the underwriting and claims processing operations of
the MGA.
                                             
 IV. Binding authority for all reinsurance contracts or participation
in insurance or reinsurance syndicates shall rest with an officer of the
insurer, who shall not be affiliated with the MGA.
                                             
 V. Within 30 days of entering into or termination of a contract with
an MGA, the insurer shall provide written notification of such
appointment or termination to the commissioner. Notices of appointment
of an MGA shall include a statement of duties which the applicant is
expected to perform on behalf of the insurer, the lines of insurance for
which the applicant is to be authorized to act, and any other
information the commissioner may request.
                                             
 VI. An insurer shall review its books and records each quarter to
determine if any producer has become an MGA. If the insurer determines
that a producer has become an MGA, the insurer shall promptly notify the
producer and the commissioner of such determination, and the insurer and
producer shall fully comply with the provisions of this chapter within
30 days.
                                             
 VII. An insurer shall not appoint to its board of directors an
officer, director, employee, subproducer, or controlling shareholder of
its MGAs. This paragraph shall not apply to relationships governed by
RSA 401-B.

**Source.** 1991, 95:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 402-E:5

 **402-E:5 Examination Authority. –**
                                             
 I. The acts of the MGA are considered to be the acts of the insurer
on whose behalf it is acting. An MGA may be examined as if it were the
insurer.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may designate examiners or consultants, as
appropriate, to perform an audit of an MGA when the commissioner
considers an audit necessary. The audit shall be conducted at the
expense of the MGA. MGA's shall make all records and books of account
available to the examiners or consultants, and shall otherwise
facilitate the performance of the audit.

**Source.** 1991, 95:1. 1997, 284:4, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 402-E:6

 **402-E:6 Penalties and Liabilities. –**
                                             
 I. If the commissioner finds after notice and hearing that any
person has violated any provision of this chapter, or rules adopted
pursuant to this chapter, the commissioner may order:
                                             
 (a) For each separate violation, a penalty in an amount of

                                             $2,500.
                                             
 (b) Revocation or suspension of the producer's license.
                                             
 (c) The MGA to reimburse the insurer, the rehabilitator or
liquidator of the insurer for any losses incurred by the insurer caused
by a violation of this chapter committed by the MGA.
                                             
 (d) Any other applicable penalty provided for in the insurance
law.
                                             
 I-a. Any person who shall practice or attempt to practice as an MGA
in this state without a license shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor
if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to or shall in any
manner limit or restrict the rights of policyholders, claimants and
auditors.

**Source.** 1991, 95:1. 1997, 284:5. 2005, 206:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 402-E:7

 **402-E:7 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of the insurance
department may adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, necessary for the
implementation and administration of this chapter.

**Source.** 1991, 95:1. 2002, 207:45, eff. July 15, 2002.

### Section 402-E:8

 **402-E:8 Other Applicable Provisions. –** The provisions of title
XXXVII apply to managing general agents.

**Source.** 1997, 284:6, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.
