---
title: 'CHAPTER 402-M ADMINISTRATIVE SUPERVISION'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 402-M
                                             
ADMINISTRATIVE SUPERVISION
--------------------------

### Section 402-M:1


                                             


                                             [RSA 402-M:1 effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **402-M:1 Definitions. –**
                                             
 In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the insurance commissioner.
                                             
 II. "Consent'' means agreement to administrative supervision by the
insurer, including agreement to the terms of the supervision order.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the insurance department.
                                             
 IV. "Insurer'' means and includes every entity or person licensed,
authorized, or permitted by the commissioner to transact the business of
insurance in this state, and for which the commissioner is granted
authority to conduct an examination into its affairs, including all
fraternal benefit societies as defined in RSA 418 and all providers of
continuing care or life care contracts as defined in RSA 420-D;
provided, however, that fraternal benefit societies and providers of
continuing care or life care contracts shall not be construed to be
"insurers'' except for the limited purpose of administrative supervision
under the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 2016, 17:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 402-M:2


                                             


                                             [RSA 402-M:2 effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **402-M:2 Applicability. –**
                                             
 The provisions of this chapter shall apply to:
                                             
 I. All domestic insurers.
                                             
 II. Any other insurer doing business in this state whose state of
domicile has requested in writing that the commissioner apply the
provisions of the chapter regarding such insurer.

**Source.** 2016, 17:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 402-M:3


                                             


                                             [RSA 402-M:3 effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **402-M:3 Notice to Comply with Written Requirements of
Commissioner; Noncompliance; Administrative Supervision. –**
                                             
 I. An insurer may be subject to administrative supervision by the
commissioner only if the insurer gives its consent.
                                             
 II. Upon receiving consent of the insurer to the terms of the
supervision order, the commissioner may issue an agreed supervision
order which shall provide:
                                             
 (a) A statement of the commissioner's grounds for seeking a
supervision order;
                                             
 (b) A date certain upon which the supervision order shall expire,
ending the supervision period;
                                             
 (c) A written list to the insurer of the requirements to abate
the order prior to its expiration date; and
                                             
 (d) A statement that the insurer is under the supervision of the
commissioner and that the commissioner is applying and effectuating the
provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may employ staff personnel, outside counsel,
and other consultants as necessary for the proper conduct of the
administrative supervision. All reasonable costs of such outside counsel
and other consultants, including the costs attributable to the use of
staff personnel, shall be borne by the insurer under administrative
supervision.

**Source.** 2016, 17:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 402-M:4


                                             


                                             [RSA 402-M:4 effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **402-M:4 Confidentiality of Certain Proceedings and Records. –**
                                             
 I. Except as set forth in this section, all administrative and
judicial proceedings arising under this chapter shall be held privately
unless a public hearing is requested by the insurer, and all
proceedings, hearing, notices, correspondence, reports, orders, records,
and other information in the possession of the commissioner or the
department relating to the supervision of any insurer are confidential
and shall not be subject to RSA 91-A, shall not be subject to subpoena,
and shall not be subject to discovery or admissible in evidence in any
private civil action. However, the commissioner may use the documents,
materials, or other information in the furtherance of any regulatory or
legal action brought as part of the commissioner's official duties.
                                             
 II. The personnel of the department shall have access to these
proceedings, hearings, notices, correspondence, reports, orders,
records, or information as permitted by the commissioner. Neither the
commissioner nor any person who receive documents, materials, or other
information while acting under the authority of the commissioner shall
be permitted or required to testify in any private civil action
concerning any confidential documents, materials, or information subject
to paragraph I.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may share the notices, correspondence,
reports, orders, records, or information with other state, federal, and
international regulatory agencies, with the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) and its affiliates and subsidiaries, and
with state, federal, and international law enforcement authorities if
the commissioner determines that the disclosure is necessary or proper
for the enforcement of the laws of this or another state of the United
States; provided, that the recipient agrees to maintain the
confidentiality of the documents, material, or other information. No
waiver of any applicable privilege or claim of confidentiality shall
occur as a result of the sharing of documents, materials, or other
information pursuant to this paragraph.
                                             
 IV. This section shall not apply to proceedings under RSA 402-C or
to hearings, notices, correspondence, reports, orders, records, or other
information obtained upon the appointment of a receiver for the insurer
by a court of competent jurisdiction.

**Source.** 2016, 17:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 402-M:5


                                             


                                             [RSA 402-M:5 effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **402-M:5 Authority of Administrative Supervisor. –**
                                             
 I. During the period of supervision, the commissioner, or designee,
shall serve as the administrative supervisor. If the commissioner
appoints a designee to serve as administrative supervisor, then such
person shall have all of the powers of the commissioner granted under
this section and shall be considered a state officer or official under
RSA 99-D. The commissioner may impose operating restrictions or
requirements on the insurer during the period of administrative
supervision which are deemed necessary for the protection of
policyholders or the general public. The commissioner may order the
insurer to:
                                             
 (a) Reduce the total amount of present and potential liability
for policy benefits by reinsurance;
                                             
 (b) Reduce, suspend, or limit the volume of business being
accepted or renewed;
                                             
 (c) Reduce general insurance and commission expenses by specified
methods;
                                             
 (d) Increase the insurer's capital and surplus;
                                             
 (e) Suspend or limit the declaration and payment of dividends by
an insurer to its stockholders or to its policyholders;
                                             
 (f) File reports in a form acceptable to the commissioner
concerning the market value of an insurer's assets;
                                             
 (g) Limit or withdraw from certain investments or discontinue
certain investment practices to the extent the commissioner deems
necessary;
                                             
 (h) Document the adequacy of premium rates in relation to the
risks insured;
                                             
 (i) File, in addition to regular annual statements, interim
financial reports on the form adopted by the NAIC or in such format as
adopted by the commissioner; or
                                             
 (j) Cease from engaging in certain business practices which are
illegal or which the administrative supervisor deems harmful to
policyholders or the general public.
                                             
 II. In addition to the provisions of paragraph I, the commissioner
may prohibit the insurer from engaging in any of the following acts
during the period of supervision without the prior approval of the
administrative supervisor:
                                             
 (a) Dispose of, convey, or encumber any of its assets or its
business in force;
                                             
 (b) Withdraw any funds from its bank accounts;
                                             
 (c) Lend any of its funds;
                                             
 (d) Invest any of its funds;
                                             
 (e) Transfer any of its property;
                                             
 (f) Incur any debt, obligation, or liability;
                                             
 (g) Merge or consolidate with any company;
                                             
 (h) Approve new premiums or renew any policies;
                                             
 (i) Enter into any new reinsurance contract or treaty;
                                             
 (j) Terminate, surrender, forfeit, convert, or lapse any
insurance policy, certificate, or contract, except for nonpayment of
premiums due;
                                             
 (k) Release, pay, or refund premium deposits, accrued cash or
loan values, unearned premiums, or other reserves on any insurance
policy, certificate, or contract;
                                             
 (l) Make any material change in management; or
                                             
 (m) Increase salaries and benefits of officers or directors or
the preferential payment of bonuses, dividends, or other payments deemed
preferential.

**Source.** 2016, 17:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 402-M:6


                                             


                                             [RSA 402-M:6 effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **402-M:6 Extension of, or Early Release From, Supervision. –**
                                             
 I. If placed under administrative supervision by an order issued
pursuant to RSA 402-M:3, the commissioner shall release the insurer from
the supervision order prior to the end of the specified supervision
period upon finding that the abatement requirements listed in the order
have been met.
                                             
 II. If the commissioner determines that the conditions giving rise
to the supervision still exist at the end of the supervision period
specified in the order, the commissioner may seek consent from the
insurer to amend the agreed order extending the supervision period.

**Source.** 2016, 17:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 402-M:7


                                             


                                             [RSA 402-M:7 effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **402-M:7 Judicial Review. –**
                                             
 An insurer placed under administrative supervision by the
commissioner may contest any action taken pursuant to the agreed
supervision order at any time during the supervision by requesting
review by the superior court for Merrimack county. The court shall
review the action complained of in a closed hearing and render its
decision at the earliest possible date thereafter. The court may stay
any action of the commissioner, pending its review of such petition.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, filing of a petition for review of such
action shall not automatically stay the commissioner's action, or any of
the provisions of the supervision order.

**Source.** 2016, 17:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 402-M:8


                                             


                                             [RSA 402-M:8 effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **402-M:8 Administrative Election of Proceedings. –**
                                             
 Nothing contained in this chapter shall preclude the commissioner
from initiating any proceeding under RSA 402-C, including any judicial
proceedings to place an insurer in conservation, rehabilitation, or
liquidation proceedings or other delinquency proceedings, however
designated under the laws of this state, regardless of whether the
commissioner has previously initiated administrative supervision
proceedings under this chapter against the insurer.

**Source.** 2016, 17:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 402-M:9


                                             


                                             [RSA 402-M:9 effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **402-M:9 Rules. –**
                                             
 The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, as
necessary for the purposes of this chapter.

**Source.** 2016, 17:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 402-M:10


                                             


                                             [RSA 402-M:10 effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **402-M:10 Other Laws; Conflicts; Meetings Between the Commissioner
and the Supervisor. –**
                                             
 The commissioner may meet with a supervisor appointed under this
chapter and with the attorney or other representative of the supervisor,
without the presence of any other person, at the time of any proceeding
or during the pendency of any proceeding held under authority of this
chapter to carry out the commissioner's duties under this chapter or for
the supervisor to carry out his or her duties under this chapter.

**Source.** 2016, 17:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 402-M:11


                                             


                                             [RSA 402-M:11 effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **402-M:11 Immunity. –**
                                             
 There shall be no liability on the part of, and no cause of action
of any nature shall arise against, the commissioner or the department or
their employees, agents, consultants, or counsel for any action taken by
them that is within the scope of their powers and duties under this
chapter and that is performed in good faith and not in a wanton or
reckless manner.

**Source.** 2016, 17:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.
