---
title: |
    CHAPTER 402-G BUSINESS TRANSACTED WITH PRODUCER CONTROLLED
    PROPERTY/CASUALTY ACT
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 402-G
                                             
BUSINESS TRANSACTED WITH PRODUCER CONTROLLED PROPERTY/CASUALTY ACT
------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 402-G:1

 **402-G:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Accredited state'' means a state in which the insurance
department or regulatory agency has qualified as meeting the minimum
financial regulatory standards promulgated and established from time to
time by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC).
                                             
 II. "Control'' or "controlled'' means "control'' as defined in RSA
401-B:1, III.
                                             
 III. "Controlled insurer'' means a licensed insurer which is
controlled, directly or indirectly, by a producer.
                                             
 IV. "Controlling producer'' means a producer who, directly or
indirectly, controls an insurer.
                                             
 V. "Licensed insurer'' or "insurer'' means any person, firm,
association, or corporation duly licensed to transact a
property/casualty insurance business in this state. The following, among
others, are not licensed insurers for the purposes of this chapter:
                                             
 (a) All risk retention groups as defined in the Superfund
Amendments Reauthorization Act of 1986, Pub. L. No. 99-499, 100 Stat.
1613 (1986) and the Risk Retention Act, 15 U.S.C. section 3901 et seq.
(1982 & Supp. 1986) and RSA 405-A;
                                             
 (b) All residual market pools and joint underwriting authorities
or associations; and
                                             
 (c) All captive insurers which, for the purposes of this chapter,
are insurance companies owned by another organization whose exclusive
purpose is to insure risks of the parent organization and affiliated
companies or, in the case of groups and associations, insurance
organizations owned by the insureds whose exclusive purpose is to insure
risks to member organizations or group members, or both, and their
affiliates.
                                             
 VI. "Producer'' means an insurance broker or brokers or any other
person, firm, association or corporation, when, for any compensation,
commission or other thing of value, such person, firm, association or
corporation acts or aids in any manner in soliciting, negotiating, or
procuring the making of any insurance contract on behalf of an insured
other than the person, firm, association, or corporation.

**Source.** 1992, 288:15. 1993, 254:10, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 402-G:2

 **402-G:2 Applicability. –** This chapter shall apply to licensed
insurers, as defined in RSA 402-G:1, V, either domiciled in this state
or domiciled in a state that is not an accredited state having in effect
a substantially similar law. All provisions of RSA 401-B, to the extent
they are not superseded by this chapter, shall continue to apply to all
parties within holding company systems subject to the chapter.

**Source.** 1992, 288:15, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 402-G:3

 **402-G:3 Minimum Standards; Required Contract Provisions. –**
                                             
 I. Applicability of section:
                                             
 (a) The provisions of this section shall apply if, in any
calendar year, the aggregate amount of gross written premium on business
placed with a controlled insurer by a controlling producer is equal to
or greater than 5 percent of the admitted assets of the controlled
insurer, as reported in the controlled insurer's quarterly statement
filed as of September 30 of the prior year.
                                             
 (b) Notwithstanding subparagraph I(a), the provisions of this
section shall not apply if:
                                             
 (1) The controlling producer:
                                             
 (A) Places insurance only with the controlled insurer, or
only with the controlled insurer and a member or members of the
controlled insurer's holding company system, or the controlled insurer's
parent, affiliate, or subsidiary and receives no compensation based upon
the amount of premiums written in connection with such insurance; and
                                             
 (B) Accepts insurance placements only from non-affiliated
subproducers, and not directly from insureds; and
                                             
 (2) The controlled insurer, except for insurance business
written through a residual market facility, accepts insurance business
only from a controlling producer, a producer controlled by the
controlled insurer, or a producer that is a subsidiary of the controlled
insurer.
                                             
 II. A controlled insurer shall not accept business from a
controlling producer and a controlling producer shall not place business
with a controlled insurer unless there is a written contract between the
controlling producer and the insurer specifying the responsibilities of
each party, which contract has been approved by the board of directors
of the insurer and contains the following minimum provisions:
                                             
 (a) The controlled insurer may terminate the contract for cause,
upon written notice to the controlling producer. The controlled insurer
shall suspend the authority of the controlling producer to write
business during the pendency of any dispute regarding the cause for the
termination.
                                             
 (b) The controlling producer shall render accounts to the
controlled insurer detailing all material transactions, including
information necessary to support all commissions, charges and other fees
received by, or owing to, the controlling producer.
                                             
 (c) The controlling producer shall remit all funds due under the
terms of the contract to the controlled insurer on at least a monthly
basis. The due date shall be fixed so that premiums or installments
thereof collected shall be remitted no later than 90 days after the
effective date of any policy placed with the controlled insurer under
this contract.
                                             
 (d) All funds collected for the controlled insurer's account
shall be held by the controlling producer in a fiduciary capacity, in
one or more appropriately identified bank accounts in banks that are
members of the Federal Reserve System, in accordance with the provisions
of the insurance law as applicable. However, funds of a controlling
producer not required to be licensed in this state shall be maintained
in compliance with the requirements of the controlling producer's
domiciliary jurisdiction.
                                             
 (e) The controlling producer shall maintain separately
identifiable records of business written for the controlled insurer.
                                             
 (f) The contract shall not be assigned in whole or in part by the
controlling producer.
                                             
 (g) The controlled insurer shall provide the controlling producer
with its underwriting standards, rules and procedures, manuals setting
forth the rates to be charged, and the conditions for the acceptance or
rejection of risks. The controlling producer shall adhere to the
standards, rules, procedures, rates, and conditions. The standards,
rules, procedures, rates, and conditions shall be the same as those
applicable to comparable business placed with the controlled insurer by
a producer other than the controlling producer.
                                             
 (h) The rates and terms of the controlling producer's
commissions, charges, or other fees and the purposes for those charges
or fees. The rates of the commissions, charges, and other fees shall be
no greater than those applicable to comparable business placed with the
controlled insurer by producers other than controlling producers. For
purposes of this subparagraph and subparagraph II(a) of this section,
examples of "comparable business'' includes the same lines of insurance,
same kinds of insurance, same kinds of risks, similar policy limits, and
similar quality of business.
                                             
 (i) If the contract provides that the controlling producer, on
insurance business placed with the insurer, is to be compensated
contingent upon the insurer's profits on that business, then such
compensation shall not be determined and paid until at least 5 years
after the premiums on liability insurance are earned and at least 1 year
after the premiums are earned on any other insurance. In no event shall
the commissions be paid until the adequacy of the controlled insurer's
reserves on remaining claims has been independently verified pursuant to
paragraph IV of this section.
                                             
 (j) A limit on the controlling producer's writings in relation to
the controlled insurer's surplus and total writings. The insurer may
establish a different limit for each line or sub-line of business. The
controlled insurer shall notify the controlling producer when the
applicable limit is approached and shall not accept business from the
controlling producer if the limit is reached. The controlling producer
shall not place business with the controlled insurer if it has been
notified by the controlled insurer that the limit has been reached.
                                             
 (k) The controlling producer may negotiate but shall not bind
reinsurance on behalf of the controlled insurer on business the
controlling producer places with the controlled insurer, except that the
controlling producer may bind facultative reinsurance contracts pursuant
to obligatory facultative agreements if the contract with the controlled
insurer contains underwriting guidelines including, for both reinsurance
assumed, and ceded, a list of reinsurers with which such automatic
agreements are in effect, the coverages and amounts or percentages that
may be reinsured and commission schedules.
                                             
 III. Every controlled insurer shall have an audit committee of the
board of directors composed of independent directors. The audit
committee shall annually meet with management, the insurer's independent
certified public accountants, and an independent casualty actuary or
other independent loss reserve specialist acceptable to the commissioner
to review the adequacy of the insurer's loss reserves.
                                             
 IV. Reporting requirements are as follows:
                                             
 (a) In addition to any other required loss reserve certification,
the controlled insurer shall file annually, on April 1 of each year,
with the commissioner an opinion of an independent casualty actuary, or
such other independent loss reserve specialist acceptable to the
commissioner, reporting loss ratios for each line of business written
and attesting to the adequacy of loss reserves established for losses
incurred and outstanding as of year-end, including incurred but not
reported, on business placed by the producer; and
                                             
 (b) The controlled insurer shall annually report to the
commissioner the amount of commissions paid to the producer, the
percentage such amount represents of the net premiums written, and
comparable amounts and percentage paid to noncontrolling producers for
placements of the same kinds of insurance.

**Source.** 1992, 288:15, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 402-G:4

 **402-G:4 Disclosure. –** The producer, prior to the effective date
of the policy, shall deliver written notice to the prospective insured
disclosing the relationship between the producer and the controlled
insurer, except that, if the business is placed through a subproducer
who is not a controlling producer, the controlling producer shall retain
in his records a signed commitment from the subproducer that the
subproducer is aware of the relationship between the insurer and the
producer and that the subproducer has or will notify the insured.

**Source.** 1992, 288:15, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 402-G:5

 **402-G:5 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. (a) If the commissioner believes that the controlling producer or
any other person has not materially complied with this chapter, or any
rule adopted or order issued under this chapter, after notice and
opportunity to be heard, the commissioner may order the controlling
producer to cease placing business with the controlled insurer; and
                                             
 (b) If it was found that because of such material non-compliance
that the controlled insurer or any policyholder thereof has suffered any
loss or damage, the commissioner may maintain a civil action or
intervene in an action brought by or on behalf of the insurer or
policyholder for recovery of compensatory damages for the benefit of the
insurer or policyholder or other appropriate relief.
                                             
 II. If an order for liquidation or rehabilitation of the controlled
insurer has been entered pursuant to RSA 402-C, and the receiver
appointed under that order believes that the controlling producer or any
other person has not materially complied with this chapter, or any rule
adopted or order issued under this chapter, and the insurer suffered any
loss or damage therefrom, the receiver may maintain a civil action for
recovery of damages or other appropriate sanctions for the benefit of
the insurer.
                                             
 III. Nothing contained in this section shall affect the right of the
commissioner to impose any other penalties provided for in the insurance
laws.
                                             
 IV. Nothing contained in this section is intended to or shall in any
manner alter or affect the rights of policyholders, claimants, creditors
or other third parties.

**Source.** 1992, 288:15, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.
