---
title: 'CHAPTER 402-B INSURANCE CLAIMS ADJUSTERS'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 402-B
                                             
INSURANCE CLAIMS ADJUSTERS
--------------------------

### Section 402-B:1

 **402-B:1 Prohibition. –** It is unlawful for any person, whether as
agent or employee, to act directly or indirectly, as an insurance claims
adjuster in this state for any insurance company unless licensed as
provided in this chapter.

**Source.** 1969, 218:1, eff. Aug. 5, 1969.

### Section 402-B:2

 **402-B:2 Definitions; Exemption. –**
                                             
 I. "Home state'' means the District of Columbia and any state or
territory of the United States in which an insurance claims adjuster
maintains his or her principal place of residence or principal place of
business and is licensed to act as an insurance claims adjuster. If such
state does not issue an insurance claims adjuster license for the line
of business sought, the insurance claims adjuster may designate as his
or her "home state'' any state in which the insurance claims adjuster
qualifies pursuant to the provisions of RSA 402-B.
                                             
 II. In this chapter, "insurance claims adjuster'' means a person who
investigates, negotiates, or settles property, casualty, or workers'
compensation claims whether employed by or contracted by or with an
insurer, a claims adjusting company, or a third party administrator.
                                             
 III. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
                                             
 (a) Attorneys duly admitted to practice in this state pursuant to
the provisions of RSA 311 when acting in their professional capacity as
an attorney.
                                             
 (b) A person employed solely to obtain facts surrounding a claim
or to furnish technical assistance to a licensed insurance claims
adjuster.
                                             
 (c) An individual who is employed to investigate suspected
insurance fraud and who does not adjust losses or determine claims
payments.
                                             
 (d) A person who, for purposes of portable electronics insurance
claims, collects and enters claims information from, or furnishes claims
information to, insureds or claimants, utilizing an automated claims
adjudication system; provided, that no more than 25 such persons are
under the supervision of a licensed insurance claims adjuster or a
licensed insurance producer. A licensed insurance producer adjusting
claims or acting as a supervisor pursuant to this subparagraph shall not
also be required to be a licensed insurance claims adjuster. In this
subparagraph:
                                             
 (1) "Automated claims adjudication system'' means a
preprogrammed computer system that is utilized only by licensed
insurance claims adjusters, licensed insurance producers, or supervised
individuals operating pursuant to this subparagraph, designed for the
collection, data entry, calculation, and final resolution and settlement
of claims with respect to portable electronics insurance in compliance
with the claims settlement requirements of the insurance laws of this
state.
                                             
 (2) "Licensed insurance claims adjuster'' means a person
licensed as an insurance claims adjuster under this chapter.
                                             
 (3) "Licensed insurance producer'' means a person licensed to
sell, solicit, or negotiate portable electronics insurance under RSA
402-J.
                                             
 (4) "Portable electronics insurance'' shall have the same
meaning as such term under RSA 402-K:1, VI.

**Source.** 1969, 218:1, eff. Aug. 5, 1969. 2008, 212:1, eff. June 16,
2008. 2013, 230:1, eff. Sept. 13, 2013. 2015, 93:1, eff. Aug. 4, 2015.

### Section 402-B:3

 **402-B:3 Applications. –** Applications for licenses as an
insurance claims adjuster shall be made in writing to the commissioner
of insurance on forms prescribed by him or her stating the age,
domicile, line or lines of insurance for which the applicant desires a
license, and the place of business of the individual applicant. The
commissioner shall require the applicant to set forth personal and
professional background information in the application as the
commissioner may reasonably require to determine suitability for
issuance of a license.

**Source.** 1969, 218:1, eff. Aug. 5, 1969. 2008, 18:9, eff. July 11,
2008.

### Section 402-B:4

 **402-B:4 Examination. –** Except as hereinafter provided, the
commissioner of insurance shall not issue an original claims adjuster's
license to any applicant therefor unless and until said applicant shall
have satisfactorily passed a reasonable written examination, which shall
be administered by the commissioner, shall be in such form as said
commissioner shall prescribe and shall be of sufficient scope to test
the applicant's knowledge of insurance, the duties and responsibilities
of a licensee, and the laws of the state applicable to insurance. The
commissioner shall cause such examinations to be given at least 4 times
annually. The commissioner is authorized to publish and distribute
printed material indicating the scope of the examination and suggested
sources of study. The commissioner shall collect a fee as established by
RSA 400-A:29.

**Source.** 1969, 218:1. 1983, 473:9, eff. Sept. 3, 1983.

### Section 402-B:5

 **402-B:5 Exceptions. –** The commissioner shall waive the
requirement of such examination in the following cases:
                                             
 I. Nonresident applicants who are licensed as insurance claims
adjusters in the states in which they reside, or if no license is
required in said states, then nonresident applicants who have engaged in
the business of claims adjusting for a period of 6 months;
                                             
 II. Residents of the state who (a) have been engaged in the business
of insurance claims adjusting prior to the effective date of this act or
(b) prove to the commissioner that they have passed a course on
insurance conducted by an insurance company or an educational
institution which course the commissioner has approved;
                                             
 III. Attorneys-at-law.

**Source.** 1969, 218:1, eff. Aug. 5, 1969.

### Section 402-B:5-a

 **402-B:5-a Continuing Education. –** Every 2 years, at least 60
days prior to the renewal date of their license, persons holding an
adjusters license shall be certified by the insurance department as
having completed 20 hours of continuing education instruction. Licensees
with workers' compensation authority shall comply with the approved 10
credit hours of workers' compensation and 10 credit hours of multi-line
requirement pursuant to RSA 281-A:63. Those licensees without workers'
compensation authority may satisfy their 20 credit hour requirement
exclusively with multi-line approved credits or any combination of
approved workers' compensation or multi-line courses. Such continuing
education instruction shall be approved by the insurance department. If
a nonresident licensee has complied with the continuing education
requirements of his or her state of residence or designated home state,
he or she will not be required to comply with the requirements of this
state.

**Source.** 1993, 317:1. 1997, 324:4. 2001, 224:2, eff. Sept. 9, 2001.
2010, 212:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 402-B:6

 **402-B:6 Rules and Regulations. –** The commissioner may make
reasonable rules and regulations necessary to effect the purposes of
this chapter.

**Source.** 1969, 218:1, eff. Aug. 5, 1969.

### Section 402-B:7

 **402-B:7 License to Issue. –** Upon satisfying himself that such
applicant is in all respects properly qualified and of good character,
and that the granting of such license is not against the public
interest, the commissioner shall, upon the payment of the required fee,
issue said applicant an insurance claims adjuster's license.

**Source.** 1969, 218:1, eff. Aug. 5, 1969.

### Section 402-B:8

 **402-B:8 Fees. –** The commissioner of insurance shall collect the
following fees for use by the commissioner in administrating this
title:
                                             
 I. For each original insurance claims adjuster's license, as
prescribed by RSA 400-A:29.
                                             
 II. For each renewal, as prescribed by RSA 400-A:29.

**Source.** 1969, 218:1. 1970, 37:5. 1971, 244:18. 2001, 224:11, eff.
Sept. 9, 2001.

### Section 402-B:9

 **402-B:9 Form of License, Display. –** The insurance claims
adjuster's license shall be in such form and contain such identifying
information concerning the licensee as the commissioner of insurance
shall prescribe. The licensee shall exhibit said license to each person,
whether an insured, a claimant, a witness, a potential witness or any
other informant with whom he may deal in the course of investigating or
adjusting any claim or potential claim prior to any such dealings and
shall identify the name of the company for which he works and the name
of the insured.

**Source.** 1969, 218:1, eff. Aug. 5, 1969.

### Section 402-B:10

 **402-B:10 Term; Renewals. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 244:19, VII, eff.
Aug. 17, 1971.
                                             ]

### Section 402-B:10-a

 **402-B:10-a Expiration. –** Unless revoked by the commissioner, the
license and any renewal thereof shall expire on October 1 of the second
calendar year after its issue.

**Source.** 1977, 232:3, eff. Aug. 14, 1977.

### Section 402-B:11

 **402-B:11 Temporary License. –** In the event of an emergency or
disaster, the commissioner of insurance may, in his discretion, issue
temporary licenses to persons he thinks are qualified. Said temporary
license shall terminate at the discretion of the commissioner or one
year from its issuance, whichever is sooner. The fee for said temporary
license shall be the same as that provided in RSA 402-B:8.

**Source.** 1969, 218:1, eff. Aug. 5, 1969.

### Section 402-B:12

 **402-B:12 Suspension, Revocation or Fine. –** The commissioner may
for good cause shown, after notice and hearing, suspend or revoke the
insurance claims adjuster's license of any holder or subject him to an
administrative fine not to exceed 
                                             $ 2,500. Such hearing may be held by
the commissioner or any person designated by him. Any person aggrieved
by said action of the commissioner or refused a license or renewal of
the same by him may appeal in accordance with the provisions of RSA 541.

**Source.** 1969, 218:1. 1975, 312:1, eff. Aug. 6, 1975.

### Section 402-B:13

 **402-B:13 Penalty. –** Any person who shall act within this state
as an insurance claims adjuster without being licensed as herein
provided, or any licensee who in the course of his work as an insurance
claims adjuster shall misrepresent his identity or the identity of his
principal or employer, or who shall wrongfully divulge information
coming to him in his capacity as an insurance claims adjuster, shall:
                                             
 I. Be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a
felony if any other person; and
                                             
 II. Be subject to suspension or revocation of his license and a fine
not to exceed 
                                             $2,500 for each violation.

**Source.** 1969, 218:1. 1973, 529:101. 1975, 312:2. 1991, 136:1, eff.
Jan. 1, 1992.
