---
title: 'CHAPTER 402-J PRODUCER LICENSING'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 402-J
                                             
PRODUCER LICENSING
------------------

### Section 402-J:1

 **402-J:1 Purpose and Scope. –**
                                             
 I. This chapter governs the qualifications and procedures for the
licensing of insurance producers. It simplifies and organizes some
statutory language to improve efficiency and reduce costs associated
with issuing and renewing insurance licenses.
                                             
 II. This chapter applies to all persons required to be a licensed
producer pursuant to the provisions of RSA 402:15; RSA 405:15; RSA
405:24; RSA 405:44-a; RSA 405:44-b; RSA 406-C:3; RSA 407-C:3; RSA
408:42; RSA 416-A:15; RSA 418:31; RSA 420-A:7; RSA 420-B:18; RSA
420-F:3; and New Hampshire code of administrative rules Ins 2501.03.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1. 2005, 206:11, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.
2008, 18:1, II, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 402-J:2

 **402-J:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Business entity'' means a corporation, association, partnership,
limited liability company or partnership, or other legal entity.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the insurance commissioner of the state of
New Hampshire.
                                             
 III. "Home state'' means the District of Columbia and any state or
territory of the United States in which an insurance producer maintains
his or her principal place of residence or principal place of business
and is licensed to act as an insurance producer.
                                             
 IV. "Insurance'' means any of the lines of authority in RSA 401:1
and RSA 401:1-a.
                                             
 V. "Insurance producer'' means a person required to be licensed
under the laws of this state to sell, solicit, or negotiate insurance.
                                             
 VI. "License'' means a document issued by the commissioner
authorizing a person to act as an insurance producer for the lines of
authority specified in the document. The license itself does not create
any authority, actual, apparent, or inherent, in the holder to represent
or commit an insurance carrier.
                                             
 VII. "Limited line credit insurance'' includes credit life, credit
disability, credit property, credit unemployment, involuntary
unemployment, mortgage life, mortgage guaranty, mortgage disability,
guaranteed automobile protection gap insurance, and any other form of
insurance offered in connection with an extension of credit that is
limited to partially or wholly extinguishing that credit obligation that
the commissioner determines should be designated a form of limited line
credit insurance.
                                             
 VIII. "Limited line credit insurance producer'' means a person who
sells, solicits or negotiates one or more forms of limited line credit
insurance coverage to individuals through a master, corporate, group, or
individual policy.
                                             
 IX. "Limited lines insurance'' means those lines of insurance that
the commissioner deems necessary to recognize for the purpose of
complying with RSA 402-J:8.
                                             
 X. "Limited lines producer'' means a person authorized by the
commissioner to sell, solicit, or negotiate limited lines insurance.
                                             
 XI. "Negotiate'' means the act of conferring directly with or
offering advice directly to a purchaser or prospective purchaser of a
particular contract of insurance concerning any of the substantive
benefits, terms, or conditions of such contract, provided that the
person engaged in that act either sells insurance, or obtains insurance
from insurers for purchasers.
                                             
 XII. "Person'' means an individual or business entity.
                                             
 XIII. "Sell'' means to exchange a contract of insurance by any
means, for money or its equivalent, on behalf of an insurance company.
                                             
 XIV. "Solicit'' means attempting to sell insurance or asking or
urging a person to apply for a particular kind of insurance from a
particular company.
                                             
 XV. "Terminate'' means the cancellation of the relationship between
an insurance producer and the insurer or the termination of a producer's
authority to transact insurance.
                                             
 XVI. "Uniform application'' means the current version of the NAIC
uniform application for resident and nonresident producer licensing.
                                             
 XVII. "Uniform business entity application'' means the current
version of the NAIC uniform business entity application for resident and
nonresident business entities.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 402-J:3

 **402-J:3 License Required. –**
                                             
 I. A person shall not sell, solicit, or negotiate insurance in this
state for any class or classes of insurance unless the person is
licensed for that line of authority in accordance with this chapter.
                                             
 II. Any person who shall practice or attempt to practice as an
insurance producer in this state without a license shall be guilty of a
class A misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any
other person.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1. 2005, 206:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 402-J:4

 **402-J:4 Exceptions to Licensing. –**
                                             
 I. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require an insurer
to obtain an insurance producer license. For the purposes of this
section "insurer'' does not include an insurer's officers, directors,
employees, subsidiaries, or affiliates.
                                             
 II. A license as an insurance producer shall not be required of the
following:
                                             
 (a) An officer, director, or employee of an insurer or of an
insurance producer, provided that the officer, director, or employee
does not receive any commission on policies written or sold to insure
risks residing, located or to be performed in this state and:
                                             
 (1) The officer, director, or employee's activities are
executive, administrative, managerial, clerical, or a combination of
these and are only indirectly related to the sale, solicitation, or
negotiations of insurance;
                                             
 (2) The officer, director, or employee's function relates to
underwriting, loss control, inspection or the processing, adjusting,
investigating, or settling of a claim on a contract of insurance; or
                                             
 (3) The officer, director, or employee is acting in the
capacity of a special agent or agency supervisor assisting insurance
producers where the person's activities are limited to providing
technical advice and assistance to licensed insurance producers and do
not include the sale, solicitation, or negotiation of insurance.
                                             
 (b) A person who secures and furnishes information for the
purpose of group life insurance, group property and casualty insurance,
group annuities, group or blanket accident and health insurance; or for
the purpose of enrolling individuals under plans; issuing certificates
under plans or otherwise assisting in administering plans or performs
administrative services related to mass marketed property and casualty
insurance; where no commission is paid to the person for the service.
                                             
 (c) An employer or association or its officers, directors,
employees, or the trustees of an employee trust plan, to the extent that
the employers, officers, employees, director, or trustees are engaged in
the administration or operation of a program of employee benefits for
the employer's or association's own employees or the employees of its
subsidiaries or affiliates, which program involves the use of insurance
issued by an insurer, as long as the employers, associations, officers,
directors, employees, or trustees are not in any manner compensated,
directly or indirectly, by the company issuing the contracts.
                                             
 (d) Employees of insurers or organizations employed by insurers
who are engaging in the inspection, rating or classification of risks,
or in the supervision of the training of insurance producers and who are
not individually engaged in the sale, solicitation, or negotiation of
insurance.
                                             
 (e) A person whose activities in this state are limited to
advertising without the intent to solicit insurance in this state
through communications in printed publications or other forms of
electronic mass media whose distribution is not limited to residents of
the state, provided that the person does not sell, solicit, or negotiate
insurance that would insure risks residing, located, or to be performed
in this state.
                                             
 (f) A person who is not a resident of this state who sells,
solicits, or negotiates a contract of insurance for commercial property
and casualty risks to an insured with risks located in more than one
state insured under that contract, provided that that person is
otherwise licensed as an insurance producer to sell, solicit, or
negotiate that insurance in the state where the insured maintains its
principal place of business and the contract of insurance insures risks
located in that state.
                                             
 (g) A salaried full-time employee who counsels or advises his or
her employer relative to the insurance interests of the employer or of
the subsidiaries or business affiliates of the employer provided that
the employee does not sell or solicit insurance or receive a commission.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 402-J:5

 **402-J:5 Application for Examination. –**
                                             
 I. A resident individual applying for an insurance producer license
shall pass a written examination unless exempt pursuant to RSA 402-J:9.
The examination shall test the knowledge of the individual concerning
the lines of authority for which application is made, the duties and
responsibilities of an insurance producer and the insurance laws and
regulations of this state. Examinations required by this section shall
be developed and conducted under title XXXVII and rules adopted by the
commissioner.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may make arrangements, including contracting
with an outside testing service, for administering examinations and
collecting the nonrefundable fee set forth in RSA 400-A:29.
                                             
 III. Each individual applying for an examination shall remit a
nonrefundable fee as prescribed by the commissioner as set forth in RSA
400-A:29.
                                             
 IV. An individual who fails to appear for the examination as
scheduled or fails to pass the examination, shall reapply for an
examination and remit all required fees and forms before being
rescheduled for another examination.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 402-J:6

 **402-J:6 Application for License. –**
                                             
 I. A person applying for a resident insurance producer license shall
make application to the commissioner on the uniform application and
declare under penalty of refusal, suspension, or revocation of the
license that the statements made in the application are true, correct,
and complete to the best of the individual's knowledge and belief.
Before approving the application, the commissioner shall find that the
individual:
                                             
 (a) Is at least 18 years of age.
                                             
 (b) Has not committed any act that is a ground for denial,
suspension, or revocation set forth in RSA 402-J:12.
                                             
 (c) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (d) Has paid the fees set forth in RSA 400-A:29.
                                             
 (e) Has successfully passed the examinations for the line or
lines of authority for which the person has applied.
                                             
 II. A business entity acting as an insurance producer is required to
obtain an insurance producer license. Application shall be made using
the uniform business entity application. Before approving the
application the commissioner shall find that:
                                             
 (a) The business entity has paid the fees set forth in RSA
400-A:29; and
                                             
 (b) The business entity has designated a licensed producer
responsible for the business entity's compliance with the insurance
laws, rules, and regulations of this state.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may require any documents reasonably necessary
to verify the information contained in an application.
                                             
 IV. Each insurer that sells, solicits or negotiates any form of
limited line credit insurance shall provide to each individual whose
duties will include selling, soliciting or negotiating limited line
credit insurance a program of instruction that may be approved by the
commissioner.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2001. 2008, 18:1,
III, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 402-J:7

 **402-J:7 License. –**
                                             
 I. Unless denied licensure pursuant to RSA 402-J:12, persons who
have met the requirements of RSA 402-J:5 and RSA 402-J:6 shall be issued
an insurance producer license. An insurance producer may receive
qualification for a license in one or more of the following lines of
authority:
                                             
 (a) Life: Insurance coverage on human lives including benefits of
endowment, and annuities, and may include benefits in the event of death
or dismemberment by accident and benefits for disability income.
                                             
 (b) Accident and health or sickness: Insurance coverage for
sickness, bodily injury, or accidental death and may include benefits
for disability income.
                                             
 (c) Property: Insurance coverage for the direct or consequential
loss or damage to property of every kind.
                                             
 (d) Casualty: Insurance coverage against legal liability,
including that for death, injury, or disability or damage to real or
personal property.
                                             
 (e) Variable life and variable annuity products: Insurance
coverage provided under variable life insurance contracts and variable
annuities.
                                             
 (f) Personal lines property and casualty: Insurance coverage sold
to individuals and families for primarily noncommercial purposes.
                                             
 (g) Credit-limited line credit insurance.
                                             
 (h) Any other line of insurance permitted under state law or
rules.
                                             
 II. An insurance producer license shall remain in effect unless
revoked or suspended as long as the fee set forth in RSA 400-A:29 is
paid and educational requirements for resident individual producers are
met by the due date.
                                             
 III. An individual insurance producer who allows his or her license
to lapse may, within 24 months from the due date of the renewal fee,
reinstate the same license without the necessity of passing a written
examination. However, a penalty in the amount of double the unpaid
renewal fee shall be required for any renewal fee received after the due
date.
                                             
 IV. A licensed insurance producer who is unable to comply with
license renewal procedures due to military service or some other
extenuating circumstance may request a waiver of renewal procedures. The
producer may also request a waiver of any examination requirement or any
other fine or sanction imposed for failure to comply with renewal
procedures.
                                             
 V. The license shall contain the licensee's name, address, personal
identification number, and the date of issuance, the lines of authority,
the expiration date, and any other information the commissioner deems
necessary.
                                             
 VI. Licensees shall inform the commissioner by any means acceptable
to the commissioner of a change of address within 30 days of the change.
Change of address shall be accompanied by the fee required pursuant to
RSA 400-A:29.
                                             
 VII. In order to assist in the performance of the commissioner's
duties, the commissioner may contract with non-governmental entities,
including the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) or
any affiliates or subsidiaries that the NAIC oversees, to perform any
ministerial functions, including the collection of fees, related to
producer licensing that the insurance commissioner and the
non-governmental entity may deem appropriate.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2001. 2008, 18:11,
eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 402-J:7-a

 **402-J:7-a Continuing Education. –** Every 2 years, at least 60
days prior to the renewal date of their license, persons holding a
producers license shall be certified by the insurance department as
having completed 24 hours of continuing education instruction. Of the 24
continuing education hours required, at least 3 hours, but no more than
10 hours, shall consist of courses approved for ethics credit. Such
continuing education instruction shall be approved by the insurance
department. If a nonresident has complied with the continuing education
requirements of his or her state of residence, he or she shall not be
required to comply with requirements of this section.

**Source.** 2016, 109:2, eff. July 19, 2016.

### Section 402-J:8

 **402-J:8 Nonresident Licensing. –**
                                             
 I. Unless denied licensure pursuant to RSA 402-J:12, a nonresident
shall receive a nonresident producer license if:
                                             
 (a) The person is currently licensed as a resident and in good
standing in his or her home state.
                                             
 (b) The person has submitted the proper request for licensure and
has paid the fees required by RSA 400-A:29.
                                             
 (c) The person has submitted or transmitted to the commissioner
the application for licensure that the person submitted to his or her
home state, or in lieu of same, a completed uniform application.
                                             
 (d) The person's home state awards nonresident producer licenses
to residents of this state on the same basis.
                                             
 II. A nonresident producer who moves from one state to another state
or a resident producer who moves from this state to another state shall
file a change of address and provide certification from the new resident
state within 30 days of the change of legal residence. No license
application or license fee is required.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may verify the producer's licensing status
through the producer database maintained by the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners, its affiliates or subsidiaries.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a person
licensed as a surplus lines producer in his or her home state shall
receive a nonresident surplus lines producer license pursuant to
paragraph I of this section. Except as provided in paragraph I, nothing
in this section otherwise amends or supersedes any provision of RSA
405:24 through RSA 405:31.
                                             
 V. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a person
licensed as a limited line credit insurance or other type of limited
lines producer in his or her home state shall receive a nonresident
limited lines producer license, pursuant to paragraph I of this section,
granting the same scope of authority as granted under the license issued
by the producer's home state. For the purposes of this paragraph,
limited line insurance is any authority granted by the home state which
restricts the authority of the license to less than the total authority
prescribed in the associated major lines pursuant to RSA 402-J:7,
I(a)-(g).

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2001. 2008, 18:12,
eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 402-J:9

 **402-J:9 Exemption and Examination. –**
                                             
 I. An individual who applies for an insurance producer license in
this state who was previously licensed for the same lines of authority
in another state shall not be required to complete any prelicensing
education or examination. This exemption is only available if the person
is currently licensed in that state, or if the application is received
within 90 days of the cancellation of the applicant's previous license
and if the prior state issues a certification that, at the time of
cancellation, the applicant was in good standing in that state or the
state's Producer Database records, maintained by the NAIC, its
affiliates or subsidiaries indicate that the producer is or was licensed
in good standing for the line of authority requested.
                                             
 II. A person licensed as an insurance producer in another state who
moves to this state shall make application within 90 days of
establishing legal residence to become a resident licensee pursuant to
RSA 402-J:6. No prelicensing education or examination shall be required
of that person to obtain any line of authority previously held in the
prior state, except where the commissioner determines otherwise by
regulation.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 402-J:10

 **402-J:10 Assumed Names. –** An insurance producer doing business
under any name other than the producer's legal name is required to
notify and obtain approval of the commissioner prior to using the
assumed name.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 402-J:11

 **402-J:11 Temporary Licensing. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner may issue a temporary insurance producer license
for a period not to exceed 180 days without requiring an examination if
the commissioner deems that the temporary license is necessary for the
servicing of an insurance business in the following cases:
                                             
 (a) To a member or employee of a business entity licensed as an
insurance producer, upon the death or disability of an individual
designated in the business entity application or the license.
                                             
 (b) To the designee of a licensed insurance producer entering
active service in the armed forces of the United States of America.
                                             
 (c) In any other circumstance where the commissioner deems that
the public interest will best be served by the issuance of a license.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may by order limit the authority of any
temporary licensee in any way deemed necessary to protect insureds and
the public. The commissioner may require the temporary licensee to have
a suitable sponsor who is a licensed producer or insurer and who assumes
responsibility for all acts of the temporary licensee and may impose
other similar requirements designed to protect insureds and the public.
The commissioner may by order revoke a temporary license if the interest
of insureds or the public are endangered. A temporary license may not
continue after the owner or the personal representative disposes of the
business.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 402-J:12

 **402-J:12 License Denial, Nonrenewal, or Revocation. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner may place on probation, suspend, revoke, or
refuse to issue or renew an insurance producer's license, or may levy a
penalty in accordance with RSA 400-A:15, III or any combination of
actions for any one or more of the following causes:
                                             
 (a) Providing incorrect, misleading, incomplete, or materially
untrue information in the license application.
                                             
 (b) Violating any insurance laws, or violating any rule,
regulation, subpoena, or order of the commissioner or of another state's
insurance commissioner.
                                             
 (c) Obtaining or attempting to obtain a license through
misrepresentation or fraud.
                                             
 (d) Improperly withholding, misappropriating, or converting any
moneys or properties in the course of doing insurance business.
                                             
 (e) Intentionally misrepresenting the terms of an actual or
proposed insurance contract or application for insurance.
                                             
 (f) Having been convicted of a felony.
                                             
 (g) Having admitted or been found to have committed any insurance
unfair trade practice or fraud.
                                             
 (h) Using fraudulent, coercive, or dishonest practices, or
demonstrating incompetence, untrustworthiness or financial
irresponsibility in the conduct of business in this state or elsewhere.
                                             
 (i) Having an insurance producer license, or its equivalent,
denied, suspended, or revoked in any other state, province, district, or
territory.
                                             
 (j) Forging another's name to an application for insurance or to
any document related to an insurance transaction.
                                             
 (k) Improperly using notes or any other reference material to
complete an examination for an insurance license.
                                             
 (l) Knowingly accepting insurance business from an individual who
is not licensed.
                                             
 (m) Failing to comply with an administrative or court order
imposing a child support obligation.
                                             
 II. In the event that the action by the commissioner is to nonrenew
or to deny an application for a license, the commissioner shall notify
the applicant or licensee and advise, in writing, the applicant or
licensee of the reason for the denial or nonrenewal of the applicant's
or licensee's license. The applicant or licensee may make written demand
upon the commissioner for a hearing before the commissioner to determine
the reasonableness of the commissioner's action pursuant to RSA
400-A:17.
                                             
 III. The license of a business entity may be suspended, revoked, or
refused if the commissioner finds, after hearing, that an individual
licensee's violation was known or should have been known by one or more
of the partners, officers, or managers acting on behalf of the
partnership or corporation and the violation was neither reported to the
commissioner nor had any corrective action taken.
                                             
 IV. In addition to or in lieu of any applicable denial, suspension,
or revocation of a license, a person may, after hearing, be subject to
an administrative fine pursuant to RSA 400-A:15, III.
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall retain the authority to enforce the
provisions of and impose any penalty or remedy authorized by this
chapter and title XXXVII against any person who is under investigation
for or charged with a violation of this chapter or title XXXVII even if
such person's license or registration has been surrendered or has lapsed
by operation of law.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 402-J:13

 **402-J:13 Commissions. –**
                                             
 I. An insurance company or insurance producer shall not pay a
commission, service fee, brokerage or other valuable consideration to a
person for selling, soliciting, or negotiating insurance in this state
if that person is required to be licensed under this chapter and is not
so licensed.
                                             
 II. A person shall not accept a commission, service fee, brokerage
or other valuable consideration for selling, soliciting, or negotiating
insurance in this state if that person is required to be licensed under
this chapter and is not so licensed.
                                             
 III. Renewal or other deferred commission may be paid to a person
for selling, soliciting or negotiating insurance in this state if the
person was required to be licensed under this chapter at the time of the
sale, solicitation, or negotiation and was so licensed at that time.
                                             
 IV. An insurer or insurance producer may pay or assign commissions,
service fees, brokerages, or other valuable consideration to an
insurance agency or to persons who do not sell, solicit, or negotiate
insurance in this state, unless the payment would violate RSA 417:4, IX.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 402-J:14

 **402-J:14 Appointments and Authority. –**
                                             
 I. An insurance producer shall not act as an agent of an insurer
unless the insurance producer becomes an appointed agent of that
insurer. An insurance producer who is not acting as an agent of an
insurer is not required to become appointed.
                                             
 II. To appoint a producer as its agent, the appointing insurer shall
file, in a format approved by the commissioner, a notice of appointment
within 15 days from the date the agency contract is executed or the
first insurance application is submitted. An insurer may also elect to
appoint a producer to all or some insurers within the insurer's holding
company system or group by the filing of a single appointment request.
                                             
 III. An insurer shall pay an appointment fee, in the amount and
method of payment set forth in RSA 400-A:29 for each insurance producer
appointed by the insurer.
                                             
 IV. While such producer's appointment remains in force, an insurer
shall be bound by the acts of the person named therein within his or her
apparent authority as its acknowledged producer.
                                             
 V. No such company shall issue a policy or other evidence of
insurance through an unlicensed producer or other unlicensed person. Any
violation of this provision shall, after hearing, subject the insurer to
an administrative fine, pursuant to RSA 400-A:15, III, and, upon
repeated violations, the commissioner may suspend or revoke the license
of the company.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1. 2003, 144:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 402-J:15

 **402-J:15 Notification to Commissioner of Termination;
Confidentiality; Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. An insurer or authorized representative of the insurer that
terminates the appointment, employment, contract or other insurance
business relationship with a producer shall notify the commissioner
within 15 days following the effective date of the termination under RSA
402:15-c, using a format prescribed by the commissioner, if the reason
for termination is one of the reasons set forth in RSA 402-J:12 or the
insurer has knowledge the producer was found by a court, government
body, or self-regulatory organization authorized by law, to have engaged
in any of the activities in RSA 402-J:12. Upon the written request of
the commissioner, the insurer shall provide additional information,
documents, records, or other data pertaining to the termination or
activity of the producer.
                                             
 II. An insurer or authorized representative of the insurer that
terminates the appointment, employment, or contract with a producer for
any reason not set forth in RSA 402-J:12, shall notify the commissioner
within 15 days following the effective date of the termination, using a
format prescribed by the commissioner. Upon written request of the
commissioner, the insurer shall provide additional information,
documents, records, or other data pertaining to the termination.
                                             
 III. The insurer or the authorized representative of the insurer
shall promptly notify the commissioner in a format acceptable to the
commissioner if, upon further review or investigation, the insurer
discovers additional information that would have been reportable to the
commissioner in accordance with paragraph I had the insurer then known
of its existence.
                                             
 IV. (a) Within 15 days after making the notification required by
paragraphs I, II, and III, the insurer shall mail a copy of the
notification to the producer at his or her last known address. If the
producer is terminated for cause for any of the reasons listed in RSA
402-J:12, the insurer shall provide a copy of the notification to the
producer at his or her last known address by certified mail, return
receipt requested, postage prepaid or by overnight delivery using a
nationally recognized carrier.
                                             
 (b) Within 30 days after the producer has received the original
or additional notification, the producer may file written comments
concerning the substance of the notification with the commissioner. The
producer shall, by the same means, simultaneously send a copy of the
comments to the reporting insurer, and the comments shall become a part
of the commissioner's file and accompany every copy of a report
distributed or disclosed for any reason about the producer as permitted
under RSA 402-J:15, VII.
                                             
 V. (a) In the absence of actual malice, an insurer, the authorized
representative of the insurer, a producer, the commissioner, or an
organization of which the commissioner is a member and that compiles the
information and makes it available to other insurance commissioners, or
regulatory or law enforcement agencies shall not be subject to civil
liability, and a civil cause of action of any nature shall not arise
against these entities or their respective agents or employees, as a
result of any statement or information required by or provided pursuant
to this section or any information relating to any statement that may be
requested in writing by the commissioner, from an insurer or producer;
or a statement by a terminating insurer or producer to an insurer or
producer limited solely and exclusively to whether a termination for
cause under paragraph I was reported to the commissioner, provided that
the propriety of any termination for cause under paragraph I is
certified in writing by an officer or authorized representative of the
insurer or producer terminating the relationship.
                                             
 (b) In any action brought against a person that may have immunity
under subparagraph V(a) for making any statement required by this
section or providing any information relating to any statement that may
be requested by the commissioner, the party bringing the action shall
plead specifically in any allegation that subparagraph V(a) does not
apply because the person making the statement or providing the
information did so with actual malice.
                                             
 (c) Subparagraphs V(a) and (b) shall not abrogate or modify any
existing statutory or common law privileges or immunities.
                                             
 VI. (a) Any documents, materials, or other information in the
control or possession of the insurance department that is furnished by
an insurer, producer, or an employee or agent thereof acting on behalf
of the insurer or producer, or obtained by the commissioner in an
investigation pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential by law and
privileged, shall not be subject to RSA 91-A, shall not be subject to
subpoena, and shall not be subject to discovery or admissible in
evidence in any private civil action. However, the commissioner is
authorized to use such documents, materials, or other information in the
furtherance of any regulatory or legal action brought as part of the
commissioner's duties.
                                             
 (b) Neither the commissioner nor any person who received
documents, materials, or other information while acting under the
authority of the commissioner shall be permitted or required to testify
in any private civil action concerning any confidential documents,
materials, or information subject to subparagraph VI(a).
                                             
 (c) In order to assist in the performance of the commissioner's
duties under this chapter, the commissioner may:
                                             
 (1) Share documents, materials, or other information,
including the confidential and privileged documents, materials, or
information under subparagraph VI(a), with other state, federal, and
international regulatory agencies, with the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners, its affiliates or subsidiaries, and with state,
federal, and international law enforcement authorities, provided that
the recipient agrees to maintain the confidentiality and privileged
status of the document, material, or other information.
                                             
 (2) Receive documents, materials, or information, including
otherwise confidential and privileged documents, materials, or
information, from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners,
its affiliates or subsidiaries, and from regulatory and law enforcement
officials of other foreign or domestic jurisdictions, and shall maintain
as confidential or privileged any document, material, or information
received with notice of the understanding that it is confidential or
privileged under the laws of the jurisdiction that is the source of the
document, material, or information; and may enter into agreements
governing sharing and use of information consistent with this
subparagraph.
                                             
 (3) No waiver of any applicable privilege or claim of
confidentiality in the documents, materials or information shall occur
as a result of disclosure to the commissioner under this section or as a
result of sharing as authorized herein.
                                             
 (d) Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the commissioner from
releasing final, adjudicated actions including for cause terminations
that are open to public inspection pursuant to RSA 91-A to a database or
other clearinghouse service maintained by the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners, its affiliates or subsidiaries.
                                             
 VII. An insurer, the authorized representative of the insurer, or
producer that fails to report as required under the provisions of RSA
402-J:15 or that is found to have reported with actual malice by a court
of competent jurisdiction may, after notice and hearing, have its
license or certificate of authority suspended or revoked and may be
fined in accordance with RSA 400-A:15, III.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 402-J:16

 **402-J:16 Reciprocity. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall waive any requirements for a nonresident
license applicant with a valid license from his or her home state except
the requirements imposed by RSA 402-J:8, if the applicant's home state
awards nonresident licenses to residents of this state on the same
basis.
                                             
 II. A nonresident producer's satisfaction of his or her home state's
continuing education requirements for licensed producers shall
constitute satisfaction of this state's continuing education
requirements if the nonresident producer's home state recognizes the
satisfaction of its continuing education requirements imposed upon
producers from this state on the same basis.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 402-J:17

 **402-J:17 Reporting of Actions. –**
                                             
 I. A producer shall report to the commissioner any administrative
action taken against the producer in another jurisdiction or by another
governmental agency in this state within 30 days of the final
disposition of the matter. This report shall include a copy of the
order, consent to order, or other relevant legal documents.
                                             
 II. Within 30 days of the initial pretrial hearing date, a producer
shall report to the commissioner any criminal prosecution of the
producer taken in any jurisdiction. The report shall include a copy of
the initial complaint filed, the order resulting from the hearing, and
any other relevant legal documents.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1. 2005, 248:6, eff. Sept. 12, 2005.

### Section 402-J:18

 **402-J:18 Rules. –** The commissioner may, in accordance with RSA
541-A, adopt reasonable rules as are necessary or proper to carry out
the purpose of this chapter.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.

### Section 402-J:19

 **402-J:19 Severability. –** If any provisions of this chapter, or
the application of a provision to any person or circumstances, shall be
held invalid, the remainder of the chapter, and the application of the
provision to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is
held invalid, shall not be affected.

**Source.** 2000, 315:1. 2001, 95:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2001.
