---
title: 'CHAPTER 402-L SALE OF LIMITED LINES TRAVEL INSURANCE'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 402-L
                                             
SALE OF LIMITED LINES TRAVEL INSURANCE
--------------------------------------

### Section 402-L:1

 **402-L:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the insurance commissioner.
                                             
 II. "Designated responsible producer'' means an employee, who is a
licensed individual producer, of the limited lines travel insurance
producer who has designated the employee as responsible for the limited
lines travel insurance producer's compliance with this chapter.
                                             
 III. "Limited lines travel insurance producer'' means a:
                                             
 (a) Licensed managing general underwriter;
                                             
 (b) Licensed managing general agent or third party administrator;
or
                                             
 (c) Licensed insurance producer, including a limited lines
producer.
                                             
 IV. "Offer and disseminate'' means providing general information,
including a description of the coverage and price, as well as processing
the application, collecting premiums, and performing other
non-licensable activities permitted by the state.
                                             
 V. (a) "Travel insurance'' means insurance coverage for personal
risks incident to planned travel, including but not limited to:
                                             
 (1) Interruption or cancellation of a trip or event;
                                             
 (2) Loss of baggage or personal effects;
                                             
 (3) Damages to accommodations or rental vehicles; or
                                             
 (4) Sickness, accident, disability or death occurring during
travel.
                                             
 (b) Travel insurance shall not include major medical plans, which
provide comprehensive medical protection for travelers with trips
lasting 12 months or longer, including those persons working overseas or
military personnel being deployed.
                                             
 VI. "Travel retailer'' means a business entity that makes, arranges,
or offers travel services and may offer and disseminate travel insurance
as a service to its customers on behalf of and under the direction of a
limited lines travel insurance producer.

**Source.** 2015, 62:1, eff. Aug. 31, 2015.

### Section 402-L:2

 **402-L:2 Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. Pursuant to the provisions of RSA 402-J, the commissioner may
issue to an individual or business entity that has filed with the
commissioner an application for such limited license, a limited lines
travel insurance producer license, which authorizes the limited lines
travel insurance producer to sell, solicit or negotiate travel insurance
through a licensed insurer.
                                             
 II. (a) A travel retailer may offer and disseminate travel insurance
on behalf of and under a limited lines travel insurance producer
business entity license only if the following conditions are met:
                                             
 (1) The limited lines travel insurance producer or travel
retailer provides to purchasers of travel insurance:
                                             
 (A) A description of the material terms or the actual
material terms of the insurance coverage;
                                             
 (B) A description of the process for filing a claim;
                                             
 (C) A description of the review or cancellation process for
the travel insurance policy; and
                                             
 (D) The identity and contact information of the insurer and
the limited lines travel insurance producer.
                                             
 (2) At the time of licensure, the limited lines travel
insurance producer establishes and maintains a register, on a form
prescribed by the commissioner, listing each travel retailer that offers
travel insurance on the limited lines travel insurance producer's
behalf. The register shall be maintained and updated annually by the
limited lines travel insurance producer and shall include the name,
address, and contact information of the travel retailer and an officer
or person who directs or controls the travel retailer's operations, and
the travel retailer's federal tax identification number. The limited
lines travel insurance producer shall submit such register to the
insurance department upon request. The limited lines travel insurance
producer shall also certify, upon request, that the registered travel
retailer complies with 18 U.S.C. section 1033.
                                             
 (3) The designated responsible producer, president, secretary,
treasurer, and any other officer or person who directs or controls the
limited lines travel insurance producer's insurance operations has
complied with the fingerprinting requirements applicable to insurance
producers in the resident state of the limited lines travel insurance
producer.
                                             
 (4) The limited lines travel insurance producer has paid all
applicable insurance producer licensing fees.
                                             
 (5) The limited lines travel insurance producer requires each
employee and authorized representative of the travel retailer whose
duties include offering and disseminating travel insurance to receive a
program of instruction or training, which may be subject to review by
the commissioner. The training material shall, at a minimum, contain
instructions on the types of insurance offered, ethical sales practices,
and required disclosures to prospective customers.
                                             
 (b) Limited lines travel insurance producers, and those
registered under its license, are exempt from all examination
requirements.
                                             
 III. Any travel retailer offering or disseminating travel insurance
shall make available to prospective purchasers, brochures or other
written materials that:
                                             
 (a) Provide the identity and contact information of the insurer
and the limited lines travel insurance producer;
                                             
 (b) Explain that the purchase of travel insurance is not required
in order to purchase any other product or service from the travel
retailer; and
                                             
 (c) Explain that an unlicensed travel retailer, is permitted to
provide general information about the insurance offered by the travel
retailer, including a description of the coverage and price, but is not
qualified or authorized to answer technical questions about the terms
and conditions of the insurance offered by the travel retailer or to
evaluate the adequacy of the customer's existing insurance coverage.
                                             
 IV. A travel retailer's employee, or authorized representative, who
is not licensed as an insurance producer shall not:
                                             
 (a) Evaluate or interpret the technical terms, benefits, and
conditions of the offered travel insurance coverage;
                                             
 (b) Evaluate or provide advice concerning a prospective
purchaser's existing insurance coverage; or
                                             
 (c) Hold itself out as a licensed insurer, licensed producer, or
insurance expert.

**Source.** 2015, 62:1, eff. Aug. 31, 2015.

### Section 402-L:3

 **402-L:3 Registration; Policy. –**
                                             
 I. A travel retailer whose insurance-related activities, and those
of its employees and authorized representative, are limited to offering
and disseminating travel insurance on behalf of and under the direction
of a limited lines travel insurance producer meeting the conditions
stated under this chapter, is authorized to do so and receive related
compensation, upon registration by the limited lines travel insurance
producer as described in RSA 402-L:2.
                                             
 II. Travel insurance under this chapter may be provided under an
individual policy or under a group or master policy.

**Source.** 2015, 62:1, eff. Aug. 31, 2015.

### Section 402-L:4

 **402-L:4 Responsibility. –** As the insurer designee, the limited
lines travel insurance producer shall be responsible for the acts of the
travel retailer and shall use reasonable means to ensure compliance by
the travel retailer with the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 62:1, eff. Aug. 31, 2015.

### Section 402-L:5

 **402-L:5 Enforcement. –** The limited lines travel insurance
producer and any travel retailer offering and disseminating travel
insurance on behalf of the limited license travel insurance producer and
under the limited lines travel insurance producers license shall be
subject to RSA 417:4, VIII(e), RSA 402:J:12, and RSA 402-J:15.

**Source.** 2015, 62:1, eff. Aug. 31, 2015.
