---
title: 'CHAPTER 403-C DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL TRANSACTIONS'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 403-C
                                             
DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL TRANSACTIONS
-----------------------------------

### Section 403-C:1

 **403-C:1 Report. –**
                                             
 I. Every insurer domiciled in this state shall file a report with
the commissioner disclosing material acquisitions and dispositions of
assets or material nonrenewals, cancellations, or revisions of ceded
reinsurance agreements unless such acquisitions and dispositions of
assets or material nonrenewals, cancellations or revisions of ceded
reinsurance agreements have been submitted to the commissioner for
review, approval, or information purposes pursuant to other provisions
of the insurance code, laws, rules, or other requirements.
                                             
 II. The report required in paragraph I is due within 15 days after
the end of the calendar month in which any of the transactions specified
in paragraph I occurs.
                                             
 III. One complete copy of the report, including any exhibits or
other attachments, shall be filed with:
                                             
 (a) The insurance department of the insurer's state of domicile;
and
                                             
 (b) The National Association of Insurance Commissioners.
                                             
 IV. All reports obtained by or disclosed to the commissioner
pursuant to this chapter shall be given confidential treatment and shall
not be subject to subpoena and shall not be made public by the
commissioner, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, or
any other person, except to insurance departments of other states,
without the prior written consent of the insurer to which it pertains
unless the commissioner, after giving the insurer who would be affected
notice and an opportunity to be heard, determines that the interest of
policyholders, shareholders, or the public will be served by the
publication, in which event the commissioner may publish all or any part
in the manner the commissioner may deem appropriate.

**Source.** 1995, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 403-C:2

 **403-C:2 Acquisitions and Dispositions of Assets. –**
                                             
 I. No acquisitions or dispositions of assets need be reported
pursuant to RSA 403-C:1 if the acquisitions or dispositions are not
material. For purposes of this chapter, a material acquisition (or the
aggregate of any series of related acquisitions during any 30-day
period) or disposition (or the aggregate of any series of related
dispositions during any 30-day period) is one that is nonrecurring and
not in the ordinary course of business and involves more than 5 percent
of the reporting insurer's total admitted assets as reported in its most
recent statutory statement filed with the insurance department of the
insurer's state of domicile.
                                             
 II. (a) Asset acquisitions subject to this chapter include every
purchase, lease, exchange, merger, consolidation, succession, or other
acquisition other than the construction or development of real property
by or for the reporting insurer or the acquisition of materials for such
purpose.
                                             
 (b) Asset dispositions subject to this chapter include every
sale, lease, exchange, merger, consolidation, mortgage, hypothecation,
assignment (whether for the benefit of creditors or otherwise),
abandonment, destruction, or other disposition.
                                             
 III. (a) The following information is required to be disclosed in
any report of a material acquisition or disposition of assets:
                                             
 (1) Date of the transaction.
                                             
 (2) Manner of acquisition or disposition.
                                             
 (3) Description of the assets involved.
                                             
 (4) Nature and amount of the consideration given or received.
                                             
 (5) Purpose of, or reason for, the transaction.
                                             
 (6) Manner by which the amount of consideration was
determined.
                                             
 (7) Gain or loss recognized or realized as a result of the
transaction.
                                             
 (8) Name of each person from whom the assets were acquired or
to whom they were disposed.
                                             
 (b) Insurers are required to report material acquisitions and
dispositions on a nonconsolidated basis unless the insurer is part of a
consolidated group of insurers which utilizes a pooling arrangement or
100 percent reinsurance agreement that affects the solvency and
integrity of the insurer's reserves and the insurer ceded substantially
all of its direct and assumed business to the pool. An insurer is deemed
to have ceded substantially all of its direct and assumed business to a
pool if the insurer has less than 
                                             $1,000,000 total direct plus assumed
written premiums during a calendar year that are not subject to a
pooling arrangement and the net income of the business not subject to
the pooling arrangement represents less than 5 percent of the insurer's
capital and surplus.

**Source.** 1995, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 403-C:3

 **403-C:3 Nonrenewals, Cancellations, or Revisions of Ceded
Reinsurance Agreements. –**
                                             
 I. (a) No nonrenewals, cancellations, or revisions of ceded
reinsurance agreements need be reported pursuant to RSA 403-C:1 if the
nonrenewals, cancellations, or revisions are not material. For purposes
of this chapter, a material nonrenewal, cancellation, or revision is one
that affects:
                                             
 (1) As respects property and casualty business, including
accident and health business written by a property and casualty
insurer:
                                             
 (A) More than 50 percent of the insurer's total ceded
written premium; or
                                             
 (B) More than 50 percent of the insurer's total ceded
indemnity and loss adjustment reserves.
                                             
 (2) As respects life, annuity, and accident and health
business: more than 50 percent of the total reserve credit taken for
business ceded, on an annualized basis, as indicated in the insurer's
most recent annual statement.
                                             
 (3) As respects either property and casualty or life, annuity,
and accident and health business, either of the following events shall
constitute a material revision which must be reported:
                                             
 (A) An authorized reinsurer representing more than 10
percent of a total cession is replaced by one or more unauthorized
reinsurers; or
                                             
 (B) Previously established collateral requirements have
been reduced or waived as respects one or more unauthorized reinsurers
representing collectively more than 10 percent of a total cession.
                                             
 (b) However, no filing shall be required if:
                                             
 (1) As respects property and casualty business, including
accident and health business written by a property and casualty insurer,
the insurer's total ceded written premium represents, on an annualized
basis, less than 10 percent of its total written premium for direct and
assumed business; or
                                             
 (2) As respects life, annuity, and accident and health
business, the total reserve credit taken for business ceded represents,
on an annualized basis, less than 10 percent of the statutory reserve
requirement prior to any cession.
                                             
 II. (a) The following information is required to be disclosed in any
report of a material nonrenewal, cancellation, or revision of ceded
reinsurance agreements:
                                             
 (1) Effective date of the nonrenewal, cancellation, or
revision.
                                             
 (2) The description of the transaction with an identification
of its initiator.
                                             
 (3) Purpose of, or reason for, the transaction.
                                             
 (4) If applicable, the identity of the replacement
reinsurers.
                                             
 (b) Insurers are required to report all material nonrenewals,
cancellations, or revisions of ceded reinsurance agreements on a
nonconsolidated basis unless the insurer is part of a consolidated group
of insurers which utilizes a pooling arrangement or 100 percent
reinsurance agreement that affects the solvency and integrity of the
insurer's reserves and the insurer ceded substantially all of its direct
and assumed business to the pool. An insurer is deemed to have ceded
substantially all of its direct and assumed business to a pool if the
insurer has less than 
                                             $1,000,000 total direct plus assumed written
premiums during a calendar year that are not subject to a pooling
arrangement and the net income of the business not subject to the
pooling arrangement represents less than 5 percent of the insurer's
capital and surplus.

**Source.** 1995, 146:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.
