---
title: 'CHAPTER 403-E CHARITABLE GIFT ANNUITIES EXEMPTION'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 403-E
                                             
CHARITABLE GIFT ANNUITIES EXEMPTION
-----------------------------------

### Section 403-E:1

 **403-E:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "American Council on Gift Annuities'' means the organization
which on the effective date of this chapter has its principal place of
business in Indianapolis, Indiana, and which advises charitable
organizations and promulgates recommended standards regarding the
provision of charitable gift annuities.
                                             
 II. "Charitable gift annuity'' means a transfer of cash or other
property by a donor to a charitable organization in return for an
annuity payable over one or 2 lives, under which the actuarial value of
the annuity is less than the value of the cash or other property
transferred and the difference in value constitutes a charitable
deduction for federal tax purposes.
                                             
 III. "Charitable organization'' means an entity described by:
                                             
 (a) Section 501(c) (3), Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C.
section 501(c) (3)); or
                                             
 (b) Section 170(c), Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C.
section 170(c)).
                                             
 IV. "Director'' means the director of charitable trusts, serving
pursuant to RSA 7:20.
                                             
 V. "Qualified charitable gift annuity'' means a charitable gift
annuity described by section 501(m)(5), Internal Revenue Code of 1986
(26 U.S.C. section 501(m)(5)), and section 514(c)(5), Internal Revenue
Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 514(c)(5)), that is issued by a charitable
organization that on the date of the annuity agreement:
                                             
 (a) Has a minimum of 
                                             $300,000 in unrestricted cash, cash
equivalents, or publicly traded securities, exclusive of the assets
funding the annuity agreement;
                                             
 (b) Has been in continuous operation for at least 3 years or is a
successor or affiliate of a charitable organization that has been in
continuous operation for at least 3 years;
                                             
 (c) Issues charitable gift annuities with payout ratios no
greater than recommended by the American Council on Gift Annuities at
the time of issuance;
                                             
 (d) Retains 100 percent of the contribution made in exchange for
each charitable gift annuity, increased by earnings on the contribution
and decreased by annuity payments and expenses properly allocated to the
annuity, until the annuity is terminated; and
                                             
 (e) Invests contributions made in exchange for charitable gift
annuities solely in conformance with article 9 of RSA 564-B, general
standards of prudent investment.

**Source.** 1999, 68:1. 2004, 130:5, eff. Oct. 1, 2004.

### Section 403-E:2

 **403-E:2 Qualified Charitable Gift Annuity is Not Insurance. –**
                                             
 I. The issuance of a qualified charitable gift annuity does not
constitute engaging in the business of insurance in this state.
                                             
 II. A charitable gift annuity issued before the effective date of
this chapter shall be deemed to be a qualified charitable gift annuity
for purposes of this chapter, and the issuance of that charitable gift
annuity shall not constitute engaging in the business of insurance in
this state, if the charitable organization issuing such annuity has
given notice to the director pursuant to RSA 403-E:3, II(a).

**Source.** 1999, 68:1, eff. May 28, 1999.

### Section 403-E:3

 **403-E:3 Disclosures; Notification; Recertification. –**
                                             
 I. (a) When entering into an agreement for a qualified charitable
gift annuity, the charitable organization shall disclose to the donor in
writing in the annuity agreement that a qualified charitable gift
annuity is not insurance under the laws of this state and is not subject
to regulation by the insurance department or protected by an insurance
guaranty association. The following information shall also be similarly
disclosed:
                                             
 (1) The value of the property being transferred.
                                             
 (2) The amount of the annuity to be paid.
                                             
 (3) The manner in which, and the intervals at which, the
payment is to be made.
                                             
 (4) The date that payments are to begin.
                                             
 (b) The disclosures required by this paragraph shall appear on
the first page of the annuity agreement in a print size no smaller than
that employed in the annuity agreement generally.
                                             
 II. (a) A charitable organization that issues qualified charitable
gift annuities shall notify the director in writing by the later of 90
days after the effective date of this chapter or the date on which it
enters into the organization's first qualified charitable gift annuity
agreement. The notice shall:
                                             
 (1) Be signed by an officer or director of the organization;
                                             
 (2) Identify the organization; and
                                             
 (3) Certify that:
                                             
 (A) The organization is a charitable organization; and
                                             
 (B) The annuities issued by the organization shall be
limited to qualified charitable gift annuities, as defined in RSA
403-E:1, V.
                                             
 (b) Subsequently, each charitable organization that issues
qualified charitable annuities shall, as part of its report submitted to
the director pursuant to RSA 7:28, II and III, annually recertify that
the annuities issued by the organization shall be limited to qualified
charitable gift annuities, as defined in RSA 403-E:1, V.
                                             
 (c) The organization shall not be required to submit additional
information except to determine appropriate penalties that may be
applicable under RSA 403-E:4.

**Source.** 1999, 68:1, eff. May 28, 1999.

### Section 403-E:4

 **403-E:4 Failure to Comply. –** The failure of a charitable
organization to comply with the requirements imposed under RSA 403-E:3
of this chapter shall not prevent a charitable gift annuity that
otherwise meets the requirements of this chapter from constituting a
qualified charitable gift annuity. The director shall enforce
performance of RSA 403-E:3 by sending a letter by certified mail, return
receipt requested, demanding that the charitable organization comply
with the requirements of RSA 403-E:3. The director may fine the
charitable organization in an amount not to exceed 
                                             $1,000 per qualified
charitable gift annuity agreement issued until such time as the
charitable organization complies with RSA 403-E:3.

**Source.** 1999, 68:1, eff. May 28, 1999.

### Section 403-E:5

 **403-E:5 Not Unfair or Deceptive Trade Practice. –** The issuance
of a qualified charitable gift annuity shall not constitute a violation
of RSA 417.

**Source.** 1999, 68:1, eff. May 28, 1999.
