---
title: 'CHAPTER 404-F RISK-BASED CAPITAL (RBC) FOR INSURERS'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 404-F
                                             
RISK-BASED CAPITAL (RBC) FOR INSURERS
-------------------------------------

### Section 404-F:1

 **404-F:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Adjusted RBC report'' means an RBC report which has been
adjusted by the commissioner in accordance with RSA 404-F:2, V.
                                             
 II. "Corrective order'' means an order issued by the commissioner
specifying corrective actions which the commissioner has determined are
required.
                                             
 III. "Domestic insurer'' means any insurance company domiciled in
this state.
                                             
 IV. "Foreign insurer'' means any insurance company which is licensed
to do business in this state under title XXXVII but is not domiciled in
this state.
                                             
 IV-a. "Health organization'' means a health maintenance
organization, limited health service organization, dental or vision
plan, health service corporation, or other managed care organization
licensed under title XXXVII.
                                             
 V. "NAIC'' means the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners.
                                             
 VI. "Life and/or health insurer'' means any insurance company
licensed under title XXXVII writing life, accident and health insurance,
health maintenance organizations, limited health service organizations,
dental or vision plans, health service corporations, or a licensed
property and casualty insurer writing only accident and health
insurance.
                                             
 VII. "Property and casualty insurer'' means any insurance company
licensed under title XXXVII but shall not include monoline mortgage
guaranty insurers, financial guaranty insurers, and title insurers.
                                             
 VIII. "Negative trend'' means, with respect to a life and/or health
insurer, negative trend over a period of time, as determined in
accordance with the "trend test calculation'' included in the RBC
instructions.
                                             
 IX. "RBC instructions'' means the RBC report including risk-based
capital instructions adopted by the NAIC, as such RBC instructions may
be amended by the NAIC from time to time in accordance with the
procedures adopted by the NAIC.
                                             
 X. "RBC level'' means an insurer's company action level RBC,
regulatory action level RBC, authorized control level RBC, or mandatory
control level RBC where:
                                             
 (a) "Company action level RBC'' means, with respect to any
insurer, the product of 2.0 and its authorized control level RBC;
                                             
 (b) "Regulatory action level RBC'' means the product of 1.5 and
its authorized control level RBC;
                                             
 (c) "Authorized control level RBC'' means the number determined
under the risk-based capital formula in accordance with the RBC
instructions;
                                             
 (d) "Mandatory control level RBC'' means the product of .70 and
the authorized control level RBC.
                                             
 XI. "RBC plan'' means a comprehensive financial plan containing the
elements specified in RSA 404-F:3, II. If the commissioner rejects the
RBC plan, and it is revised by the insurer, with or without the
commissioner's recommendation, the plan shall be called the "revised RBC
plan.''
                                             
 XII. "RBC report'' means the report required in RSA 404-F:2.
                                             
 XIII. "Total adjusted capital'' means the sum of:
                                             
 (a) An insurer's statutory capital and surplus as determined in
accordance with statutory accounting applicable to the annual financial
statements required to be filed; and
                                             
 (b) Such other items, if any, as the RBC instructions may
provide.

**Source.** 1995, 113:1. 2000, 207:1, 2, eff. July 29, 2000.

### Section 404-F:2

 **404-F:2 RBC Reports. –**
                                             
 I. Every domestic insurer shall, on or prior to each March 1 (the
"filing date''), prepare and submit to the commissioner a report of its
RBC levels as of the end of the calendar year just ended, in a form and
containing such information as is required by the RBC instructions. In
addition, every domestic insurer shall file its RBC report:
                                             
 (a) With the NAIC in accordance with the RBC instructions; and
                                             
 (b) With the insurance commissioner in any state in which the
insurer is authorized to do business, if the insurance commissioner has
notified the insurer of its request in writing, in which case the
insurer shall file its RBC report not later than the later of:
                                             
 (1) Fifteen days from the receipt of notice to file its RBC
report with that state; or
                                             
 (2) The filing date.
                                             
 II. A life and/or health insurer's RBC shall be determined in
accordance with the formula set forth in the RBC instructions. The
formula shall take into account, and may adjust for the covariance
between:
                                             
 (a) The risk with respect to the insurer's assets;
                                             
 (b) The risk of adverse insurance experience with respect to the
insurer's liabilities and obligations;
                                             
 (c) The interest rate risk with respect to the insurer's
business; and
                                             
 (d) All other business risks and such other relevant risks as are
set forth in the RBC instructions.
                                             
 III. A property and casualty insurer's RBC shall be determined in
accordance with the formula set forth in the RBC instructions. The
formula shall take into account, and may adjust for the covariance
between:
                                             
 (a) Asset risk;
                                             
 (b) Credit risk;
                                             
 (c) Underwriting risk; and
                                             
 (d) All other business risks and such other relevant risks as are
set forth in the RBC instructions;
                                             
determined in each case by applying the factors in the manner set forth
in the RBC instructions.
                                             
 IV. An excess of capital over the amount produced by the risk-based
capital requirement contained in this chapter and the formulas,
schedules, and instructions referenced in this chapter is desirable in
the business of insurance. Accordingly, insurers should seek to maintain
capital above the RBC levels required by this chapter. Additional
capital is used and useful in the insurance business and helps to secure
an insurer against various risks inherent in, or affecting, the business
of insurance and not accounted for or only partially measured by the
risk-based capital requirements contained in this chapter.
                                             
 V. If a domestic insurer files an RBC report which in the judgment
of the commissioner is inaccurate, then the commissioner shall adjust
the RBC report to correct the inaccuracy and shall notify the insurer of
the adjustment. The notice shall contain a statement of the reason for
the adjustment. An RBC report as so adjusted is referred to as an
"adjusted RBC report.''

**Source.** 1995, 113:1. 2000, 207:3, eff. July 29, 2000.

### Section 404-F:3

 **404-F:3 Company Action Level Event. –**
                                             
 I. "Company action level event'' means any of the following events:
                                             
 (a) The filing of an RBC report by an insurer which indicates
that:
                                             
 (1) The insurer's total adjusted capital is greater than or
equal to its regulatory action level RBC but less than its company
action level RBC;
                                             
 (2) If a life and/or health insurer, the insurer has total
adjusted capital which is greater than or equal to its company action
level RBC but less than the product of its authorized control level RBC
and 3.0 and has a negative trend; or
                                             
 (3) If a property and casualty insurer, the insurer has total
adjusted capital which is greater than or equal to its company action
level RBC but less than the product of its authorized control level RBC
and 3.0 and triggers the trend test determined in accordance with the
trend test calculation included in the property and casualty RBC
instructions;
                                             
 (b) The notification by the commissioner to the insurer of an
adjusted RBC report that indicates an event in subparagraph (a),
provided the insurer does not challenge the adjusted RBC report under
RSA 404-F:7; or
                                             
 (c) If, pursuant to RSA 404-F:7, an insurer challenges an
adjusted RBC report that indicates the event in subparagraph (a), the
notification by the commissioner to the insurer that the commissioner
has, after a hearing, rejected the insurer's challenge.
                                             
 II. In the event of a company action level event, the insurer shall
prepare and submit to the commissioner an RBC plan which shall:
                                             
 (a) Identify the conditions which contribute to the company
action level event;
                                             
 (b) Contain proposals of corrective actions which the insurer
intends to take and would be expected to result in the elimination of
the company action level event;
                                             
 (c) Provide projections of the insurer's financial results in the
current year and at least the 4 succeeding years, both in the absence of
proposed corrective actions and giving effect to the proposed corrective
actions, including projections of statutory operating income, net
income, capital and/or surplus. The projections for both new and renewal
business might include separate projections for each major line of
business and separately identify each significant income, expense and
benefit component;
                                             
 (d) Identify the key assumptions impacting the insurer's
projections and the sensitivity of the projections to the assumptions;
and
                                             
 (e) Identify the quality of, and problems associated with, the
insurer's business, including but not limited to its assets, anticipated
business growth and associated surplus strain, extraordinary exposure to
risk, mix of business and use of reinsurance, if any, in each case.
                                             
 III. The RBC plan shall be submitted:
                                             
 (a) Within 45 days of the company action level event; or
                                             
 (b) If the insurer challenges an adjusted RBC report pursuant to
RSA 404-F:7, within 45 days after notification to the insurer that the
commissioner has, after a hearing, rejected the insurer's challenge.
                                             
 IV. Within 60 days after the submission by an insurer of an RBC plan
to the commissioner, the commissioner shall notify the insurer whether
the RBC plan shall be implemented or is, in the judgment of the
commissioner, unsatisfactory. If the commissioner determines the RBC
plan is unsatisfactory, the notification to the insurer shall set forth
the reasons for the determination, and may set forth proposed revisions
which will render the RBC plan satisfactory, in the judgment of the
commissioner. Upon notification from the commissioner, the insurer shall
prepare a revised RBC plan, which may incorporate by reference any
revisions proposed by the commissioner, and shall submit the revised RBC
plan to the commissioner:
                                             
 (a) Within 45 days after the notification from the commissioner;
or
                                             
 (b) If the insurer challenges the notification from the
commissioner under RSA 404-F:7, within 45 days after a notification to
the insurer that the commissioner has, after a hearing, rejected the
insurer's challenge.
                                             
 V. In the event of a notification by the commissioner to an insurer
that the insurer's RBC plan or revised RBC plan is unsatisfactory, the
commissioner may at the commissioner's discretion, subject to the
insurer's right to a hearing under RSA 404-F:7, specify in the
notification that the notification constitutes a regulatory action level
event.
                                             
 VI. Every domestic insurer that files an RBC plan or revised RBC
plan with the commissioner shall file a copy of the RBC plan or revised
RBC plan with the insurance commissioner in any state in which the
insurer is authorized to do business if:
                                             
 (a) Such state has an RBC provision substantially similar to RSA
404-F:8, I; and
                                             
 (b) The insurance commissioner of that state has notified the
insurer of its request for the filing in writing, in which case the
insurer shall file a copy of the RBC plan or revised RBC plan in that
state no later than the later of:
                                             
 (1) Fifteen days after the receipt of notice to file a copy of
its RBC plan or revised RBC plan with the state; or
                                             
 (2) The date on which the RBC plan or revised RBC plan is
filed under RSA 404-F:3, III and IV.

**Source.** 1995, 113:1, eff. July 15, 1995. 2013, 110:1, eff. Aug. 24,
2013. 2016, 113:1, eff. July 19, 2016.

### Section 404-F:4

 **404-F:4 Regulatory Action Level Event. –**
                                             
 I. "Regulatory action level event'' means, with respect to any
insurer, any of the following events:
                                             
 (a) The filing of an RBC report by the insurer which indicates
that the insurer's total adjusted capital is greater than or equal to
its authorized control level RBC but less than its regulatory action
level RBC;
                                             
 (b) The notification by the commissioner to an insurer of an
adjusted RBC report that indicates the event in subparagraph (a),
provided the insurer does not challenge the adjusted RBC report under
RSA 404-F:7;
                                             
 (c) If, pursuant to RSA 404-F:7, the insurer challenges an
adjusted RBC report that indicates the event in subparagraph (a), the
notification by the commissioner to the insurer that the commissioner
has, after a hearing, rejected the insurer's challenge;
                                             
 (d) The failure of the insurer to file an RBC report by the
filing date, unless the insurer has provided an explanation for such
failure which is satisfactory to the commissioner and has cured the
failure within 10 days after the filing date;
                                             
 (e) The failure of the insurer to submit an RBC plan to the
commissioner within the time period set forth in RSA 404-F:3, III;
                                             
 (f) Notification by the commissioner to the insurer that:
                                             
 (1) The RBC plan or revised RBC plan submitted by the insurer
is, in the judgment of the commissioner, unsatisfactory; and
                                             
 (2) Such notification constitutes a regulatory action level
event with respect to the insurer, provided the insurer has not
challenged the determination under RSA 404-F:7;
                                             
 (g) If, pursuant to RSA 404-F:7 the insurer challenges a
determination by the commissioner under subparagraph (f), the
notification by the commissioner to the insurer that the commissioner
has, after a hearing, rejected such challenge;
                                             
 (h) Notification by the commissioner to the insurer that the
insurer has failed to adhere to its RBC plan or revised RBC plan, but
only if such failure has a substantial adverse effect on the ability of
the insurer to eliminate the company action level event in accordance
with its RBC plan or revised RBC plan and the commissioner has so stated
in the notification, provided the insurer has not challenged the
determination under RSA 404-F:7; or
                                             
 (i) If, pursuant to RSA 404-F:7 the insurer challenges a
determination by the commissioner under subparagraph (h), the
notification by the commissioner to the insurer that the commissioner
has, after a hearing, rejected the challenge.
                                             
 II. In the event of a regulatory action level event the commissioner
shall:
                                             
 (a) Require the insurer to prepare and submit an RBC plan or, if
applicable, a revised RBC plan;
                                             
 (b) Perform such examination or analysis as the commissioner
deems necessary of the assets, liabilities, and operations of the
insurer including a review of its RBC plan or revised RBC plan; and
                                             
 (c) Subsequent to the examination or analysis, issue an order
specifying such corrective actions as the commissioner shall determine
are required (a "corrective order'').
                                             
 III. In determining corrective actions, the commissioner may take
into account such factors as are deemed relevant with respect to the
insurer based upon the commissioner's examination or analysis of the
assets, liabilities, and operations of the insurer, including, but not
limited to, the results of any sensitivity tests undertaken pursuant to
the RBC instructions. The RBC plan or revised RBC plan shall be
submitted:
                                             
 (a) Within 45 days after the occurrence of the regulatory action
level event;
                                             
 (b) If the insurer challenges an adjusted RBC report pursuant to
RSA 404-F:7 and the challenge is not frivolous in the judgment of the
commissioner, within 45 days after the notification to the insurer that
the commissioner has, after a hearing, rejected the insurer's challenge;
or
                                             
 (c) If the insurer challenges a revised RBC plan pursuant to RSA
404-F:7 and the challenge is not frivolous in the judgment of the
commissioner, within 45 days after the notification to the insurer that
the commissioner has, after a hearing rejected the insurer's challenge.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner may retain actuaries and investment experts and
other consultants as may be necessary in the judgment of the
commissioner to review the insurer's RBC plan or revised RBC plan,
examine or analyze the assets, liabilities, and operations of the
insurer and formulate the corrective order with respect to the insurer.
The fees, costs, and expenses relating to consultants shall be borne by
the affected insurer or such other party as directed by the
commissioner.

**Source.** 1995, 113:1, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 404-F:5

 **404-F:5 Authorized Control Level Event. –**
                                             
 I. "Authorized control level event'' means any of the following
events:
                                             
 (a) The filing of an RBC report by the insurer which indicates
that the insurer's total adjusted capital is greater than or equal to
its mandatory control level RBC but less than its authorized control
level RBC;
                                             
 (b) The notification by the commissioner to the insurer of an
adjusted RBC report that indicates the event in subparagraph (a),
provided the insurer does not challenge the adjusted RBC report under
RSA 404-F:7;
                                             
 (c) If, pursuant to RSA 404-F:7, the insurer challenges an
adjusted RBC report that indicates the event in subparagraph (a),
notification by the commissioner to the insurer that the commissioner
has, after a hearing, rejected the insurer's challenge;
                                             
 (d) The failure of the insurer to respond, in a manner
satisfactory to the commissioner, to a corrective order, provided the
insurer has not challenged the corrective order under RSA 404-F:7; or
                                             
 (e) If the insurer has challenged a corrective order under RSA
404-F:7 and the commissioner has, after a hearing, rejected the
challenge or modified the corrective order, the failure of the insurer
to respond, in a manner satisfactory to the commissioner, to the
corrective order subsequent to rejection or modification by the
commissioner.
                                             
 II. In the event of an authorized control level event with respect
to an insurer, the commissioner shall:
                                             
 (a) Take such actions as are required under RSA 404-F:4 regarding
an insurer with respect to which a regulatory action level event has
occurred; or
                                             
 (b) If the commissioner deems it to be in the best interests of
the policyholders and creditors of the insurer and of the public, take
such actions as are necessary to cause the insurer to be placed under
regulatory control under RSA 402-C. In the event the commissioner takes
such actions, the authorized control level event shall be deemed
sufficient grounds for the commissioner to take action under RSA 402-C,
and the commissioner shall have the rights, powers, and duties with
respect to the insurer as are set forth in RSA 402-C. In the event the
commissioner takes actions under this paragraph pursuant to an adjusted
RBC report, the insurer shall be entitled to such protections as are
afforded to insurers under the provisions of RSA 402-C:11-14 pertaining
to summary proceedings.

**Source.** 1995, 113:1, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 404-F:6

 **404-F:6 Mandatory Control Level Event. –**
                                             
 I. "Mandatory control level event'' means any of the following
events:
                                             
 (a) The filing of an RBC report which indicates that the
insurer's total adjusted capital is less than its mandatory control
level RBC;
                                             
 (b) Notification by the commissioner to the insurer of an
adjusted RBC report that indicates the event in subparagraph (a),
provided the insurer does not challenge the adjusted RBC report under
RSA 404-F:7; or
                                             
 (c) If, pursuant to RSA 404-F:7, the insurer challenges an
adjusted RBC report that indicates the event in subparagraph (a),
notification by the commissioner to the insurer that the commissioner
has, after a hearing, rejected the insurer's challenge.
                                             
 II. In the event of a mandatory control level event:
                                             
 (a) With respect to a life and/or health insurer, the
commissioner shall take such actions as are necessary to place the
insurer under regulatory control under RSA 402-C. In that event, the
mandatory control level event shall be deemed sufficient grounds for the
commissioner to take action under RSA 402-C, and the commissioner shall
have the rights, powers, and duties with respect to the insurer as are
set forth in RSA 402-C. If the commissioner takes actions pursuant to an
adjusted RBC report, the insurer shall be entitled to the protections of
RSA 402-C:11-14 pertaining to summary proceedings. Notwithstanding any
of the foregoing, the commissioner may forego action for up to 90 days
after the mandatory control level event if the commissioner finds there
is a reasonable expectation that the mandatory control level event may
be eliminated within the 90-day period.
                                             
 (b) With respect to a property and casualty insurer, the
commissioner shall take such actions as are necessary to place the
insurer under regulatory control under RSA 402-C, or, in the case of an
insurer which is writing no business and which is running-off its
existing business, may allow the insurer to continue its runoff under
the supervision of the commissioner. In either event, the mandatory
control level event shall be deemed sufficient grounds for the
commissioner to take action under RSA 402-C and the commissioner shall
have the rights, powers, and duties with respect to the insurer as are
set forth in RSA 402-C. If the commissioner takes actions pursuant to an
adjusted RBC report, the insurer shall be entitled to the protections of
RSA 402-C:11-14 pertaining to summary proceedings. Notwithstanding any
of the foregoing, the commissioner may forego action for up to 90 days
after the mandatory control level event if the commissioner finds there
is a reasonable expectation that the mandatory control level event may
be eliminated within the 90-day period.

**Source.** 1995, 113:1. 2000, 207:4, eff. July 29, 2000.

### Section 404-F:7

 **404-F:7 Hearings. –** Upon:
                                             
 I. Notification to an insurer by the commissioner of an adjusted RBC
report; or
                                             
 II. Notification to an insurer by the commissioner that:
                                             
 (a) The insurer's RBC plan or revised RBC plan is unsatisfactory;
and
                                             
 (b) Such notification constitutes a regulatory action level event
with respect to such insurer; or
                                             
 III. Notification to any insurer by the commissioner that the
insurer has failed to adhere to its RBC plan or revised RBC plan and
that such failure has a substantial adverse effect on the ability of the
insurer to eliminate the company action level event with respect to the
insurer in accordance with its RBC plan or revised RBC plan; or
                                             
 IV. Notification to an insurer by the commissioner of a corrective
order with respect to the insurer,
                                             
the insurer shall have the right to a confidential departmental hearing,
on the record, at which the insurer may challenge any determination or
action by the commissioner. The insurer shall notify the commissioner of
its request for a hearing within 5 days after the notification by the
commissioner under paragraph I, II, III, or IV. Upon receipt of the
insurer's request for a hearing, the commissioner shall set a date for
the hearing, which date shall be no less than 10 nor more than 30 days
after the date of the insurer's request.

**Source.** 1995, 113:1, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 404-F:8

 **404-F:8 Confidentiality; Prohibition on Announcements; Prohibition
on Use in Ratemaking. –**
                                             
 I. All RBC reports, to the extent the information therein is not
required to be set forth in a publicly available annual statement
schedule, and RBC plans, including the results or report of any
examination or analysis of an insurer performed pursuant hereto and any
corrective order issued by the commissioner pursuant to examination or
analysis, with respect to any domestic insurer or foreign insurer which
are filed with the commissioner constitute information that might be
damaging to the insurer if made available to its competitors, and
therefore shall be kept confidential by the commissioner. This
information shall not be made public or be subject to subpoena, other
than by the commissioner and then only for the purpose of enforcement
actions taken by the commissioner pursuant to this chapter or any other
provision of the insurance laws of this state.
                                             
 II. It is the judgment of the legislature that the comparison of an
insurer's total adjusted capital to any of its RBC levels is a
regulatory tool which may indicate the need for possible corrective
action with respect to the insurer, and is not intended as a means to
rank insurers generally. Therefore, except as otherwise required under
the provisions of this chapter, the making, publishing, disseminating,
circulating, or placing before the public, or causing, directly or
indirectly to be made, published, disseminated, circulated, or placed
before the public, in a newspaper, magazine, or other publication, or in
the form of a notice, circular, pamphlet, letter, or poster, or over any
radio or television station, or in any other way, an advertisement,
announcement, or statement containing an assertion, representation, or
statement with regard to the RBC levels of any insurer, or of any
component derived in the calculation, by any insurer, agent, broker, or
other person engaged in any manner in the insurance business would be
misleading and is therefore prohibited; provided, however, that if any
materially false statement with respect to the comparison regarding an
insurer's total adjusted capital to its RBC levels, or any of them, or
an inappropriate comparison of any other amount to the insurer's RBC
levels is published in any written publication and the insurer is able
to demonstrate to the commissioner with substantial proof the falsity of
such statement, or the inappropriateness, as the case may be, then the
insurer may publish an announcement in a written publication if the sole
purpose of the announcement is to rebut the materially false statement.
                                             
 III. It is the further judgment of the legislature that the RBC
instructions, RBC reports, adjusted RBC reports, RBC plans and revised
RBC plans are intended solely for use by the commissioner in monitoring
the solvency of insurers and the need for possible corrective action
with respect to insurers and shall not be used by the commissioner for
ratemaking nor considered or introduced as evidence in any rate
proceeding nor used by the commissioner to calculate or derive any
elements of an appropriate premium level or rate of return for any line
of insurance which an insurer or any affiliate is authorized to write.

**Source.** 1995, 113:1, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 404-F:9

 **404-F:9 Supplemental Provisions; Rules; Exemption. –**
                                             
 I. The provisions of this chapter are supplemental to any other
provisions of the laws of this state, and shall not preclude or limit
any other powers or duties of the commissioner under such laws,
including, but not limited to, RSA 402-C.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may adopt reasonable rules, under RSA 541-A,
necessary for the implementation of this chapter.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may exempt from the application of this
chapter any domestic property and casualty insurer which:
                                             
 (a) Writes direct business only in this state;
                                             
 (b) Writes direct annual premium of 
                                             $2,000,000 or less; and
                                             
 (c) Assumes no reinsurance in excess of 5 percent of direct
premium written.

**Source.** 1995, 113:1, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 404-F:10

 **404-F:10 Foreign Insurers. –**
                                             
 I. Any foreign insurer shall, upon the written request of the
commissioner, submit to the commissioner an RBC report as of the end of
the calendar year just ended the later of:
                                             
 (a) The date an RBC report would be required to be filed by a
domestic insurer under this chapter; or
                                             
 (b) Fifteen days after the request is received by the foreign
insurer. Any foreign insurer shall, at the written request of the
commissioner, promptly submit to the commissioner a copy of any RBC plan
that is filed with the insurance commissioner of any other state.
                                             
 II. In the event of a company action level event, regulatory action
level event, or authorized control level event with respect to any
foreign insurer as determined under the RBC statute applicable in the
state of domicile of the insurer or, if no RBC statute is in force in
that state, under the provisions of this chapter, if the insurance
commissioner of the state of domicile of the foreign insurer fails to
require the foreign insurer to file an RBC plan in the manner specified
under that state's RBC statute, or, if no RBC statute is in force in
that state, under RSA 404-F:3, the commissioner may require the foreign
insurer to file an RBC plan with the commissioner. In such event, the
failure of the foreign insurer to file an RBC plan with the commissioner
shall be grounds to order the insurer to cease and desist from writing
new insurance business in this state.
                                             
 III. In the event of a mandatory control level event with respect to
any foreign insurer, if no domiciliary receiver has been appointed with
respect to the foreign insurer under the rehabilitation and liquidation
statute applicable in the state of domicile of the foreign insurer, the
commissioner may make application to the superior court permitted under
RSA 402-C with respect to the liquidation of property of foreign
insurers found in this state, and the occurrence of the mandatory
control level event shall be considered adequate grounds for the
application.

**Source.** 1995, 113:1, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 404-F:11

 **404-F:11 Immunity. –** There shall be no liability on the part of,
and no cause of action shall arise against, the commissioner or the
insurance department or its employees or agents for any action taken by
them in the performance of their powers and duties under this chapter.

**Source.** 1995, 113:1, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 404-F:12

 **404-F:12 Severability Clause. –** If any provision of this
chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is
held invalid, such determination shall not affect the provisions or
applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to that end the provisions of this
chapter are severable.

**Source.** 1995, 113:1, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 404-F:13

 **404-F:13 Notices. –** All notices by the commissioner to an
insurer which may result in regulatory action hereunder shall be
effective upon dispatch if transmitted by registered or certified mail,
or in the case of any other transmission shall be effective upon the
insurer's receipt of such notice.

**Source.** 1995, 113:1, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 404-F:14

 **404-F:14 Phase-in Provision. –**
                                             
 I. For RBC reports required to be filed by life insurers with
respect to 1993, the following requirements shall apply in lieu of the
provisions of RSA 404-F:3, 4, 5, and 6:
                                             
 (a) In the event of a company action level event with respect to
a domestic insurer, the commissioner shall take no regulatory action
hereunder.
                                             
 (b) In the event of a regulatory action level event under RSA
404-F:4, I(a), (b), or (c) the commissioner shall take the actions
required under RSA 404-F:3.
                                             
 (c) In the event of a regulatory action level event under RSA
404-F:4, I(d), (e), (f), (g), (h), or (i) or an authorized control level
event, the commissioner shall take the actions required under RSA
404-F:4 with respect to the insurer.
                                             
 (d) In the event of a mandatory control level event with respect
to an insurer, the commissioner shall take the actions required under
RSA 404-F:5 with respect to the insurer.
                                             
 II. For RBC reports required to be filed by property and casualty
insurers with respect to 1994, the following requirements shall apply in
lieu of the provision of RSA 404-F:3, 4, 5, and 6:
                                             
 (a) In the event of a company action level event with respect to
a domestic insurer, the commissioner shall take no regulatory action
hereunder.
                                             
 (b) In the event of a regulatory action level event under RSA
404-F:4, I(a), (b), or (c) the commissioner shall take the actions
required under RSA 404-F:3.
                                             
 (c) In the event of a regulatory action level event under RSA
404-F:4, I(d), (e), (f), (g), (h), or (i) or an authorized control level
event, the commissioner shall take the actions required under RSA
404-F:4 with respect to the insurer.
                                             
 (d) In the event of a mandatory control level event with respect
to an insurer, the commissioner shall take the actions required under
RSA 404-F:5 with respect to the insurer.
                                             
 III. For RBC reports required to be filed by health organizations
with respect to 1999, the following requirements shall apply in lieu of
the provisions of RSA 404-F:3, 4, 5, and 6:
                                             
 (a) In the event of a company action level event with respect to
a health organization, the commissioner shall take no regulatory action
hereunder.
                                             
 (b) In the event of a regulatory action level event under RSA
404-F:4, I, (a), (b), or (c) the commissioner shall take the actions
required under RSA 404-F:3.
                                             
 (c) In the event of a regulatory action level event under RSA
404-F:4, I, (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), or (i) or an authorized control
level event, the commissioner shall take the actions required under RSA
404-F:4 with respect to the health organization.
                                             
 (d) In the event of a mandatory control level event with respect
to an insurer, the commissioner shall take the actions required under
RSA 404-F:5 with respect to the health organization.

**Source.** 1995, 113:1. 2000, 207:5, eff. July 29, 2000.
