---
title: 'CHAPTER 407-D AFTER MARKET PARTS'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 407-D
                                             
AFTER MARKET PARTS
------------------

### Section 407-D:1

 **407-D:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Insurer'' includes any person authorized to represent the
insurer with respect to a claim who is acting within the scope of the
person's authority.
                                             
 II. "Non-original manufacturer'' means any manufacturer other than
the original manufacturer of the part.
                                             
 III. "After market part'' means sheet metal or plastic parts which
generally constitute the exterior of a motor vehicle, including inner
and outer panels.

**Source.** 1988, 176:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1989.

### Section 407-D:2

 **407-D:2 Identification. –** All after market parts manufactured
after January 1, 1989, shall carry sufficient permanent identification
so as to identify its manufacturer. Such identification shall be
accessible to the extent possible after installation.

**Source.** 1988, 176:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1989.

### Section 407-D:3

 **407-D:3 Like Kind and Quality. –** No insurer shall require the
use of after market parts in the repair of an automobile unless the
after market part is at least equal in like kind and quality to the
original part in terms of fit, quality and performance. Insurers
specifying the use of after market parts shall consider the cost of any
modifications which may become necessary when making the repair.

**Source.** 1988, 176:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1989.

### Section 407-D:3-a


                                             


                                             [RSA 407-D:3-a effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **407-D:3-a Limitation on the Use of After Market Parts. –**
                                             
 I. No insurer of private passenger automobiles shall require or
specify the use of after market parts on:
                                             
 (a) Vehicles that have been placed in service within the
immediately preceding 2 years and that have 30,000 or fewer miles
recorded on the odometer; or
                                             
 (b) Leased vehicles if the lease provides that such parts will
cause a diminution of the residual value of such vehicle.
                                             
 II. In this section, "specify'' includes writing repair estimates on
the basis of the cost of after market parts or otherwise declining to
pay for the cost of original equipment manufacturer replacement parts.

**Source.** 2016, 186:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 407-D:4


                                             


                                             [RSA 407-D:4 effective until January 1, 2017; see also RSA 407-D:4 set
out below.
                                             ]

 **407-D:4 Disclosure. –**
                                             
 The insurer shall disclose to the claimant in writing, either on the
estimate or on a separate document attached to the estimate, the
following information in no smaller print than 10 point type:
                                             
 This estimate has been prepared based on the use of automobile
parts not made by the original manufacturer. Parts used in the repair of
your vehicle by other than the original manufacturer are required to be
at least equal in like kind and quality in terms of fit, quality and
performance to the original manufacturer parts they are replacing.
                                             
 All after market parts installed on the vehicle shall be clearly
identified on the estimate of such repair.


                                             [RSA 407-D:4 effective January 1, 2017; see also RSA 407-D:4 set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**407-D:4 Disclosure.** --
                                             
 I. The insurer shall disclose to the claimant in writing, either on
the estimate or on a separate document attached to the estimate, the
following information in no smaller print than 10 point type:
                                             
 This estimate has been prepared based on the use of automobile parts
not made by the original manufacturer. Parts used in the repair of your
vehicle by other than the original manufacturer are required to be at
least equal in like kind and quality in terms of fit, quality, and
performance to the original manufacturer parts they are replacing.
                                             
 II. All after market parts installed on the vehicle shall be clearly
identified on the estimate of such repair.
                                             
 III. Any insurer who fails to provide the precise statement in
paragraph I shall be prohibited from requesting or requiring the use of
after market parts.

**Source.** 1988, 176:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1989. 2016, 186:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2017.

### Section 407-D:5

 **407-D:5 Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. Any violation of this chapter by an insurer shall be deemed an
unfair insurance trade practice under RSA 417. Insurers violating any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to penalties under RSA
417:10.
                                             
 II. Any violation of this chapter by a manufacturer shall be deemed
an unfair or deceptive act or practice within the meaning of RSA 358-A:2
and may be enforced by the attorney general pursuant to RSA 358-A.

**Source.** 1988, 176:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1989.
