---
title: 'CHAPTER 407-B GROUP MARKETING OF MOTOR VEHICLE INSURANCE'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 407-B
                                             
GROUP MARKETING OF MOTOR VEHICLE INSURANCE
------------------------------------------

### Section 407-B:1

 **407-B:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to permit the
writing of motor vehicle insurance in this state on a group
merchandising basis subject to the conditions stated herein, to avoid
the application of any statute forbidding discrimination between
insureds as to the type of business defined herein and to set forth the
terms and conditions under which insurance on a group merchandising
basis may be written.

**Source.** 1969, 288:1, eff. Aug. 25, 1969.

### Section 407-B:2

 **407-B:2 Definitions. –** The following words, as used in this
chapter, unless the context otherwise requires or a different meaning is
specifically prescribed, shall have the following meanings:
                                             
 I. Group Motor Vehicle Insurance Defined. All motor vehicle
insurance which is offered by a licensed insurer in this state on a
group merchandising plan to an eligible group as herein defined shall be
deemed group motor vehicle insurance.
                                             
 II. Group Merchandising Defined. The marketing of group motor
vehicle insurance by a licensed insurer otherwise engaged in insuring
independent individual risks, to an eligible group on a guaranteed basis
under a single insurance program, without individual underwriting
selection or individual proof of insurability, shall be deemed group
merchandising. This method of marketing insurance is generally referred
to as "mass merchandising,'' "franchise merchandising,'' or "collective
merchandising''; but for purposes of this section shall hereinafter be
only referred to as "group merchandising'' or the "group plan'' as
herein defined.
                                             
 III. Eligible Group Defined. Any group to be eligible for group
merchandising shall have been in existence for more than 5 years prior
to the purchase of such insurance, and shall not have been organized
solely for the purpose of purchasing insurance. Such group shall have a
high degree of homogeneity and may include members of unincorporated and
corporated associations, labor unions, employees of a common employer
and similar principal agent relationships. No group will be eligible
unless it consists of 500 or more members with at least 75 percent
participation in the group plan. Where the group has national or other
affiliates, only the members located in the state of New Hampshire shall
be considered in determining the number and percentage of individuals
necessary for establishing group eligibility.
                                             
 IV. Eligible Members Defined. Eligible members shall include all
members in good standing in the group provided employees shall be
engaged in at least 24 hours employment per week, except as otherwise
provided in RSA 407-B:4. Officers and directors of an eligible group and
individual proprietors and partners shall be eligible for a group plan
and as such may be considered as employees.

**Source.** 1969, 288:1, eff. Aug. 25, 1969.

### Section 407-B:3

 **407-B:3 General Conditions. –** Group motor vehicle insurance may
be issued in this state provided the following conditions are complied
with:
                                             
 I. Mandatory participation in the group plan shall not be required
as a condition of employment, nor shall any member not participating in
the plan be coerced or discriminated against.
                                             
 II. The insurer and the group insured must accept all members or
employees who are eligible and wish to participate in the plan.
                                             
 III. Such a group plan shall include a provision that any member of
the group shall have the right to convert his group policy to an
individual standard policy of insurance in the same company as offered
by the insurer to the non-group insureds upon termination of his
connection with the group extending to him the same limits of coverage.
                                             
 IV. To qualify to write the group insurance herein defined, an
insurer must also be engaged in the business of writing the type of
coverage offered for insureds other than group and may not be organized
solely for the purpose of furnishing coverage to such groups.
                                             
 V. Each member of the group must be issued the same form of policy
as approved for issue in this state varying only as to the amounts of
insurance and limits of liability.
                                             
 VI. Insurance must be provided by individual policies to each member
of the group under an agreement whereby the premiums on such policies
shall be paid to the insurer periodically by the group with or without
payroll deductions.
                                             
 VII. An insurer may not cancel the insurance of an individual member
of the group except for the non-payment of premium by such member or
unless the insurance for the entire group is cancelled. In such cases
notice of cancellation as provided in like non-group policies shall be
given to each member.
                                             
 VIII. The plan shall provide that only those motor vehicles owned by
members of the group or their spouses or children, jointly or severally,
shall be eligible for coverage.
                                             
 IX. All individuals considered "Eligible Members'' as defined herein
shall be provided with this motor vehicle group insurance plan if they
wish it, provided one family member holds a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle.

**Source.** 1969, 288:1, eff. Aug. 25, 1969.

### Section 407-B:4

 **407-B:4 Maintenance of Records. –** Every insurer writing
insurance under this group merchandising plan shall keep and maintain
separate experience data on this type of business including complete
records of premium income, losses and expense so that the experience of
each group may be fairly ascertained.

**Source.** 1969, 288:1, eff. Aug. 25, 1969.

### Section 407-B:5

 **407-B:5 Rates. –** Rates for this type of business shall be
adequate but not excessive or unfairly discriminatory and shall be filed
pursuant to the provisions of RSA 412 insofar as consistent with the
provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1969, 288:1. 2003, 150:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 407-B:6

 **407-B:6 Experience Rating. –** No experience rating shall be
applied to an individual group until after 3 years of operation and at
that time shall be based on the experience of the preceding 3 calendar
years. Thereafter, any experience rating shall be made annually using
the last 3 calendar years. In case of merger of 2 or more companies, the
3-year minimum will apply to the oldest company in the newly-formed
entity, not the new entity formed by the merger itself.

**Source.** 1969, 288:1, eff. Aug. 25, 1969.

### Section 407-B:7

 **407-B:7 Other Group Plans. –** The provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to any group plans of group life insurance or group
accident and sickness insurance but any existing plan of group motor
vehicle insurance now in effect shall conform to the provisions of this
chapter.

**Source.** 1969, 288:1, eff. Aug. 25, 1969.
