---
title: 'CHAPTER 408-E FUNDING AGREEMENTS'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 408-E
                                             
FUNDING AGREEMENTS
------------------

### Section 408-E:1

 **408-E:1 Purpose and Scope. –** This chapter specifically permits
life insurance companies to issue funding agreements as a type of
insurance business permitted under authority of RSA 401:1, III and
establishes standards for the regulation of funding agreements.

**Source.** 2013, 108:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2013.

### Section 408-E:2

 **408-E:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Funding agreement'' means an agreement issued by a life
insurance company, not based on mortality or morbidity, providing for
the accumulation of funds by the insurer for the purpose of making one
or more payments to the holder, where the initial premium paid is

                                             $1,000,000 or more. Except as provided in this chapter, a "funding
agreement'' does not constitute life insurance or an annuity and does
not constitute a security as defined in RSA 421-B:1-102(53).
                                             
 II. "Holder'' means a person described in RSA 408-E:4 to whom the
life insurance company may issue a funding agreement.
                                             
 III. "Life insurance company'' means a life insurance company
authorized to do business pursuant to RSA 401:1, III.
                                             
 IV. "Optional modes of settlement'' means the manner in which the
funding agreement is structured to make payments to the holder.

**Source.** 2013, 108:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2013. 2015, 273:18, eff. Jan. 1,
2016.

### Section 408-E:3

 **408-E:3 Authorization and Regulation of Funding Agreements. –**
                                             
 I. Any licensed life insurance company may deliver or issue for
delivery one or more funding agreements.
                                             
 II. For the purposes of RSA 402-C:44, funding agreements shall be
treated as insurance contracts, and holders of funding agreements shall
be entitled to the same priority of distribution as policyholders.
                                             
 III. Except as provided in this chapter, funding agreements shall
not be subject to consumer protections that apply to annuity contracts
including free-look requirements that permit consumers to void an issued
contract and receive a return of premium by returning the contract
within a specified time frame.
                                             
 IV. Funding agreements shall be filed for approval by the
commissioner consistent with this chapter.

**Source.** 2013, 108:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2013.

### Section 408-E:4

 **408-E:4 Permissible Holders of Funding Agreements. –** Funding
agreements may be issued to:
                                             
 I. Persons authorized by a state or foreign country to engage in an
insurance business or to subsidiaries of such persons.
                                             
 II. Entities other than persons authorized to engage in an insurance
business and to individuals for the purpose of funding:
                                             
 (a) Benefits under any employee benefit plan as defined in the
federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, 29 U.S.C.
section 1001 et seq., maintained in the United States or in a foreign
country;
                                             
 (b) Activities of any organization exempt from taxation under
section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code or of any similar
organization in any foreign country;
                                             
 (c) Any program of the government of the United States, the
government of any state, foreign country or political subdivision
thereof, or any agency or instrumentality thereof;
                                             
 (d) Any agreement providing for one or more payments in
satisfaction of a claim;
                                             
 (e) Any program of an institution which has assets in excess of

                                             $25,000,000; or
                                             
 (f) Any program of an institution for the purposes of providing
collateral security for securities registered with the federal
Securities and Exchange Commission.

**Source.** 2013, 108:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2013.

### Section 408-E:5

 **408-E:5 Amounts Guaranteed or Credited Under Funding Agreements.
–** An amount shall not be guaranteed or credited under a funding
agreement except upon:
                                             
 I. Reasonable assumptions as to investment income and expenses; and
                                             
 II. A basis equitable to all holders of funding agreements of a
given class.

**Source.** 2013, 108:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2013.

### Section 408-E:6

 **408-E:6 Allocation to Separate Accounts. –** Amounts paid to the
insurer, and proceeds applied under optional modes of settlement under
the funding agreement may be allocated by the insurer to one or more
separate accounts pursuant to the provisions in RSA 408 addressing
separate accounts.

**Source.** 2013, 108:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2013.

### Section 408-E:7

 **408-E:7 Reserve Requirements. –** In establishing minimum reserve
requirements for funding agreements the commissioner may use any
relevant actuarial guidelines, regulations, interpretations, or papers
as well as standards set forth in the Valuation Manual of the National
Association of Insurance Commissioners for deposit-type contracts.

**Source.** 2013, 108:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2013.

### Section 408-E:8

 **408-E:8 Rules. –** The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to
RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The standards to be followed in the approval of forms of funding
agreements;
                                             
 II. The reserves to be maintained by insurers issuing funding
agreements;
                                             
 III. The accounting and reporting of funds credited under funding
agreements; and
                                             
 IV. The disclosure of information to be given to holders or third
parties that purchase funding agreements.

**Source.** 2013, 108:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2013.
