---
title: 'CHAPTER 408-B LIFE AND HEALTH INSURANCE GUARANTY ASSOCIATION OF 1996'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 408-B
                                             
LIFE AND HEALTH INSURANCE GUARANTY ASSOCIATION OF 1996
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 408-B:1

 **408-B:1 Title. –** This chapter shall be known and may be cited as
the New Hampshire Life and Health Insurance Guaranty Association Act of
1996.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 408-B:2

 **408-B:2 Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. The purpose of this chapter is to protect, subject to certain
limitations, the persons specified in RSA 408-B:5, I against failure in
the performance of contractual obligations, under life and health
insurance policies and annuity contracts specified in RSA 408-B:5, II,
because of the impairment or insolvency of the member insurer that
issued the policies or contracts.
                                             
 II. To provide this protection, an association of insurers is
created to pay benefits and to continue coverages as limited herein, and
members of the association are subject to assessment to provide funds to
carry out the purpose of this chapter.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 408-B:3

 **408-B:3 Construction. –** This chapter shall be liberally
construed to effect the purpose under RSA 408-B:2 which shall constitute
an aid and guide to interpretation.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 408-B:4

 **408-B:4 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Account'' means either of the 2 accounts created under RSA
408-B:6.
                                             
 II. "Association'' means the New Hampshire life and health insurance
guaranty association created under RSA 408-B:6.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of insurance.
                                             
 IV. "Contractual obligation'' means any obligation under a policy or
contract or certificate under a group policy or contract, or portion
thereof for which coverage is provided under RSA 408-B:5.
                                             
 V. "Covered policy'' means any policy or contract within the scope
of this chapter under RSA 408-B:5.
                                             
 VI. "Impaired insurer'' means a member insurer which, on or after
January 1, 1996, is not an insolvent insurer, and:
                                             
 (a) Is deemed by the commissioner to be potentially unable to
fulfill its contractual obligations, or
                                             
 (b) Is placed under an order of rehabilitation or conservation by
a court of competent jurisdiction.
                                             
 VII. "Insolvent insurer'' means a member insurer which on or after
January 1, 1996, is placed under an order of liquidation by a court of
competent jurisdiction with a finding of insolvency.
                                             
 VIII. "Member insurer'' means any insurer licensed or which holds a
certificate of authority to transact in this state any kind of insurance
for which coverage is provided under RSA 408-B:5, and includes any
insurer whose license or certificate of authority in this state may have
been suspended, revoked, not renewed or voluntarily withdrawn, but does
not include:
                                             
 (a) A nonprofit hospital or medical service organization.
                                             
 (b) A health maintenance organization.
                                             
 (c) A fraternal benefit society.
                                             
 (d) A mandatory state pooling plan.
                                             
 (e) A mutual assessment company or any entity that operates on an
assessment basis.
                                             
 (f) An insurance exchange.
                                             
 (g) Any entity similar to any of the above.
                                             
 IX. "Moody's Corporate Bond Yield Average'' means the Monthly
Average Corporates as published by Moody's Investors Service, Inc., or
any successor thereto.
                                             
 X. "Person'' means any individual, corporation, partnership,
association, or voluntary organization.
                                             
 XI. "Premiums'' means amounts received on covered policies or
contracts less premiums, considerations, and deposits returned on such
policies or contracts and less dividends and experience credits on such
policies or contracts. "Premiums'' does not include any amounts received
for any policies or contracts or for the portions of any policies or
contracts for which coverage is not provided under RSA 408-B:5, II,
except that assessable premium shall not be reduced on account of RSA
408-B:5, II(b)(3) relating to interest limitations and RSA 408-B:5,
III(b) relating to limitations with respect to any one individual, any
one participant and any one contract holder; provided that "premiums''
shall not include:
                                             
 (a) Any premiums in excess of 
                                             $5,000,000 on any unallocated
annuity contract not issued under a governmental retirement plan
established under Section 401, 403(b) or 457 of the United States
Internal Revenue Code; or
                                             
 (b) With respect to multiple non-group policies of life insurance
owned by one owner, whether the policy owner is an individual, firm,
corporation, or other person, and whether the persons insured are
officers, managers, employees or other persons, premiums in excess of

                                             $5,000,000 with respect to these policies or contracts, regardless of
the number of policies or contracts held by the owner.
                                             
 XII. "Resident'' means a person to whom a contractual obligation is
owed and who resides in this state at the date of entry of a court order
that determines a member insurer to be an impaired insurer or a court
order that determines a member insurer to be an insolvent insurer,
whichever occurs first. A person may be a resident of only one state,
which in the case of a person other than a natural person shall be its
principal place of business. Citizens of the United States that are
either: (a) residents of foreign countries or (b) residents of United
States possessions, territories or protectorates that do not have an
association similar to the association created by this chapter, shall be
deemed residents of the state of domicile of the insurer that issued the
policies or contracts.
                                             
 XIII. "Structured settlement annuity'' means an annuity purchased in
order to fund periodic payments for a plaintiff or other claimant in
payment for or with respect to personal injury suffered by the plaintiff
or other claimant.
                                             
 XIV. "Supplemental contract'' means any agreement entered into for
the distribution of policy or contract proceeds.
                                             
 XV. "Unallocated annuity contract'' means any annuity contract or
group annuity certificate which is not issued to and owned by an
individual, except to the extent of any annuity benefits guaranteed to
an individual by an insurer under the contract or certificate.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996. 2015, 205:1, 2, eff. Sept.
4, 2015.

### Section 408-B:5

 **408-B:5 Coverage and Limitations. –**
                                             
 I. This chapter shall provide coverage for the policies and
contracts specified in paragraph II:
                                             
 (a) To persons who, regardless of where they reside (except for
nonresident certificate holders under group policies or contracts), are
the beneficiaries, assignees, or payees of the persons covered under
subparagraph (b); and
                                             
 (b) To persons who are owners of or certificate holders under the
policies or contracts, (other than unallocated annuity contracts and
structured settlement annuities) and in each case who:
                                             
 (1) Are residents; or
                                             
 (2) Are not residents, but only under all of the following
conditions:
                                             
 (A) The insurers that issued the policies or contracts are
domiciled in this state;
                                             
 (B) The states in which the persons reside have
associations similar to the association created by this chapter; and
                                             
 (C) The persons are not eligible for coverage by an
association in any other state because the insurer was not licensed in
the state at the time specified in the state's guaranty association
law.
                                             
 (c) For unallocated annuity contracts specified in paragraph II,
subparagraphs (a) and (b) shall not apply, and this chapter shall,
except as provided in subparagraphs (e) and (f), provide coverage to:
                                             
 (1) Persons who are the owners of the unallocated annuity
contracts if the contracts are issued to or in connection with a
specified benefit plan whose plan sponsor has its principal place of
business in this state; and
                                             
 (2) Persons who are owners of unallocated annuity contracts
issued to or in connection with government lotteries if the owners are
residents.
                                             
 (d) For structured settlement annuities specified in paragraph
II; subparagraphs (a) and (b) shall not apply, and this chapter shall,
except as provided in subparagraphs (e) and (f), provide coverage to a
person who is a payee under a structured settlement annuity, or
beneficiary of a payee if the payee is deceased, if the payee:
                                             
 (1) Is a resident, regardless of where the contract owner
resides; or
                                             
 (2) Is not a resident, but only under both of the following
conditions:
                                             
 (A)(i) The contract owner of the structured settlement
annuity is a resident; or
                                             
 (ii) The contract owner of the structured settlement
annuity is not a resident, but the insurer that issued the structured
settlement annuity is domiciled in this state, and the state in which
the contract owner resides has an association similar to the association
created by this chapter; and
                                             
 (B) Neither the payee or beneficiary nor the contract owner
is eligible for coverage by the association of the state in which the
payee or contract owner resides.
                                             
 (e) This chapter shall not provide coverage to:
                                             
 (1) A person who is a payee or beneficiary of a contract owner
resident of this state, if the payee or beneficiary is afforded any
coverage by the association of another state; or
                                             
 (2) A person covered under subparagraph (c), if any coverage
is provided by the association of another state to the person.
                                             
 (f) This chapter is intended to provide coverage to a person who
is a resident of this state and, in special circumstances, to a
nonresident. In order to avoid duplicate coverage, if a person who would
otherwise receive coverage under this chapter is provided coverage under
the laws of any other state, the person shall not be provided coverage
under this chapter. In determining the application of the provisions of
this paragraph in situations where a person could be covered by the
association of more than one state, whether as an owner, payee,
beneficiary, or assignee, this chapter shall be construed in conjunction
with other state laws to result in coverage by only one association.
                                             
 II. (a) This chapter shall provide coverage to the persons specified
in paragraph I for direct, non-group life, health or annuity policies or
contracts, and for certificates under direct group policies and
contracts, and for supplemental contracts to any of these, and for
unallocated annuity contracts issued by member insurers, except as
limited by this chapter. Annuity contracts and certificates under group
annuity contracts include, but are not limited to, guaranteed investment
contracts, deposit administration contracts, unallocated funding
agreements, allocated funding agreements, structured settlement
annuities, annuities issued to or in connection with government
lotteries and any immediate or deferred annuity contracts.
                                             
 (b) This chapter shall not provide coverage for:
                                             
 (1) A portion of a policy or contract not guaranteed by the
insurer, or under which the risk is borne by the policy or contract
owner;
                                             
 (2) Any policy or contract of reinsurance, unless assumption
certificates have been issued;
                                             
 (3) A portion of a policy or contract to the extent that the
rate of interest on which it is based, or the interest rate, crediting
rate, or similar factor determined by use of an index or other external
reference stated in the policy or contract employed in calculating
returns or change in value:
                                             
 (A) Averaged over the period of 4 years prior to the date
on which the member insurer becomes an impaired or insolvent insurer
under this chapter, whichever is earlier, exceeds a rate of interest
determined by subtracting 2 percentage points from Moody's Corporate
Bond Yield Average averaged for that same 4-year period or for such
lesser period if the policy or contract was issued less than 4 years
before the member insurer becomes an impaired or insolvent insurer under
this chapter, whichever is earlier; and
                                             
 (B) On and after the date on which the member insurer
becomes an impaired or insolvent insurer under this chapter, whichever
is earlier, exceeds the rate of interest determined by subtracting 3
percentage points from Moody's Corporate Bond Yield Average as most
recently available;
                                             
 (4) Any plan or program of an employer, association, or
similar entity to provide life, health, or annuity benefits to its
employees or members to the extent that the plan or program is
self-funded or uninsured, including, but not limited to, benefits
payable by an employer, association, or similar entity under:
                                             
 (A) A multiple-employer welfare arrangement as defined in
29 U.S.C. section 1002(40);
                                             
 (B) A minimum premium group insurance plan;
                                             
 (C) A stop-loss group insurance plan; or
                                             
 (D) An administrative services only contract;
                                             
 (5) Any portion of a policy or contract to the extent that it
provides dividends or experience rating credits, or provides that any
fees or allowances be paid to any person, including the policy or
contract holder, in connection with the service to or administration of
the policy or contract;
                                             
 (6) Any policy or contract issued in this state by a member
insurer at a time when it was not licensed or did not have a certificate
of authority to issue the policy or contract in this state;
                                             
 (7) Any unallocated annuity contract issued to an employee
benefit plan protected under the federal Pension Benefit Guaranty
Corporation;
                                             
 (8) Any portion of any unallocated annuity contract which is
not issued to or in connection with a specific employee, union, or
association of natural persons benefit plan or a government lottery;
                                             
 (9) Any portion of a policy or contract to the extent that the
assessments required by RSA 408-B:9 with respect to the policy or
contract are preempted by federal or state law;
                                             
 (10) A portion of a policy or contract to the extent it
provides for interest or other changes in value to be determined by the
use of an index or other external reference stated in the policy or
contract, but which have not been credited to the policy or contract, or
as to which the policy or contract owner's rights are subject to
forfeiture, as of the date the member insurer becomes an impaired or
insolvent insurer under this chapter, whichever is earlier. If a
policy's or contract's interest or changes in value are credited less
frequently than annually, then for purposes of determining the values
that have been credited and are not subject to forfeiture under this
subparagraph, the interest or change in value determined by using the
procedures defined in the policy or contract shall be credited as if the
contractual date of the crediting interest or changing values was the
date of impairment or insolvency, whichever is earlier, and shall not be
subject to forfeiture; and
                                             
 (11) A policy or contract providing any hospital, medical,
prescription drug or other health care benefits pursuant to Part C or
Part D of subchapter XVIII, chapter 7 of Title 42 of the United States
Code, commonly known as Medicare Part C and D, or any regulations issued
pursuant thereto.
                                             
 III. The benefits for which the association may become liable shall
in no event exceed the lesser of:
                                             
 (a) The contractual obligations for which the insurer is liable
or would have been liable if it were not an impaired or insolvent
insurer; or
                                             
 (b)(1) With respect to any one life, regardless of the number of
policies or contracts:
                                             
 (A) 
                                             $300,000 in life insurance death benefits, but not
more than 
                                             $100,000 in net cash surrender and net cash withdrawal values
for life insurance;
                                             
 (B) In health insurance benefits:
                                             
 (i) 
                                             $100,000 for coverages not defined as disability
insurance or basic hospital, medical and surgical insurance or long-term
care insurance, as defined in RSA 415-D, including any net cash
surrender and net cash withdrawal values;
                                             
 (ii) 
                                             $300,000 for disability insurance, and 
                                             $300,000
for long-term care insurance, as defined in RSA 415-D;
                                             
 (iii) 
                                             $500,000 for basic hospital medical and surgical
insurance or major medical insurance;
                                             
 (C) 
                                             $250,000 in the present value of annuity benefits,
including net cash surrender and net cash withdrawal values; or
                                             
 (2) With respect to each individual participating in a
governmental retirement plan established under Section 401, 403(b) or
457 of the United States Internal Revenue Code covered by an unallocated
annuity contract or the beneficiaries of each such individual if
deceased, in the aggregate, 
                                             $250,000 in present value annuity benefits,
including net cash surrender and net cash withdrawal values; or
                                             
 (3) With respect to each payee of a structured settlement
annuity or beneficiary or beneficiaries of the payee if deceased,

                                             $250,000 in present value annuity benefits, in the aggregate, including
net cash surrender and net cash withdrawal value, if any.
                                             
 (4) However, in no event shall the association be obligated to
cover more than:
                                             
 (A) An aggregate of 
                                             $300,000 in benefits with respect to
any one life under subparagraphs (b)(1), (2) and (3) except with respect
to benefits for basic hospital, medical and surgical insurance and major
medical insurance under subparagraph (b)(1)(B)(iii), in which case the
aggregate liability of the association shall not exceed 
                                             $500,000 with
respect to any one individual; or
                                             
 (B) With respect to one owner of multiple, non-group
policies of life insurance, whether the policy owner is an individual,
firm, corporation or other person, and whether the persons insured are
officers, managers, employees, or other persons, more than 
                                             $5,000,000
in benefits, regardless of the number of policies and contracts held by
the owner.
                                             
 (5) With respect to either one contract owner provided
coverage under subparagraph I(c)(2); or one plan sponsor whose plans own
directly or in trust one or more unallocated annuity contracts not
included in subparagraph (b)(2) of this paragraph, 
                                             $5,000,000 in
benefits, irrespective of the number of contracts with respect to the
contract owner or plan sponsor. However, in the case where one or more
unallocated annuity contracts are covered contracts under this chapter
and are owned by a trust or other entity for the benefit of 2 or more
plan sponsors, coverage shall be afforded by the association if the
largest interest in the trust or entity owning the contract or contracts
is held by a plan sponsor whose principal place of business is in this
state and in no event shall the association be obligated to cover more
than 
                                             $5,000,000 in benefits with respect to all these unallocated
contracts.
                                             
 (6) The limitations set forth in this paragraph are
limitations on the benefits for which the association is obligated
before taking into account either its subrogation and assignments rights
or the extent to which those benefits could be provided out of the
assets of the impaired or insolvent insurer attributable to covered
policies. The costs of the association's obligations under this chapter
may be met by the use of assets attributable to covered policies or
reimbursed to the association pursuant to its subrogation and assignment
rights.
                                             
 (7) In performing its obligations to provide coverage under
RSA 408-B:8, the association shall not be required to guarantee, assume,
reinsure, or perform, or cause to be guaranteed, assumed, reinsured, or
performed, the contractual obligations of the insolvent or impaired
insurer under a covered policy or contract that do not materially affect
the economic values or economic benefits of the covered policy or
contract.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996. 2010, 54:1, eff. May 18,
2010. 2015, 205:3, eff. Sept. 4, 2015.

### Section 408-B:6

 **408-B:6 Creation of the Association. –**
                                             
 I. There is created a nonprofit legal entity to be known as the New
Hampshire life and health insurance guaranty association, which shall be
the same association created under RSA 404-D:6. All member insurers
shall be and remain members of the association as a condition of their
authority to transact insurance in this state. The association shall
perform its functions under the plan of operation established and
approved under RSA 408-B:10 and shall exercise its powers through a
board of directors established under RSA 408-B:7. For purposes of
administration and assessment, the association shall maintain 2
accounts:
                                             
 (a) The life insurance and annuity account which includes the
following subaccounts:
                                             
 (1) Life insurance account;
                                             
 (2) Annuity account, which shall include annuity contracts
owned by a governmental retirement plan (or its trustee) established
under Section 401, 403(b) or 457 of the United States Internal Revenue
Code, but shall otherwise excluded unallocated annuities; and
                                             
 (3) Unallocated annuity account which shall exclude contracts
owned by a governmental retirement benefit plan, or its trustee
established under Section 401, 403(b), or 457 of the United States
Internal Revenue Code.
                                             
 (b) The health insurance account.
                                             
 II. The association shall come under the immediate supervision of
the commissioner and shall be subject to the applicable provisions of
the insurance laws of this state. Meetings or records of the association
may be opened to the public upon majority vote of the board of directors
of the association.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1. 1997, 167:1, eff. Aug. 8, 1997. 2015, 205:4,
eff. Sept. 4, 2015.

### Section 408-B:7

 **408-B:7 Board of Directors. –**
                                             
 I. The board of directors of the association shall consist of not
less than 5 nor more than 9 member insurers serving terms as established
in the plan of operation. The members of the board shall be selected by
member insurers subject to the approval of the commissioner. Vacancies
on the board shall be filled for the remaining period of the term by a
majority vote of the remaining board members, subject to the approval of
the commissioner.
                                             
 II. In approving selections or in appointing members to the board,
the commissioner shall consider, among other things, whether all member
insurers are fairly represented.
                                             
 III. Members of the board may be reimbursed from the assets of the
association for expense incurred by them as members of the board of
directors but members of the board shall not otherwise be compensated by
the association for their services.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1. 1997, 167:2, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 408-B:8

 **408-B:8 Powers and Duties of the Association. –**
                                             
 I. If a member insurer is an impaired domestic insurer, the
association may, in its discretion, and subject to any conditions
imposed by the association that do not impair the contractual
obligations of the impaired insurer, that are approved by the
commissioner, and that are, except in cases of court-ordered
conservation or rehabilitation, also approved by the impaired insurer:
                                             
 (a) Guarantee, assume or reinsure, or cause to be guaranteed,
assumed, or reinsured, any or all of the policies or contracts of the
impaired insurer;
                                             
 (b) Provide such moneys, pledges, notes, guarantees, or other
means as are proper to effectuate subparagraph (a) and assure payment of
the contractual obligations of the impaired insurer pending action under
subparagraph (a); or
                                             
 (c) Loan money to the impaired insurer.
                                             
 II. (a) If a member insurer is an impaired insurer, whether
domestic, foreign or alien, and the insurer is not paying claims timely,
then subject to the preconditions specified in subparagraph (b), the
association shall, in its discretion, either:
                                             
 (1) Take any of the actions specified in paragraph I, subject
to the conditions in such paragraph; or
                                             
 (2) Provide substitute benefits in lieu of the contractual
obligations of the impaired insurer solely for health claims, periodic
annuity benefit payments, death benefits, supplemental benefits, and
cash withdrawals for policy or contract owners who petition therefor
under claims of emergency or hardship in accordance with standards
proposed by the association and approved by the commissioner.
                                             
 (b) The association shall be subject to the requirements of
subparagraph (a) only if:
                                             
 (1) The laws of its state of domicile provide that until all
payments of or on account of the impaired insurer's contractual
obligations by all guaranty associations, along with all expenses
thereof and interest on all such payments and expenses, shall have been
repaid to the guaranty associations or a plan of repayment by the
impaired insurer shall have been approved by the guaranty associations:
                                             
 (A) The delinquency proceeding shall not be dismissed;
                                             
 (B) Neither the impaired insurer nor its assets shall be
returned to the control of its shareholders or private management;
                                             
 (C) It shall not be permitted to solicit or accept new
business or have any suspended or revoked license restored; and
                                             
 (2)(A) The impaired insurer is a domestic insurer, and it has
been placed under an order of rehabilitation by a court of competent
jurisdiction in this state; or
                                             
 (B) The impaired insurer is a foreign or alien insurer,
and
                                             
 (i) It has been prohibited from soliciting or accepting
new business in this state;
                                             
 (ii) Its certificate of authority has been suspended or
revoked in this state; and
                                             
 (iii) A petition for rehabilitation or liquidation has
been filed in a court of competent jurisdiction in its state of domicile
by the commissioner of the state.
                                             
 III. If a member insurer is an insolvent insurer, the association
shall, in its discretion, either:
                                             
 (a)(1) Guaranty, assume or reinsure, or cause to be guaranteed,
assumed or reinsured, the policies or contracts of the insolvent
insurer; or
                                             
 (2) Assure payment of the contractual obligations of the
insolvent insurer; and
                                             
 (3) Provide such monies, pledges, guarantees, or other means
as are reasonably necessary to discharge such duties; or
                                             
 (b) With respect only to life and health insurance policies,
provide benefits and coverages in accordance with paragraph IV.
                                             
 IV. When proceeding under paragraph II(a)(2) or III(b), the
association shall, with respect to only life and health insurance
policies:
                                             
 (a) Assure payment of benefits for premiums identical to the
premiums and benefits (except for terms of conversion and renewability)
that would have been payable under the policies of the insolvent
insurer, for claims incurred:
                                             
 (1) With respect to group policies, not later than the earlier
of the next renewal date under such policies or contracts or 45 days,
but in no event less than 30 days, after the date on which the
association becomes obligated with respect to the policies.
                                             
 (2) With respect to individual policies, not later than the
earlier of the next renewal date (if any) under the policies or one
year, but in no event less than 30 days, from the date on which the
association becomes obligated with respect to the policies.
                                             
 (b) Make diligent efforts to provide all known insureds or group
policyholders with respect to group policies 30 days notice of the
termination of the benefits provided.
                                             
 (c) With respect to individual policies, make available to each
known insured, or owner if other than the insured, and with respect to
an individual formerly insured under a group policy who is not eligible
for replacement group coverage, make available substitute coverage on an
individual basis in accordance with the provisions of subparagraph (d),
if the insureds had a right under law or the terminated policy to
convert coverage to individual coverage or to continue an individual
policy in force until a specified age or for a specified time, during
which the insurer had no right unilaterally to make changes in any
provision of the policy or had a right only to make changes in premium
by class.
                                             
 (d)(1) In providing the substitute coverage required under
subparagraph (c), the association may offer either to reissue the
terminated coverage or to issue an alternative policy.
                                             
 (2) Alternative or reissued policies shall be offered without
requiring evidence of insurability, and shall not provide for any
waiting period or exclusion that would not have applied under the
terminated policy.
                                             
 (3) The association may reinsure any alternative or reissued
policy.
                                             
 (e)(1) Alternative policies adopted by the association shall be
subject to the approval of the commissioner. The association may adopt
alternative policies of various types for future issuance without regard
to any particular impairment or insolvency.
                                             
 (2) Alternative policies shall contain at least the minimum
statutory provisions required in this state and provide benefits that
shall not be unreasonable in relation to the premium charged. The
association shall set the premium in accordance with a table of rates
which it shall adopt. The premium shall reflect the amount of insurance
to be provided and the age and class of risk of each insured, but shall
not reflect any changes in the health of the insured after the original
policy was last underwritten.
                                             
 (3) Any alternative policy issued by the association shall
provide coverage of a type similar to that of the policy issued by the
impaired or insolvent insurer, as determined by the association.
                                             
 (f) If the association elects to reissue terminated coverage at a
premium rate different from that charged under the terminated policy,
the premium shall be set by the association in accordance with the
amount of insurance provided and the age and class of risk, subject to
approval of the commissioner or by a court of competent jurisdiction.
                                             
 (g) The association's obligations with respect to coverage under
any policy of the impaired or insolvent insurer or under any reissued or
alternative policy shall cease on the date such coverage or policy is
replaced by another similar policy by the policyholder, the insured, or
the association.
                                             
 V. When proceeding under paragraphs II(a)(2) or III with respect to
any policy or contract carrying guaranteed minimum interest rates, the
association shall assure the payment or crediting of a rate of interest
consistent with RSA 408-B:5, II(b)(3).
                                             
 VI. Nonpayment of premiums within 31 days after the date required
under the terms of any guaranteed, assumed, alternative or reissued
policy or contract or substitute coverage shall terminate the
association's obligations under the policy or coverage under this
chapter with respect to the policy or coverage, except with respect to
any claims incurred or any net cash surrender value which may be due in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 VII. Premiums due for coverage after entry of an order of
liquidation of an insolvent insurer shall belong to and be payable at
the direction of the association, and the association shall be liable
for unearned premiums due to policy or contract owners arising after the
entry of the order.
                                             
 VIII. The protection provided by this chapter shall not apply where
any guaranty protection is provided to residents of this state by the
laws of the domiciliary state or jurisdiction of the impaired or
insolvent insurer other than this state.
                                             
 IX. In carrying out its duties under paragraphs II and III, the
association may, subject to approval by the court:
                                             
 (a) Impose permanent policy or contract liens in connection with
any guarantee, assumption, or reinsurance agreement, if the association
finds that the amounts which can be assessed under this chapter are less
than the amounts needed to assure full and prompt performance of the
association's duties under this chapter, or that the economic or
financial conditions as they affect member insurers are sufficiently
adverse to render the imposition of such permanent policy or contract
liens, to be in the public interest.
                                             
 (b) Impose temporary moratoriums or liens on payments of cash
values and policy loans, or any other right to withdraw funds held in
conjunction with policies or contracts, in addition to any contractual
provisions for deferral of cash or policy loan value.
                                             
 X. If the association fails to act within a reasonable period of
time as provided in paragraphs II(a)(2), III, and IV, the commissioner
shall have the powers and duties of the association under this chapter
with respect to impaired or insolvent insurers.
                                             
 XI. The association may render assistance and advice to the
commissioner, upon the commissioner's request, concerning
rehabilitation, payment of claims, continuance of coverage, or the
performance of other contractual obligations of any impaired or
insolvent insurer.
                                             
 XII. The association shall have standing to appear before any court
in this state with jurisdiction over an impaired or insolvent insurer
concerning which the association is or may become obligated under this
chapter. Such standing shall extend to all matters germane to the powers
and duties of the association, including, but not limited to, proposals
for reinsuring, modifying, or guaranteeing the policies or contracts of
the impaired or insolvent insurer and the determination of the policies
or contracts and contractual obligations. The association shall also
have the right to appear or intervene before a court in another state
with jurisdiction over an impaired or insolvent insurer for which the
association is or may become obligated or with jurisdiction over a third
party against whom the association may have rights through subrogation
of the insurer's policyholders.
                                             
 XIII. (a) Any person receiving benefits under this chapter shall be
deemed to have assigned the rights under, and any causes of action
relating to, the covered policy or contract to the association to the
extent of the benefits received because of this chapter, whether the
benefits are payments of or on account of contractual obligations,
continuation of coverage, or provision of substitute or alternative
coverages. The association may require an assignment to it of such
rights and cause of action by any payee, policy or contract owner,
beneficiary, insured or annuitant, as a condition precedent to the
receipt of any right or benefits conferred by this chapter upon such
person.
                                             
 (b) The subrogation rights of the association under this
paragraph shall have the same priority against the assets of the
impaired or insolvent insurer as that possessed by the person entitled
to receive benefits under this chapter.
                                             
 (c) In addition to subparagraphs (a) and (b), the association
shall have all common law rights of subrogation and any other equitable
or legal remedy which would have been available to the impaired or
insolvent insurer or holder of a policy or contract with respect to such
policy or contracts.
                                             
 XIV. The association may:
                                             
 (a) Enter into such contracts as are necessary or proper to carry
out the provisions and purposes of this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Sue or be sued, including taking any legal actions necessary
or proper to recover any unpaid assessments under RSA 408-B:9 and to
settle claims or potential claims against it.
                                             
 (c) Borrow money to effect the purposes of this chapter; any
notes or other evidence of indebtedness of the association not in
default shall be legal investments for domestic insurers and may be
carried as admitted assets.
                                             
 (d) Employ or retain such persons as are necessary to handle the
financial transactions of the association, and to perform such other
functions as become necessary or proper under this chapter.
                                             
 (e) Take such legal action as may be necessary to avoid payment
of improper claims.
                                             
 (f) Exercise, for the purposes of this chapter and to the extent
approved by the commissioner, the powers of a domestic life or health
insurer, but in no case may the association issue insurance policies or
annuity contracts other than those issued to perform its obligations
under this chapter.
                                             
 XV. The association may join an organization of one or more other
state associations of similar purposes, to further the purposes and
administer the powers and duties of the association.
                                             
 XVI. In carrying out its duties in connection with guaranteeing,
assuming, or reinsuring policies or contracts under paragraph I or II,
the association may, subject to approval of the receivership court,
issue substitute coverage for a policy or contract that provides an
interest rate, crediting rate, or similar factor determined by use of an
index or other external reference stated in the policy or contract
employed in calculating returns or changes in value by issuing an
alternative policy or contract in accordance with the following
provisions:
                                             
 (a) In lieu of the index or other external reference provided for
in the original policy or contract, the alternative policy or contracts
provides for:
                                             
 (1) A fixed interest rate; or
                                             
 (2) Payment of dividends with minimum guarantees; or
                                             
 (3) A different method for calculating interest or changes in
value;
                                             
 (b) There is no requirement for evidence of insurability, waiting
period or other exclusion that would not have applied under the replaced
policy or contract, and;
                                             
 (c) The alternative policy or contract is substantially similar
to the replaced policy or contract in all other material terms.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996. 2015, 205:5, eff. Sept. 4,
2015.

### Section 408-B:9

 **408-B:9 Assessments. –**
                                             
 I. For the purpose of providing the funds necessary to carry out the
powers and duties of the association, the board of directors shall
assess the member insurers, separately for each account, at such time
and for such amounts as the board finds necessary. Assessments shall be
due not less than 30 days after prior written notice to the member
insurers.
                                             
 II. There shall be 2 assessments, as follows:
                                             
 (a) Class A assessments shall be made for the purpose of meeting
administrative and legal costs and other expenses and examinations
conducted under the authority of RSA 408-B:12, V. Class A assessments
may be made whether or not related to a particular impaired or insolvent
insurer.
                                             
 (b) Class B assessments shall be made to the extent necessary to
carry out the powers and duties of the association under RSA 408-B:8
with regard to an impaired or an insolvent insurer.
                                             
 III. (a) The amount of any Class A assessment shall be determined by
the board and may be made on a pro rata or non-pro rata basis. If pro
rata, the board may provide that it be credited against future Class B
assessments. A non-pro rata assessment shall not exceed 
                                             $150 per member
insurer in any one calendar year. The amount of any Class B assessment
shall be allocated for assessment purposes among the accounts pursuant
to an allocation formula which may be based on the premiums or reserves
of the impaired or insolvent insurer or any other standard deemed by the
board in its sole discretion as being fair and reasonable under the
circumstances.
                                             
 (b) Class B assessments against member insurers for each account
and subaccount shall be in the proportion that the premiums received on
business in this state by each assessed member insurer or policies or
contracts covered by each account for the 3 most recent calendar years
for which information is available preceding the year in which the
insurer became impaired or insolvent, as the case may be, bears to such
premiums received on business in this state for such calendar years by
all assessed member insurers.
                                             
 (c) Assessments for funds to meet the requirements of the
association with respect to an impaired or insolvent insurer shall not
be made until necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter.
Classification of assessments under paragraph II and computation of
assessments under this paragraph shall be made with a reasonable degree
of accuracy, recognizing that exact determinations may not always be
possible.
                                             
 IV. The association may abate or defer, in whole or in part, the
assessment of a member insurer if, in the opinion of the board, payment
of the assessment would endanger the ability of the member insurer to
fulfill its contractual obligations. In the event an assessment against
a member insurer is abated, or deferred in whole or in part, the amount
by which the assessment is abated or deferred may be assessed against
the other member insurers in a manner consistent with the basis for
assessments set forth in this section.
                                             
 V. (a) Subject to the provisions of subparagraph (b), the total
of all assessments authorized by the association with respect to a
member insurer for each subaccount of the life insurance and annuity
account and for the health account shall not in any one calendar year
exceed 2 percent of that member insurer's average annual premiums
received in this state on the policies and contracts covered by the
subaccount or account during the 3 calendar years preceding the year in
which the insurer became an impaired or insolvent insurer. If the
maximum assessment, together with the other assets of the association in
any account, does not provide in any one year in either account an
amount sufficient to carry out the responsibilities of the association,
the necessary additional funds shall be assessed as soon thereafter as
permitted by this chapter.
                                             
 (b) The board may provide in the plan of operation a method of
allocating funds among claims, whether relating to one or more impaired
or insolvent insurers, when the maximum assessment will be insufficient
to cover anticipated claims.
                                             
 (c) If a one percent assessment for any subaccount of the life
and annuity account in any one year does not provide an amount
sufficient to carry out the responsibilities of the association, then
pursuant to subparagraph III(b), the board shall access all subaccounts
of the life and annuity account for the necessary additional amount,
subject to the maximum stated in subparagraph V(a).
                                             
 VI. The board may, by an equitable method as established in the plan
of operation, refund to member insurers, in proportion to the
contribution of each insurer to that account, the amount by which the
assets of the account exceed the amount the board finds is necessary to
carry out during the coming year the obligations of the association with
regard to that account, including assets accruing from assignment,
subrogation, net realized gains, and income from investments. A
reasonable amount may be retained in any account to provide funds for
the continuing expenses of the association and for future losses.
                                             
 VII. It shall be proper for any member insurer, in determining its
premium rates and policyowner dividends as to any kind of insurance
within the scope of this chapter, to consider the amount reasonably
necessary to meet its assessment obligations under this chapter.
                                             
 VIII. The association shall issue to each insurer paying an
assessment under this chapter, other than Class A assessment, a
certificate of contribution, in a form prescribed by the commissioner,
for the amount of the assessment so paid. All outstanding certificates
shall be of equal dignity and priority without reference to amounts or
dates of issue. A certificate of contribution may be shown by the
insurer in its financial statement as an asset in such form and for such
amount, if any, and period of time as the commissioner may approve.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1. 1997, 167:3, eff. Aug. 8, 1997. 2015, 205:6,
eff. Sept. 4, 2015.

### Section 408-B:10

 **408-B:10 Plan of Operation. –**
                                             
 I. (a) The association shall submit to the commissioner a plan of
operation and any amendments thereto necessary or suitable to assure the
fair, reasonable and equitable administration of the association. The
plan of operation and any amendments thereto shall become effective upon
the commissioner's written approval or unless the commissioner has not
disapproved it within 30 days.
                                             
 (b) If the association fails to submit a suitable plan of
operation within 120 days after January 1, 1996, or if at any time
thereafter the association fails to submit suitable amendments to the
plan, the commissioner shall, after notice and hearing, adopt such
reasonable rules under RSA 541-A as are necessary or advisable to
effectuate the provisions of this chapter. The rules shall continue in
force until modified by the commissioner or superseded by a plan
submitted by the association and approved by the commissioner.
                                             
 II. All member insurers shall comply with the plan of operation.
                                             
 III. The plan of operation shall, in addition to requirements
enumerated elsewhere in this chapter:
                                             
 (a) Establish procedures for handling the assets of the
association.
                                             
 (b) Establish the amount and method of reimbursing members of the
board of directors under RSA 408-B:7.
                                             
 (c) Establish regular places and times for meetings including
telephone conference calls of the board of directors.
                                             
 (d) Establish procedures for records to be kept of all financial
transactions of the association, its agents, and the board of
directors.
                                             
 (e) Establish the procedures whereby selections for the board of
directors will be made and submitted to the commissioner.
                                             
 (f) Establish any additional procedure for assessments under RSA
408-B:9.
                                             
 (g) Contain additional provisions necessary or proper for the
execution of the powers and duties of the association.
                                             
 IV. The plan of operation may provide that any or all powers and
duties of the association, except those under RSA 408-B:8, XIII(c) and
RSA 408-B:9, are delegated to a corporation, association or other
organization which performs or will perform functions similar to those
of this association, or its equivalent, in 2 or more states. Such a
corporation, association, or organization shall be reimbursed for any
payments made on behalf of the association and shall be paid for its
performance of any function of the association. A delegation under this
paragraph shall take effect only with the approval of both the board of
directors and the commissioner, and may be made only to a corporation,
association, or organization which extends protection not substantially
less favorable and effective than that provided by this chapter.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 408-B:11

 **408-B:11 Duties and Powers of the Commissioner. –** In addition to
the duties and powers enumerated elsewhere in this chapter:
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall:
                                             
 (a) Upon request of the board of directors, provide the
association with a statement of the premiums in this and any other
appropriate states for each member insurer.
                                             
 (b) When an impairment is declared and the amount of the
impairment is determined, serve a demand upon the impaired insurer to
make good the impairment within a reasonable time; notice to the
impaired insurer shall constitute notice to its shareholders, if any;
the failure of the insurer to promptly comply with such demand shall not
excuse the association from the performance of its powers and duties
under this chapter.
                                             
 (c) In any liquidation or rehabilitation proceeding involving a
domestic insurer, be appointed as the liquidator or rehabilitator.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may suspend or revoke, after notice and
hearing, the certificate of authority to transact insurance in this
state of any member insurer which fails to pay an assessment when due or
fails to comply with the plan of operation. As an alternative, the
commissioner may levy a forfeiture on any member insurer which fails to
pay an assessment when due. Such forfeiture shall not exceed 5 percent
of the unpaid assessment per month, but no forfeiture shall be less than

                                             $100 per month.
                                             
 III. Any action of the board of directors or the association may be
appealed to the commissioner by any member insurer if the appeal is
taken within 60 days of the final action being appealed. If a member
company is appealing an assessment, the amount assessed shall be paid to
the association and available to meet association obligations during the
pendancy of an appeal. If the appeal on the assessment is upheld, the
amount paid in error or excess shall be returned to the member company.
Any final action or order of the commissioner shall be subject to
judicial review in a court of competent jurisdiction.
                                             
 IV. The liquidator, rehabilitator, or conservator of any impaired
insurer may notify all interested persons of the effect of this chapter.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 408-B:12

 **408-B:12 Prevention of Insolvencies. –** To aid in the detection
and prevention of insurer insolvencies or impairments:
                                             
 I. It shall be the duty of the commissioner:
                                             
 (a) To notify the commissioners of all the other states,
territories of the United States, and the District of Columbia when the
commissioner takes any of the following actions against a member
insurer:
                                             
 (1) Revocation of license;
                                             
 (2) Suspension of license; or
                                             
 (3) Makes any formal order that such company restrict its
premium writing, obtain additional contributions to surplus, withdraw
from the state, reinsure all or any part of its business, or increase
capital, surplus, or any other account for the security of policyholders
or creditors.
                                             
 The notice shall be mailed to all commissioners within 30 days
following the action taken or the date on which such action occurs.
                                             
 (b) To report to the board of directors when the commissioner has
taken any of the actions set forth in subparagraph (a) or has received a
report from any other commissioner indicating that any such action has
been taken in another state. The report to the board of directors shall
contain all significant details of the action taken or the report
received from another commissioner.
                                             
 (c) To report to the board of directors when the commissioner has
reasonable cause to believe from any examination, whether completed or
in process, of any member company that the company may be an impaired or
insolvent insurer.
                                             
 (d) To furnish to the board of directors the NAIC Insurance
Regulatory Information System (IRIS) ratios and listings of companies
not included in the ratios developed by the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners, and the board may use the information contained
therein in carrying out its duties and responsibilities under this
section. The report and the information contained therein shall be kept
confidential by the board of directors until such time as made public by
the commissioner or other lawful authority.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may seek the advice and recommendations of the
board of directors concerning any matter affecting the duties and
responsibilities of the commissioner regarding the financial condition
of member insurers and companies seeking admission to transact insurance
business in this state.
                                             
 III. The board of directors may, upon majority vote, make reports
and recommendations to the commissioner upon any matter germane to the
solvency, liquidation, rehabilitation, or conservation of any member
insurer or germane to the solvency of any company seeking to do
insurance business in this state. Such reports and recommendations shall
not be considered public documents.
                                             
 IV. It shall be the duty of the board of directors, upon majority
vote, to notify the commissioner of any information indicating any
member insurer may be an impaired or insolvent insurer.
                                             
 V. The board of directors may, upon majority vote, request that the
commissioner order an examination of any member insurer which the board
in good faith believes may be an impaired or insolvent insurer. Within
30 days of the receipt of such request, the commissioner shall begin an
examination. The examination may be conducted as a National Association
of Insurance Commissioners examination or may be conducted by such
persons as the commissioner designates. The cost of the examination
shall be paid by the association and the examination report shall be
treated as are other examination reports. In no event shall the
examination report be released to the board of directors prior to its
release to the public, but this shall not preclude the commissioner from
complying with paragraph I. The commissioner shall notify the board of
directors when the examination is completed. The request for an
examination shall be kept on file by the commissioner, but it shall not
be open to public inspection prior to the release of the examination
report to the public.
                                             
 VI. The board of directors may, upon majority vote, make
recommendations to the commissioner for the detection and prevention of
insurer insolvencies.
                                             
 VII. The board of directors shall, at the conclusion of any insurer
insolvency in which the association was obligated to pay covered claims,
prepare a report to the commissioner containing such information as it
may have in its possession bearing on the history and causes of the
insolvency. The board shall cooperate with the boards of directors of
guaranty associations in other states in preparing a report on the
history and causes of insolvency of a particular insurer, and may adopt
by reference any report prepared by such other associations.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 408-B:13

 **408-B:13 Credits for Assessments Paid. –**
                                             
 I. A member insurer may offset against its tax liability under RSA
400-A any assessment described in RSA 408-B:9, II(b) for the life
insurance and annuity account, and for the health account for
guaranteeing the performance of contractual obligations of an impaired
or insolvent insurer in regard to disability income coverages only, to
the extent of 20 percent of the amount of the assessment for each of the
5 calendar years following the year in which the assessment was paid. If
a member insurer ceases doing business, all uncredited assessments
described above may be credited against its tax liability under RSA
400-A for the year it ceases doing business.
                                             
 II. Any sums acquired by refund from the association by member
insurers, as stated in RSA 408-B:9, VI, and which were previously offset
against taxes as described in paragraph I, shall be paid by these
insurers to the state of New Hampshire in the manner required by the
commissioner. The association shall notify the commissioner that refunds
have been made.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1. 1996, 188:20, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 408-B:14

 **408-B:14 Miscellaneous Provisions. –**
                                             
 I. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to reduce the
liability for unpaid assessments of the insureds of an impaired or
insolvent insurer operating under a plan with assessment liability.
                                             
 II. Records shall be kept of all negotiations and meetings in which
the association or its representatives are involved to discuss the
activities of the association in carrying out its powers and duties
under RSA 408-B:8. Records of the negotiations or meetings shall be made
public only upon the termination of a liquidation, rehabilitation, or
conservation proceeding involving the impaired or insolvent insurer,
upon the termination of the impairment or insolvency of the insurer, or
upon the order of a court of competent jurisdiction. Nothing in this
paragraph shall limit the duty of the association or render a report of
its activities under this section.
                                             
 III. For the purpose of carrying out its obligations under this
chapter, the association shall be deemed to be a creditor of the
impaired or insolvent insurer to the extent of assets attributable to
covered policies reduced by any amounts to which the association is
entitled as subrogee pursuant to RSA 408-B:8, XIII. Assets of the
impaired or insolvent insurer attributable to covered policies shall be
used to continue all covered policies and pay all contractual
obligations of the impaired or insolvent insurer as required by this
chapter. Assets attributable to covered policies, as used in this
subsection, are that proportion of the assets which the reserves that
should have been established for such policies bear to the reserves that
should have been established for all policies of insurance written by
the impaired or insolvent insurer.
                                             
 IV. (a) Prior to the termination of any liquidation, rehabilitation
or conservation proceeding, the court may take into consideration the
contributions of the respective parties, including the association, the
shareholders, and policyowners of the insolvent insurer, and any other
party with a bona fide interest, in making an equitable distribution of
the ownership rights of the insolvent insurer. In such a determination,
consideration shall be given to the welfare of the policyholders of the
continuing or successor insurer.
                                             
 (b) No distribution to stockholders, if any, of an impaired or
insolvent insurer shall be made until and unless the total amount of
valid claims of the association with interest thereon for funds expended
in carrying out its powers and duties under RSA 408-B:8 with respect to
the insurer have been fully recovered by the association.
                                             
 V. (a) If an order for liquidation or rehabilitation of an insurer
domiciled in this state has been entered, the receiver appointed under
the order shall have a right to recover on behalf of the insurer, from
any affiliate that controlled it, the amount of distributions, other
than stock dividends paid by the insurer on its capital stock, made at
any time during the 5 years preceding the petition for liquidation or
rehabilitation subject to the limitations of subparagraphs (b)-(d).
                                             
 (b) No such distribution shall be recoverable if the insurer
shows that when paid the distribution was lawful and reasonable, and
that the insurer did not know and could not reasonably have known that
the distribution might adversely affect the ability of the insurer to
fulfill its contractual obligations.
                                             
 (c) Any person who was an affiliate that controlled the insurer
at the time the distributions were paid shall be liable up to the amount
of distributions received. Any person who was an affiliate that
controlled the insurer at the time the distributions were declared,
shall be liable up to the amount of distributions which would have been
received if they had been paid immediately. If 2 or more persons are
liable with respect to the same distributions, they shall be jointly and
severally liable.
                                             
 (d) The maximum amount recoverable under this paragraph shall be
the amount needed in excess of all other available assets of the
insolvent insurer to pay the contractual obligations of the insolvent
insurer.
                                             
 (e) If any person liable under subparagraph (c) is insolvent, all
its affiliates that controlled it at the time the distribution was paid,
shall be jointly and severally liable for any resulting deficiency in
the amount recovered from the insolvent affiliate.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 408-B:15

 **408-B:15 Examination of the Association; Annual Report. –** The
association shall be subject to examination and regulation by the
commissioner. The board of directors shall submit to the commissioner
each year, not later than 120 days after the association's fiscal year,
a financial report in a form approved by the commissioner and a report
of its activities during the preceding fiscal year.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 408-B:16

 **408-B:16 Tax Exemptions. –** The association shall be exempt from
payment of all fees and all taxes levied by this state or any of its
subdivisions, except taxes levied on real property.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 408-B:17

 **408-B:17 Immunity. –** There shall be no liability on the part of
and no cause of action of any nature shall arise against any member
insurer or its agents or employees, the association or its agents or
employees, members of the board of directors, or the commissioner or the
commissioner's representatives, for any action or omission by them in
the performance of their powers and duties under this chapter. Such
immunity shall extend to the participation in any organization of one or
more other state associations of similar purposes and to any such
organization and its agents or employees.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 408-B:18

 **408-B:18 Stay of Proceedings; Reopening Default Judgments. –** All
proceedings in which the insolvent insurer is a party in any court in
this state shall be stayed 60 days from the date an order of
liquidation, rehabilitation or conservation is final to permit proper
legal action by the association on any matters germane to its powers or
duties. As to judgment under any decision, order, verdict, or finding
based on default, the association may apply to have such judgment set
aside by the same court that made such judgment and shall be permitted
to defend against such suit on the merits.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 408-B:19

 **408-B:19 Prohibited Advertisement of Insurance Guaranty
Association Act in Insurance Sales; Notice to Policyholders. –**
                                             
 I. No person, including an insurer, agent or affiliate of an insurer
shall make, publish, disseminate, circulate, or place before the public,
or cause directly or indirectly, to be made, published, disseminated,
circulated, or placed before the public, in any newspaper, magazine or
other publication, or in the form of a notice, circular, pamphlet,
letter, or poster, or over any radio station or television station, or
in any other way, any advertisement, announcement or statement, written
or oral, which uses the existence of the insurance guaranty association
of this state for the purpose of sales, solicitation or inducement to
purchase any form of insurance covered by the New Hampshire life and
health insurance guaranty association act. Provided, however, that this
paragraph shall not apply to the New Hampshire life and health insurance
guaranty association or any other entity which does not sell or solicit
insurance. The use of the protection afforded by this chapter, other
than as provided by this paragraph, by any person in the sale,
marketing, or advertising of insurance constitutes unfair competition
and unfair practices under the New Hampshire unfair trade practices act,
and is subject to sanctions imposed in that chapter.
                                             
 II. Within 180 days after January 1, 1996, the association shall
prepare a summary document describing the general purposes and current
limitations of the chapter and complying with paragraph III. This
document shall be submitted to the commissioner for approval. Unless
paragraph IV applies, at the expiration of the 60th day after the date
on which the commissioner approves the document, an insurer may not
deliver a policy or contract covered by a guaranty fund to a policy or
contract holder unless the summary document is delivered to the policy
or contract holder prior to or at the time of delivery of the policy or
contract. The document shall also be available upon request by a
policyholder. The distribution, delivery or contents or interpretation
of this document does not guarantee that either the policy or the
contract or the holder of the policy or contract is covered in the event
of the impairment or insolvency of a member insurer. The description
document shall be revised by the association as amendments to the
chapter may require. Failure to receive this document does not give the
policyholder, contract holder, certificate holder, or insured any
greater rights than those stated in this chapter.
                                             
 III. The document prepared under paragraph II shall contain a clear
and conspicuous disclaimer on its face. The commissioner shall approve
the disclaimer. The disclaimer shall:
                                             
 (a) State the name, address and telephone number of the life and
health insurance guaranty association and insurance department.
                                             
 (b) Prominently warn the policy or contract holder that the life
and health insurance guaranty association may not cover the policy or,
if coverage is available, it will be subject to substantial limitations
and exclusions and conditioned on continued residence in the state.
                                             
 (c) State the types of policies for which guaranty funds will
provide coverage.
                                             
 (d) State that the insurer and its agents are prohibited by law
from using the existence of the life and health insurance guaranty
association for the purpose of sales, solicitation, or inducement to
purchase any form of insurance.
                                             
 (e) State that the policy or contract holder should not rely on
coverage under the life and health insurance guaranty association when
selecting an insurer.
                                             
 (f) Explain rights available and procedures for filing a
complaint to allege a violation of any provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 (g) Provide other information as directed by the commissioner,
including but not limited to, sources for information about the
financial condition of insurers provided that the information is not
proprietary and is subject to disclosure under that state's public
records law.
                                             
 IV. No insurer or agent may deliver a policy or contract not covered
by the association unless the insurer or agent, prior to or at the time
of delivery, gives the policy or contract holder a separate written
notice which clearly and conspicuously discloses that the policy or
contract is not covered by the life and health insurance guaranty
association. The commissioner shall approve the notice.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1. 1997, 167:4, 5, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

### Section 408-B:20

 **408-B:20 Prospective Application. –** This chapter shall not apply
to any insurer which is insolvent or unable to fulfill its contractual
obligations on January 1, 1996.

**Source.** 1995, 305:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.
