---
title: |
    CHAPTER 409-A STANDARD NONFORFEITURE LAW FOR INDIVIDUAL DEFERRED
    ANNUITIES
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 409-A
                                             
STANDARD NONFORFEITURE LAW FOR INDIVIDUAL DEFERRED ANNUITIES
------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 409-A:1

 **409-A:1 Short Title. –** This chapter shall be known as the
Standard Nonforfeiture Law For Individual Deferred Annuities.

**Source.** 1979, 360:4, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 409-A:2

 **409-A:2 Exemptions. –** This chapter shall not apply to any
reinsurance group annuity purchased under a retirement plan or plan of
deferred compensation established or maintained by an employer
(including a partnership or sole proprietorship) or by an employee
organization, or by both, other than a plan providing individual
retirement accounts or individual retirement annuities under section 408
of the Internal Revenue Code, as now or hereafter amended, premium
deposit fund, variable annuity, investment annuity, immediate annuity,
any deferred annuity contract after annuity payments have commenced, or
reversionary annuity, nor to any contract which shall be delivered
outside this state through an agent or other representative of the
company issuing the contract.

**Source.** 1979, 360:4, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 409-A:3

 **409-A:3 Compulsory Contract Provisions. –**
                                             
 I. In the case of contracts issued on or after the operative date of
this chapter as defined in RSA 409-A:10, no contract of annuity, except
as stated in RSA 409-A:2, shall be delivered or issued for delivery in
this state unless it contains in substance the following provisions, or
corresponding provisions which in the opinion of the commissioner are at
least as favorable to the contract holder, upon cessation of payment of
considerations under the contract:
                                             
 (a) That upon cessation of payment of considerations under a
contract, the company will grant a paid-up annuity benefit on a plan
stipulated in the contract of such value as is specified in RSA 409-A:5,
409-A:6, 409-A:7, 409-A:8 and 409-A:9, I.
                                             
 (b) If a contract provides for a lump sum settlement at maturity,
or at any other time, that upon surrender of the contract at or prior to
the commencement of any annuity payments, the company will pay in lieu
of any paid-up annuity benefit a cash surrender benefit of such amount
as is specified in RSA 409-A:5, 409-A:6, 409-A:8 and 409-A:9, I. The
company shall reserve the right to defer the payment of such cash
surrender benefit for a period of 6 months after demand therefor with
surrender of the contract.
                                             
 (c) A statement of the mortality table, if any, and interest
rates used in calculating any minimum paid-up annuity, cash surrender or
death benefits that are guaranteed under the contract, together with
sufficient information to determine the amounts of such benefits.
                                             
 (d) A statement that any paid-up annuity, cash surrender or death
benefits that may be available under the contract are not less than the
minimum benefits required by any statute of the state in which the
contract is delivered and an explanation of the manner in which such
benefits are altered by the existence of any additional amounts credited
by the company to the contract, any indebtedness to the company on the
contract or any prior withdrawals from or partial surrenders of the
contract.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, any deferred
annuity contract may provide that if no considerations have been
received under a contract for a period of 2 full years and the portion
of the paid-up annuity benefit at maturity on the plan stipulated in the
contract arising from considerations paid prior to such period would be
less than 
                                             $20 monthly, the company may at its option terminate such
contract by payment in cash of the then present value of such portion of
the paid-up annuity benefit, calculated on the basis of the mortality
table, if any, and interest rate specified in the contract for
determining the paid-up annuity benefit, and by such payment shall be
relieved of any further obligation under such contract.
                                             
 III. Any contract which does not provide cash surrender benefits or
does not provide death benefits at least equal to the minimum
nonforfeiture amount prior to the commencement of any annuity payments
shall include a statement in a prominent place in the contract that such
benefits are not provided.

**Source.** 1979, 360:4, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 409-A:4

 **409-A:4 Minimum Nonforfeiture Amounts. –** The minimum values as
specified in RSA 409-A:5, 409-A:6, 409-A:7, 409-A:8 and 409-A:9, I of
any paid-up annuity, cash surrender, or death benefits available under
an annuity contract shall be based upon minimum nonforfeiture amounts as
defined in this section.
                                             
 I. The minimum nonforfeiture amount at any time at or prior to the
commencement of any annuity payments shall be equal to an accumulation
up to such time at rates of interest as indicated in paragraph III of
the net considerations, paid prior to such time, decreased by the sum of
subparagraphs (a) through (d):
                                             
 (a) Any prior withdrawals from or partial surrenders of the
contract accumulated at rates of interest as indicated in paragraph
III;
                                             
 (b) An annual contract charge of 
                                             $50, accumulated at rates of
interest as indicated in paragraph III;
                                             
 (c) Any premium tax paid by the company for the contract,
accumulated at rates of interest as indicated in paragraph III; and
                                             
 (d) The amount of any indebtedness to the company on the
contract, including interest due and accrued.
                                             
 II. The net considerations for a given contract year used to define
the minimum nonforfeiture amount shall be an amount equal to 87 1/2
percent of the gross considerations credited to the contract during that
contract year.
                                             
 III. The interest rate used in determining minimum nonforfeiture
amounts shall be an annual rate of interest determined as the lesser of
3 percent per annum and the following, which shall be specified in the
contract if the interest rate will be reset:
                                             
 (a) The 5-year Constant Maturity Treasury Rate reported by the
Federal Reserve as of a date, or average over a period, rounded to the
nearest 1/20th of one percent, specified in the contract no longer than
15 months prior to the contract issue date or redetermination date under
subparagraph III(d);
                                             
 (b) Reduced by 125 basis points;
                                             
 (c) Where the resulting interest rate is not less than one
percent; and
                                             
 (d) The interest rate shall apply for an initial period and may
be redetermined for additional periods. The redetermination date, basis,
and period, if any, shall be stated in the contract. The basis is the
date or average over a specified period that produces the value of the
5-year Constant Maturity Treasury Rate to be used at each
redetermination date.
                                             
 IV. During the period or term that a contract provides substantive
participation in an equity indexed benefit, it may increase the
reduction described in subparagraph III(b) by up to an additional 100
basis points to reflect the value of the equity index benefit. The
present value at the contract issue date, and at each redetermination
date thereafter, of the additional reduction shall not exceed the market
value of the benefit. The commissioner may require a demonstration that
the present value of the additional reduction does not exceed the market
value of the benefit. Lacking such a demonstration that is acceptable to
the commissioner, the commissioner may disallow or limit the additional
reduction.
                                             
 V. The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, as
necessary to implement the provisions of paragraph IV and to provide for
further adjustments to the calculation of minimum nonforfeiture amounts
for contracts that provide substantive participation in an equity index
benefit and for other contracts that the commissioner determines
adjustments are justified.

**Source.** 1979, 360:4, eff. Aug. 22, 1979. 2002, 207:44, eff. May 16,
2002. 2004, 187:3, eff. June 30, 2004.

### Section 409-A:5

 **409-A:5 Computation of Annuity Benefit. –** Any paid-up annuity
benefit available under a contract shall be such that its present value
on the date annuity payments are to commence is at least equal to the
minimum nonforfeiture amount on that date. Such present value shall be
computed using the mortality table, if any, and the interest rate
specified in the contract for determining the minimum paid-up annuity
benefits guaranteed in the contract.

**Source.** 1979, 360:4, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 409-A:6

 **409-A:6 Computation of Cash Surrender Benefits. –** For contracts
which provide cash surrender benefits, such cash surrender benefits
available prior to maturity shall not be less than the present value as
of the date of surrender of that portion of the maturity value of the
paid-up annuity benefit which would be provided under the contract at
maturity arising from considerations paid prior to the time of cash
surrender reduced by the amount appropriate to reflect any prior
withdrawals from or partial surrenders of the contract, such present
value being calculated on the basis of an interest rate not more than
one percent higher than the interest rate specified in the contract for
accumulating the net considerations to determine such maturity value,
decreased by the amount of any indebtedness to the company on the
contract, including interest due and accrued, and increased by any
existing additional amounts credited by the company to the contract. In
no event shall any cash surrender benefit be less than the minimum
nonforfeiture amount at that time. The death benefit under such
contracts shall be at least equal to the cash surrender benefit.

**Source.** 1979, 360:4, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 409-A:7

 **409-A:7 Computation of Paid-up Annuity Nonforfeiture Benefits. –**
For contracts which do not provide cash surrender benefits, the present
value of any paid-up annuity benefit available as a nonforfeiture option
at any time prior to maturity shall not be less than the present value
of that portion of the maturity value of the paid-up annuity benefit
provided under the contract arising from considerations paid prior to
the time the contract is surrendered in exchange for, or changed to, a
deferred paid-up annuity, such present value being calculated for the
period prior to the maturity date on the basis of the interest rate
specified in the contract for accumulating the net considerations to
determine such maturity value, and increased by any existing additional
amounts credited by the company to the contract. For contracts which do
not provide any death benefits prior to the commencement of any annuity
payments, such present values shall be calculated on the basis of such
interest rate and the mortality table specified in the contract for
determining the maturity value of the paid-up annuity benefit. However,
in no event shall the present value of a paid-up annuity benefit be less
than the minimum nonforfeiture amount at that time.

**Source.** 1979, 360:4, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 409-A:8

 **409-A:8 Determination of Maturity Date. –** For the purpose of
determining the benefits calculated under RSA 409-A:6 and 409-A:7, in
the case of annuity contracts under which an election may be made to
have annuity payments commence at optional maturity dates, the maturity
date shall be deemed to be the latest date for which election shall be
permitted by the contract, but shall not be deemed to be later than the
anniversary of the contract next following the annuitant's seventieth
birthday or the tenth anniversary of the contract, whichever is later.

**Source.** 1979, 360:4, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 409-A:9

 **409-A:9 Calculations of Values; Supplemental Rules. –**
                                             
 I. Any paid-up annuity, cash surrender or death benefits available
at any time, other than on the contract anniversary under any contract
with fixed scheduled considerations, shall be calculated with allowance
for the lapse of time and the payment of any scheduled considerations
beyond the beginning of the contract year in which cessation of payment
of considerations under the contract occurs.
                                             
 II. For any contract which provides, within the same contract by
rider or supplemental contract provision, both annuity benefits and life
insurance benefits that are in excess of the greater of cash surrender
benefits or a return of the gross considerations with interest, the
minimum nonforfeiture benefits shall be equal to the sum of the minimum
nonforfeiture benefits for the annuity portion and the minimum
nonforfeiture benefits, if any, for the life insurance portion computed
as if each portion were a separate contract. Notwithstanding the
provisions of RSA 409-A:5, 409-A:6, 409-A:7, 409-A:8 and 409-A:9, I,
additional benefits payable (a) in the event of total and permanent
disability, (b) as reversionary annuity or deferred reversionary annuity
benefits, or (c) as other policy benefits additional to life insurance,
endowment and annuity benefits, shall be disregarded in ascertaining the
minimum nonforfeiture amounts, paid-up annuity, cash surrender and death
benefits that may be required by this chapter. The inclusion of such
additional benefits shall not be required in any paid-up benefits,
unless such additional benefits separately would require minimum
nonforfeiture amounts, paid-up annuity, cash surrender and death
benefits.

**Source.** 1979, 360:4, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 409-A:10

 **409-A:10 Operative Date. –** After August 1, 1979, any company may
file with the commissioner a written notice of its election to comply
with the provisions of this chapter after a specified date before August
1, 1981. After filing of such notice, then upon such specified date,
which shall be the operative date of this chapter for such company, this
chapter shall become operative with respect to annuity contracts
thereafter issued by such company. If a company makes no such election,
the operative date of this chapter for such company shall be August 1,
1981.

**Source.** 1979, 360:4, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.
