---
title: CHAPTER 411 DOMESTIC LIFE INSURANCE COMPANIES
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 411
                                             
DOMESTIC LIFE INSURANCE COMPANIES
---------------------------------

### Section 411:1

 **411:1 Capital Stock. –** Any corporation organized under the laws
of this state and engaged wholly or in part in the life insurance
business as a stock company shall have a capital stock of not less than

                                             $600,000 paid in, which shall be invested as provided in RSA 411-A.
One-half of such capital shall be deposited with the insurance
commissioner.

**Source.** 1913, 42:1. PL 278:1. RL 328:1. RSA 411:1. 1969, 283:9.
1978, 11:4, eff. July 1, 1978.

### Section 411:2

 **411:2 Certificate of Authority. –** Upon said deposit and
satisfactory evidence to the commissioner that the capital stock of at
least 
                                             $200,000 has been paid in and invested as herein prescribed, he
shall issue to said stock company a certificate authorizing it to do
business as such.

**Source.** 1913, 42:1. PL 278:2. RL 328:2.

### Section 411:3

 **411:3 Mutual Companies. –** No such certificate shall be issued to
such a corporation organized on the mutual plan until at least 500
persons have subscribed in the aggregate for at least 
                                             $500,000 of
insurance upon their lives and shall each have paid in one full annual
premium in cash upon the insurance applied for, nor until it shall have
deposited with the commissioner at least 
                                             $200,000 in the securities
required by law.

**Source.** 1913, 42:2. 1917, 20:1. PL 278:3. RL 328:3. RSA 411:3. 1969,
283:10, eff. June 25, 1969.

### Section 411:4

 **411:4 Annual Statement. –** The president or vice-president, and
secretary or actuary, or a majority of the trustees or directors, of
every life insurance company organized under the laws of this state,
shall annually, on January 1, or within 60 days thereafter, prepare
under oath and deposit in the office of the insurance commissioner, a
statement of the condition of such company on December 31 of the
preceding year, showing:
                                             
 I. Name and where located, the names of the officers, the amount of
capital stock, and amount of capital stock paid in.
                                             
 II. The value of real estate owned by such company, the amount of
cash on hand, the amount of cash deposited in banks or trust companies,
giving names of depositaries, the amount of unreported and deferred
premiums, the amount of stocks and bonds, giving names and amounts, with
the par and market value of each kind, the amount of loans secured by
first mortgage on real estate, the amount of all other loans, and how
secured, with the rate of interest, the amount of premium notes on
policies in force, the amount of notes given for unpaid stock, and how
secured, the amount of interest due and unpaid, and all other assets.
                                             
 III. The amount of losses due and unpaid, the amount of losses
adjusted but not due, the amount of losses unadjusted, the amount of
claims for losses resisted, the amount of money borrowed and the amount
required to safely reinsure all outstanding risks according to the
American Experience Table of Mortality, and 3 1/2 percent interest per
annum, or the actuaries' combined experience table with the same rate of
interest.
                                             
 IV. The amount of cash premiums and premium notes received, the
amount of interest received from all sources during the year, and the
amount received from all other sources.
                                             
 V. The amount paid for losses, the amount of dividends paid to
policyholders and to stockholders, the amount of commissions and
salaries paid to agents, the amount paid to officers for salaries, the
amount paid for taxes, and the amount of all other payments and
expenditures.
                                             
 VI. The greatest amount insured on any one life, the amount
deposited in other states and territories as security for policyholders
therein, stating the amount in each state or territory, the amount of
premiums received in this state during the year, the amount paid for
losses in this state during the year, the whole number of policies
issued during the year, with the amount of insurance effected thereby,
and total amount of insurance at risk.

**Source.** 1913, 42:3. PL 278:4. RL 328:4.

### Section 411:5

 **411:5 Additional Inquiries. –** The commissioner is authorized to
amend the form of annual statement, and to propose such additional
inquiries as he may think necessary to elicit a full exhibit of the
standing of such companies.

**Source.** 1913, 42:3. PL 278:5. RL 328:5.

### Section 411:6

 **411:6 Policy Reserves. –** As soon as practicable after the filing
of said annual statement the commissioner shall determine the reserves
for all policies of each such company in force on December 31
immediately preceding, in accordance with the provisions of RSA 410.

**Source.** 1913, 424:4. PL 278:6. RL 328:6. RSA 411:6. 1963, 70:1, eff.
July 9, 1963.

### Section 411:7

 **411:7 Making Valuation. –** For the purpose of making such
valuation the commissioner may employ a competent actuary, who shall be
paid by the company for which the services are rendered; but nothing
herein shall prevent any company from making said valuation herein
contemplated, which may be received by the commissioner upon such proof
as he may determine.

**Source.** 1913, 42:4. PL 278:7. RL 328:7.

### Section 411:8

 **411:8 Security Deposit. –** The commissioner shall require a
domestic insurance company to make a deposit in trust in an amount
necessary, in the discretion of the commissioner for the protection of
the company's policyholders, provided that the required deposit shall
not exceed the greater of 
                                             $1,000,000 or the amount of deposits required
under RSA 402:73.

**Source.** 1913, 42:4. PL 278:8. 1933, 80:1. RL 328:8. RSA 411:8. 1963,
70:2. 1978, 11:5. 1987, 246:1, eff. May 18, 1987.

### Section 411:9

 **411:9 Exception. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 246:5, I, eff. May 18,
1987.
                                             ]

### Section 411:10

 **411:10 Purpose. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 246:5, II, eff. May 18,
1987.
                                             ]

### Section 411:11

 **411:11 Certificate. –** Upon receipt of a deposit in trust from
any such company, as required or allowed by the laws of this state, the
commissioner shall issue upon the request of such company a certificate
which shall set forth the corporate name of the company, its principal
office, that a deposit for the protection of all its policyholders has
been duly made, the amount of securities so deposited and that it is
authorized to transact the business of life insurance.

**Source.** 1913, 42:5. 1917, 20:3. PL 278:11. RL 328:11. RSA 411:11.
1963, 70:4. 1987, 246:2, eff. May 18, 1987.

### Section 411:12

 **411:12 Noncompliance. –** Upon the failure of any company
organized or doing business under this chapter to make the deposit
required under RSA 411:8 the commissioner shall notify such company to
issue no new policies until there shall have been compliance with said
requirement.

**Source.** 1913, 42:6. PL 278:12. RL 328:12. RSA 411:12. 1987, 246:6,
eff. May 18, 1987.

### Section 411:13

 **411:13 Change of Securities, Etc. –** Any such company making a
deposit in trust shall have the right at any time to change their
securities on deposit by substituting for those withdrawn a like amount
in other securities of the character described in RSA 411-A.

**Source.** 1913, 42:9. PL 278:13. RL 328:13. RSA 411:13. 1987, 246:3,
eff. May 18, 1987.

### Section 411:14

 **411:14 Collection of Interest. –** The commissioner shall permit
companies, having on deposit with him stocks or bonds as security, to
collect the dividends or interest accruing on such deposits, delivering
to their authorized agents, respectively, the coupons or other evidences
of interest as the same become due; but upon default by any company to
deposit additional security as called for by the commissioner, or
pending any proceedings to close up or enjoin it, the commissioner shall
collect the dividends and interest as they become due and add the same
to the securities in his hands belonging to such company.

**Source.** 1913, 42:13. PL 278:14. RL 328:14.

Investments
-----------

### Section 411:15-19

 **411:15 to 411:19 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1978, 11:7, eff. July 1,
1978.
                                             ]

Winding Up Companies
--------------------

### Section 411:20-27

 **411:20 to 411:27 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1969, 272:3, eff. June
23, 1969.
                                             ]

Miscellaneous Provisions
------------------------

### Section 411:28

 **411:28 Acting Without Certificate. –** Any such company, doing or
attempting to do life insurance business without a certificate as
provided for in this chapter, shall forfeit 
                                             $ 100 for every day it
continues to write new business in this state without such certificate.

**Source.** 1913, 42:14. PL 278:29. RL 328:27.

### Section 411:29

 **411:29 Suits for Penalties. –** Suits to recover any of the
penalties provided for in this chapter shall be instituted in the name
of the state on relation of the attorney general, under the direction
and by the authority of the commissioner. Said penalties shall be paid
to the state.

**Source.** 1913, 42:15. PL 278:30. RL 328:28.

### Section 411:30

 **411:30 Transfer of Risks, Etc. –** No such corporation shall
transfer its risks, or any part thereof, to, or reinsure its risks, or
any part thereof, except reinsurance effected in the ordinary course of
business, in any insurance corporation, association or society which is
not at the time of such transfer or reinsurance authorized to do
business in this state.

**Source.** 1913, 42:19. 1919, 19:1. PL 278:31. RL 328:29.

### Section 411:31

 **411:31 Change of Payee, Etc. –** The insured in any such
corporation shall have the right at any time, with the consent of such
corporation, to make a change in his payee or beneficiary without
requiring the consent of such payee or beneficiary; provided, that such
policy has not been assigned as security for debt or other legal
consideration.

**Source.** 1913, 42:20. PL 278:32. RL 328:30.

### Section 411:32

 **411:32 Negotiation of Insurance. –** No insurance shall be
negotiated in this state by or on behalf of any such company except by
agents or brokers who shall be qualified, appointed and licensed in
accordance with the law.

**Source.** 1913, 42:22. 1917, 20:4. PL 278:33. RL 328:31.

### Section 411:33

 **411:33 Application of Chapter. –** Nothing in this chapter shall
affect life insurance companies, associations or societies or accident
insurance companies doing business on the assessment plan.

**Source.** 1913, 42:21. PL 278:34. RL 328:32.
