---
title: 'CHAPTER 412-A FILING OF AIRCRAFT INSURANCE POLICIES'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 412-A
                                             
FILING OF AIRCRAFT INSURANCE POLICIES
-------------------------------------

### Section 412-A:1

 **412-A:1 Policies to be Filed With Commissioner. –** Every
insurance company which issues insurance on hulls of aircraft, including
their accessories and equipment, and liability resulting from the
ownership, use or maintenance of aircraft shall file with the insurance
commissioner a copy of the form of the policy containing the insurance
contract covering such losses and all printed endorsements that may be
attached thereto. An insurance company authorized to insure against such
losses shall not issue a policy covering such losses until 30 days after
it has filed the form of the policy, unless the commissioner sooner
gives written approval of the policy.

**Source.** 2003, 150:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 412-A:2

 **412-A:2 Liability for Aircraft Accident. –** No policy of
insurance issued or delivered in this state covering any loss, expense,
or liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of an
aircraft shall exclude or deny coverage because the aircraft is operated
in violation of federal or civil air regulations, or any state law or
local ordinance. This section does not prohibit the use of specific
exclusions or conditions in any such policy which relate to any of the
following:
                                             
 I. Certification of an aircraft in a stated category by the federal
aviation administration;
                                             
 II. Certification of a pilot in a stated category by the federal
aviation administration;
                                             
 III. Establishing requirements for pilot experience;
                                             
 IV. Establishing limitations on the use of the aircraft.

**Source.** 2003, 150:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 412-A:3

 **412-A:3 Penalties. –** Any insurer willfully violating any of the
provisions of this chapter may be fined not more than 
                                             $500. The
commissioner may suspend or revoke the license of any insurer or
organization for any violation of this chapter or the failure to comply
with an order of the commissioner, issued under this chapter.

**Source.** 2003, 150:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 412-A:4

 **412-A:4 Hearing and Appeal. –** Any insurer or organization
aggrieved by any order or decision of the commissioner is entitled to a
rehearing and appeal under RSA 541.

**Source.** 2003, 150:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.
