---
title: 'CHAPTER 415-F MEDICARE SUPPLEMENTAL INSURANCE'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 415-F
                                             
MEDICARE SUPPLEMENTAL INSURANCE
-------------------------------

### Section 415-F:1

 **415-F:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Applicant'' means:
                                             
 (a) In the case of an individual Medicare supplement policy, the
person who seeks to contract for insurance benefits; and
                                             
 (b) In the case of a group Medicare supplement policy, the
proposed certificate holder.
                                             
 II. "Certificate'' means any certificate advertised, solicited,
delivered or issued for delivery in this state under a group Medicare
supplement policy.
                                             
 III. "Certificate form'' means the form on which the certificate is
advertised, solicited, delivered or issued for delivery by the issuer.
                                             
 IV. "Issuer'' includes insurance companies, fraternal benefit
societies, nonprofit health service corporations, health maintenance
organizations, and any other entity advertising, soliciting, delivering
or issuing for delivery in this state Medicare supplement policies or
certificates.
                                             
 V. "Medicare'' means the "Health Insurance for the Aged Act,'' Title
XVIII of the Social Security Amendments of 1965, as then constituted or
later amended.
                                             
 VI. "Medicare supplement policy'' means a group or individual policy
of accident and sickness insurance or a subscriber contract of hospital
and medical service corporations, nonprofit health service corporations,
or health maintenance organizations other than a policy issued pursuant
to a contract under Section 1876 of the federal Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. Section 1395 et seq.), or an issued policy under a demonstration
project specified in 42 U.S.C. Section 1395 (a)(1), which is advertised,
marketed or designed primarily as a supplement to reimbursements under
Medicare or the hospital, medical or surgical expenses of persons
eligible for Medicare.
                                             
 VII. "Policy form'' means the form on which the policy is delivered
or issued for delivery by the issuer.

**Source.** 1994, 233:1. 1996, 188:15, 16, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 415-F:2

 **415-F:2 Applicability and Scope. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise specifically provided in RSA 415-F:4, this
chapter shall apply to:
                                             
 (a) All Medicare supplement policies delivered or issued for
delivery in this state on or after January 1, 1995; and
                                             
 (b) All certificates issued under group Medicare supplement
policies, which certificates have been delivered or issued for delivery
in this state.
                                             
 II. This chapter shall not apply to a policy of one or more
employers or labor organizations, or of the trustees of a fund
established by one or more employers or labor organizations, or
combination thereof, for employees or former employees or a combination
of employees or former employees, or for members or former members, or a
combination of members or former members, of the labor organizations.
                                             
 III. Except as otherwise specifically provided in RSA 415-F:5, III,
the provisions of this chapter are not intended to prohibit or apply to
insurance policies or health care benefit plans, including group
conversion policies, provided to Medicare eligible persons, which
policies are not marketed or held to be Medicare supplement policies or
benefit plans.

**Source.** 1994, 233:1. 1996, 188:17, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 415-F:3

 **415-F:3 Standards for Policy Provisions and Authority to Adopt
Rules. –**
                                             
 I. No Medicare supplement policy or certificate in force in the
state shall contain benefits that duplicate benefits provided by
Medicare.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any other provision of law of this state, a
Medicare supplement policy or certificate shall not exclude or limit
benefits for loss incurred more than 6 months from the effective date of
coverage because it involved a preexisting condition. The policy or
certificate shall not define a preexisting condition more restrictively
than a condition for which medical advice was given or treatment was
recommended by or received from a physician within 6 months before the
effective date of coverage.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall adopt reasonable rules under RSA 541-A
to establish specific standards for policy provisions of Medicare
supplement policies and certificates. Such standards shall be in
addition to and in accordance with applicable laws of this state. No
requirement of the insurance code relating to minimum required policy
benefits, other than the minimum standards contained in this chapter,
shall apply to Medicare supplement policies and certificates. The
standards may cover, but not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) Terms of renewability.
                                             
 (b) Initial and subsequent conditions of eligibility.
                                             
 (c) Nonduplication of coverage.
                                             
 (d) Probationary periods.
                                             
 (e) Benefit limitations, exceptions, and reductions.
                                             
 (f) Elimination periods.
                                             
 (g) Requirements for replacement.
                                             
 (h) Recurrent conditions.
                                             
 (i) Definitions of terms.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner may adopt reasonable rules under RSA 541-A to
establish minimum standards for benefits, claims payment, marketing
practices, compensation arrangements and reporting practices for
Medicare supplement policies and certificates.
                                             
 V. The commissioner may adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, as are
necessary to conform Medicare supplement policies and certificates to
the requirements of federal law and regulations promulgated under such
federal law, including but not limited to:
                                             
 (a) Requiring refunds or credits if the policies or certificates
do not meet loss ratio requirements.
                                             
 (b) Establishing a uniform methodology for calculating and
reporting loss ratios.
                                             
 (c) Assuring public access to policies, premiums, and loss ratio
information of issuers of Medicare supplement insurance.
                                             
 (d) Establishing a process for approving or disapproving policy
forms, certificate forms, and proposed premium increases.
                                             
 (e) Establishing a policy for holding public hearings prior to
approval of premium increases.
                                             
 (f) Establishing standards for medicare select policies and
certificates.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner may adopt rules under RSA 541-A that specify
prohibited policy provisions not otherwise specifically authorized by
statute which, in the opinion of the commissioner, are unjust, unfair or
unfairly discriminatory to any person insured or proposed to be insured
under a Medicare supplement policy or certificate.

**Source.** 1994, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 415-F:4

 **415-F:4 Loss Ratio Standards. –** Medicare supplement policies
shall return to policyholders benefits which are reasonable in relation
to the premium charged. The commissioner shall issue reasonable
regulations to establish minimum standards for loss ratios of Medicare
supplement policies on the basis of incurred claims experience, or
incurred health care expenses where coverage is provided by a health
maintenance organization on a service rather than reimbursement basis,
and earned premiums in accordance with accepted actuarial principles and
practices.

**Source.** 1994, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 415-F:5

 **415-F:5 Disclosure Standards. –**
                                             
 I. In order to provide for full and fair disclosure in the sale of
Medicare supplement policies, no Medicare supplement policy or
certificate shall be delivered in this state unless an outline of
coverage is delivered to the applicant at the time application is made.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall prescribe the format and content of the
outline of coverage required by 415-A:5, I. For purposes of this
section, "format'' means style, arrangements and overall appearance,
including such items as size, color, and prominence of type and
arrangement of text and captions. Such outline of coverage shall
include:
                                             
 (a) A description of the principal benefits and coverage provided
in the policy.
                                             
 (b) A statement of the renewal provisions, including any
reservations by the issuer of a right to change premiums, and disclosure
of the existence of any automatic renewal premium increases based on the
policyholder's age.
                                             
 (c) A statement that the outline of coverage is a summary of the
policy issued or applied for and that the policy should be consulted to
determine governing contractual provisions.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may prescribe by rule a standard form and the
contents of an informational brochure for persons eligible for Medicare,
which is intended to improve the buyer's ability to select the most
appropriate coverage and improve the buyer's understanding of Medicare.
Except in the case of direct response insurance policies, the
commissioner may require by rule that the informational brochure be
provided to any prospective insureds eligible for Medicare concurrently
with delivery of the outline of coverage. With respect to direct
response insurance policies, the commissioner may require by rule that
the prescribed brochure be provided upon request to any prospective
insureds eligible for Medicare, but in no event later than the time of
policy delivery.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner may adopt rules under RSA 541-A for captions or
notice requirements, determined to be in the public interest and
designed to inform prospective insureds that particular insurance
coverages are not Medicare supplement coverages, for all accident and
sickness insurance policies sold to persons eligible for Medicare, other
than:
                                             
 (a) Medicare supplement policies.
                                             
 (b) Disability income policies.
                                             
 V. The commissioner may adopt rules under RSA 541-A to govern the
full and fair disclosure of the information in connection with the
replacement of accident and sickness policies, subscriber contracts or
certificates by persons eligible for Medicare.

**Source.** 1994, 233:1. 1996, 188:18, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 415-F:6

 **415-F:6 Notice of Free Examination. –** Medicare supplement
policies and certificates shall have a notice prominently printed on the
first page of the policy or certificate or attached thereto stating in
substance that the applicant shall have the right to return the policy
or certificate within 30 days of its delivery and to have the premium
refunded if, after examination of the policy or certificate, the
applicant is not satisfied for any reason. Any refund made pursuant to
this section shall be paid directly to the applicant by the issuer in a
timely manner.

**Source.** 1994, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 415-F:7

 **415-F:7 Filing Requirements for Advertising. –** Every issuer of
Medicare supplement insurance policies or certificates in this state
shall provide a copy of any Medicare supplement advertisement intended
for use in this state whether through written, radio or television
medium to the commissioner of this state for review or approval by the
commissioner to the extent it may be required under state law.

**Source.** 1994, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 415-F:8

 **415-F:8 Penalties. –** In addition to any other applicable
penalties for violations of the insurance code, the commissioner may
require issuers violating any provision of this chapter or rules adopted
pursuant to this chapter to cease marketing any Medicare supplement
policy or certificate in this state which is related directly or
indirectly to a violation or may require such issuer to take such
actions as are necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter,
or both.

**Source.** 1994, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.
