---
title: 'CHAPTER 415-J NEW HAMPSHIRE TELEMEDICINE ACT'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 415-J
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE TELEMEDICINE ACT
------------------------------

### Section 415-J:1

 **415-J:1 New Hampshire Telemedicine Act. –** This chapter shall be
known and may be cited as the New Hampshire telemedicine act.

**Source.** 2009, 259:1, eff. Oct. 14, 2009.

### Section 415-J:2

 **415-J:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Health benefit policy'' means any individual or group plan,
policy, or contract for health care services issued, delivered, issued
for delivery, executed, or renewed in this state, including, but not
limited to, those contracts executed by the state of New Hampshire on
behalf of state employees under RSA 21-I, by an insurer.
                                             
 II. "Insurer'' means an accident and sickness insurer, fraternal
benefit society, hospital service corporation, medical service
corporation, health care corporation, health maintenance organization,
preferred provider organization, provider sponsored health care
corporation, managed care entity, or any similar entity authorized to
issue contracts under this title or to provide health benefit policies.
                                             
 III. "Telemedicine,'' as it pertains to the delivery of health care
services, means the use of audio, video, or other electronic media for
the purpose of diagnosis, consultation, or treatment. Telemedicine does
not include the use of audio-only telephone or facsimile.

**Source.** 2009, 259:1, eff. Oct. 14, 2009.

### Section 415-J:3

 **415-J:3 Coverage for Telemedicine Services. –**
                                             
 I. It is the intent of the general court to recognize the
application of telemedicine for covered services provided within the
scope of practice of a physician or other health care provider as a
method of delivery of medical care by which an individual shall receive
medical services from a health care provider without in-person contact
with the provider.
                                             
 II. An insurer offering a health plan in this state may not deny
coverage on the sole basis that the coverage is provided through
telemedicine if the health care service would be covered if it were
provided through in-person consultation between the covered person and a
health care provider.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit an
insurer from providing coverage for only those services that are
medically necessary and subject to the terms and conditions of the
covered person's policy.

**Source.** 2009, 259:1, eff. Oct. 14, 2009.
