---
title: 'CHAPTER 415-B PREMIUM FINANCE COMPANIES'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 415-B
                                             
PREMIUM FINANCE COMPANIES
-------------------------

### Section 415-B:1

 **415-B:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the insurance commissioner.
                                             
 II. "Insurance premium finance company'' means a person engaged in
whole or in part in the business of entering into premium finance
agreements.
                                             
 III. "Licensee'' means an insurance premium finance company holding
a license issued under this chapter.
                                             
 IV. "Person'' means an individual, partnership, association,
business corporation, nonprofit corporation, common law trust,
joint-stock company, or any other group of individuals however
organized.
                                             
 V. "Premium finance agreement'' means an agreement by which an
insured or prospective insured promises to pay to an insurance premium
finance company the amount advanced or to be advanced under the
agreement to an insurer or to an insurance agent or broker in payment of
premiums of an insurance contract, together with interest or discount
and a service charge as authorized and limited by this chapter, and in
which as security for the amount advanced the premium finance company
receives an assignment of the gross unearned premiums of such insurance
contract.
                                             
 VI. "Default'' means the failure of the named insured to discharge
when due any of his obligations in connection with the payment of
premiums on a policy, or any installment of such premium, whether the
premium is payable directly to the insurer or its agent or indirectly
under any premium finance plan or extension of credit.

**Source.** 1981, 118:1, eff. July 3, 1981.

### Section 415-B:2

 **415-B:2 License Required. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall engage in the business of a premium finance
company in this state without having first obtained a premium finance
company license from the commissioner, except as provided in paragraph
IV.
                                             
 II. The annual license fee shall be 
                                             $200. Licenses may be renewed
from year to year as of July 1 of each year upon payment of the license
fee to the commissioner. Additionally, a premium finance company
established in this state shall file with the commissioner proof of
minimum capital and surplus in an amount equal to or greater than

                                             $250,000, or shall file with the commissioner a surety bond or
equivalent acceptable to the commissioner in the amount of 
                                             $250,000.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may, at any time, require the applicant to
disclose fully the identity of all stockholders, partners, officers, and
employees; and he may, in his discretion, refuse to issue or renew a
license in the name of any person, firm, partnership, or corporation if
he is not satisfied that any officer, employee, stockholder, or partner
thereof, who may materially influence the applicant's conduct, meets the
standards of RSA 415-B:3, II.
                                             
 IV. This section shall not require any insurance company, agent,
broker, association, exchange, building or savings and loan association,
bank, thrift institution, trust company, small loan company, industrial
loan company or credit union authorized to do business in this state
financing premiums on policies to be additionally licensed under this
chapter; provided, however, that all other provisions of this chapter
shall apply to such persons.

**Source.** 1981, 118:1. 2001, 224:7, eff. Sept. 9, 2001.

### Section 415-B:3

 **415-B:3 Issuance and Renewal of License. –**
                                             
 I. Upon the filing of an application and the payment of the license
fee, the commissioner shall make an investigation of each applicant and
shall issue a license if the applicant is qualified in accordance with
this chapter. If the commissioner does not find the applicant qualified,
he shall, within 30 days after he has received such application, at the
request of the applicant, give the applicant a full hearing.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall issue or renew a license when he is
satisfied that the person to be licensed:
                                             
 (a) Is competent and trustworthy and intends to act in good faith
in the capacity involved by the license applied for;
                                             
 (b) Has a good business reputation and has had experience,
training or education so as to be qualified in the business for which
the license is applied for; and
                                             
 (c) If a corporation, is a corporation incorporated under the
laws of this state or a foreign corporation authorized to transact
business in this state.

**Source.** 1981, 118:1, eff. July 3, 1981.

### Section 415-B:4

 **415-B:4 Revocation or Suspension of License; Appeal. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner may revoke or suspend the license of any premium
finance company when, after investigation, the commissioner finds that:
                                             
 (a) The license issued to such company was obtained by fraud;
                                             
 (b) There was any misrepresentation in the application for the
license;
                                             
 (c) The holder of such license has shown himself untrustworthy or
incompetent to act as a premium finance company; or
                                             
 (d) Such company has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter.
                                             
 II. In lieu of revoking or suspending the license for any of the
causes stated in paragraph I, after hearing as provided in paragraph
III, the commissioner may subject such company to a penalty of not more
than 
                                             $1,500 for each offense when, in his judgment, he finds that the
public interest would not be harmed by the continued operation of such
company. The amount of any such penalty shall be paid by the company to
the commissioner.
                                             
 III. Before the commissioner shall penalize, revoke, suspend, or
refuse to renew the license of any premium finance company, the
aggrieved person shall be entitled to a hearing in accordance with RSA
541.
                                             
 IV. If the commissioner refuses to issue a license as a premium
finance company to any person, or if he revokes, suspends or refuses to
renew the license of any premium finance company, or imposes a penalty
on such company, after a hearing as provided under paragraph III, the
applicant or licensee may appeal from such refusal to issue a license or
from such adjudication in accordance with RSA 541.

**Source.** 1981, 118:1, eff. July 3, 1981.

### Section 415-B:5

 **415-B:5 Licensee's Books and Records. –**
                                             
 I. Every licensee shall maintain records of its premium finance
transactions. Such records shall be open to examination and
investigation by the commissioner at any time during regular business
hours at any location at which such records are maintained.
                                             
 II. Every licensee shall preserve its records of such premium
finance transactions, including cards used in a card system, if any, for
at least 2 years after making the final entry in respect to any premium
finance agreement. The preservation of records in photographic or
microfilm form shall constitute compliance with this requirement.
                                             
 III. Within 120 days after the completion of the fiscal year, each
licensee shall file a report with the commissioner giving such
information as the commissioner may require concerning the business
operations during the preceding fiscal year of each licensee. Such
information shall include but not be limited to a financial statement
prepared according to generally accepted accounting principles and
certified by a certified public accountant.
                                             
 IV. Any licensee neglecting to make an annual report required by
paragraph III or failing to amend such report within 15 days after
notice from the commissioner shall, unless such neglect or failure is
due to justifiable cause and not willful neglect, pay the state 
                                             $25 for
each day during which such neglect or failure continues.
                                             
 V. If the licensee's records are located out of this state, the
licensee at the licensee's option shall make such records available
within 72 hours to the commissioner at a convenient location within the
state, or pay the reasonable and necessary expenses for the commissioner
or his representative to examine them at a place where they are
maintained. The commissioner may designate representatives, including
comparable officials of the state in which they are maintained, to
inspect them on his behalf.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner shall have the power to issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents,
papers, books, records, and other evidence before him in any matter
pertaining to this chapter.

**Source.** 1981, 118:1. 1985, 343:2, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 415-B:6

 **415-B:6 Form of Premium Finance Agreement. –**
                                             
 I. A premium finance agreement shall:
                                             
 (a) Be dated and signed by or on behalf of the insured; and the
printed portion of the agreement shall be in at least 8-point type;
                                             
 (b) Contain the name and place of business of the insurance agent
or broker negotiating the related insurance contract; the name and
residence or the place of business of the insured as specified by him;
the name and place of business of the premium finance company to which
payments are to be made; a brief description of the insurance contracts
involved and the amount of the premium; and
                                             
 (c) Set forth the following items where applicable:
                                             
 (1) The total amount of the premiums,
                                             
 (2) The amount of the down payment,
                                             
 (3) The principal balance (the difference between (1) and
(2)),
                                             
 (4) The amount of the interest or discount,
                                             
 (5) The balance payable by the insured (sum of (3) and (4)),
and
                                             
 (6) The number of installments required, the amount of each
installment expressed in dollars, and the due date or period of each
installment.
                                             
 II. The items set out in subparagraph I(c) need not be stated in the
sequence or order in which they appear, and additional items may be
included to explain the computations made in determining the amount to
be paid by the insured.
                                             
 III. A premium finance agreement may contain any provision not
prohibited by this chapter or by order of the commissioner.

**Source.** 1981, 118:1, eff. July 3, 1981.

### Section 415-B:7

 **415-B:7 Limitation on Interest and Other Charges. –**
                                             
 I. A premium finance company shall not charge, contract for,
receive, or collect an interest or discount charge other than as
permitted by this chapter.
                                             
 II. The interest or discount shall be agreed upon by the parties and
shall be computed on the balance of the premiums due (after subtracting
the down payment made by the insured in accordance with the premium
finance agreement) from the effective date of the insurance policy for
which the premiums are being advanced, up to and including the date when
the final installment of the premium finance agreement is payable.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding the provisions of any premium finance
agreement, any insured may repay the obligation in full at any time. If
the insured voluntarily prepays, he shall receive a refund credit, which
shall represent at least as great a proportion of the interest or
discount as the sum of the periodic balances after the month in which
prepayment is made bears to the sum of all periodic balances under the
schedule of installments in the agreement. Where the amount of the
refund credit is less than 
                                             $1, no refund need be made.

**Source.** 1981, 118:1, eff. July 3, 1981.

### Section 415-B:8

 **415-B:8 Delinquency and Cancellation Charges. –**
                                             
 I. A premium finance agreement may provide for the payment by the
insured of a delinquency charge on any installment which is in default
for a period of 5 consecutive days or more, of 
                                             $1 to a maximum of 5
percent of the delinquent installment. If the default results in the
cancellation of any insurance contract listed in the agreement, the
agreement may provide for the payment by the insured of a cancellation
charge equal to the difference between any delinquency charge imposed
with respect to the installment in default and 
                                             $15.
                                             
 II. A premium finance agreement may provide for payment of
collection costs, attorney's fees equal to 20 percent of the outstanding
indebtedness, and any other charges which arise because one party
breaches the contract.
                                             
 III. None of the charges referred to in this section shall be
considered directly or indirectly in determining whether a violation of
the usury laws has occurred under a premium finance agreement.

**Source.** 1981, 118:1, eff. July 3, 1981.

### Section 415-B:9

 **415-B:9 Cancellation of Insurance Contract Upon Default. –**
                                             
 I. When a premium finance agreement contains a power of attorney
enabling the premium finance company to cancel upon default any
insurance contract or contracts listed in the agreement, the insurance
contract or contracts shall not be cancelled by the premium finance
company unless such cancellation is effected in accordance with this
section.
                                             
 II. After default, the premium finance company may cancel such
insurance contract or contracts by mailing to the insurer a notice of
cancellation, stating the effective date of cancellation. Such date
shall be not less than 10 days from the date of mailing the notice. The
insurance contract shall be cancelled as if such notice of cancellation
had been submitted by the insured himself but without requiring the
return of the insurance contract or contracts. The premium finance
company shall also mail a copy of the notice of cancellation to the
insured at his last known address as shown on the records of the premium
finance company, and to the insurance agent or broker. Termination of
workers' compensation policies shall be made pursuant to the provisions
set forth in RSA 281-A:9.
                                             
 III. All statutory, regulatory, and contractual restrictions
providing that the insurance contract may not be cancelled unless notice
is given to a governmental agency, mortgagee, or other third party shall
apply where cancellation is effected under the provisions of this
section. The insurer shall give the prescribed notice on behalf of
itself or the insured to any governmental agency, mortgagee, or other
third party on or before the second business day after the day it
receives the notice of cancellation from the premium finance company.
The insurer shall determine the effective date of cancellation taking
into consideration the number of days' notice required to complete the
cancellation.
                                             
 IV. The notice of cancellation shall state the date, not less than
10 days after its mailing, on which such cancellation shall become
effective.

**Source.** 1981, 118:1. 1993, 210:5, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 415-B:10

 **415-B:10 Return Premiums. –** Whenever a financed insurance
contract is cancelled, the insurer shall return whatever gross unearned
premiums are due under the insurance contract to the premium finance
company for the account of the insured or insureds as soon as reasonably
possible, but in any event, within 30 days after the effective date of
cancellation. On auditable policies, gross unearned premiums shall be
returned within 30 days after the date of the completed audit of the
insured. In the event that a crediting of return premiums to the account
of the insured results in a surplus over the amount due from the
insured, the premium finance company shall refund such excess to the
insured provided that no such refund shall be required if it amounts to
less than 
                                             $1. This section shall not apply to retrospectively rated
policies.

**Source.** 1981, 118:1. 1988, 221:3. 1993, 210:6, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 415-B:11

 **415-B:11 Exemption From Filing Requirements. –** No filing of the
premium finance agreement shall be necessary to perfect the validity of
such agreement as a secured transaction as against creditors, subsequent
purchases, pledges, encumbrancers, successors, or assigns.

**Source.** 1981, 118:1, eff. July 3, 1981.

### Section 415-B:12

 **415-B:12 Rulemaking Authority. –** The commissioner may adopt
rules pursuant to RSA 541-A for the purposes of this chapter.

**Source.** 1981, 118:1, eff. July 3, 1981.

### Section 415-B:13

 **415-B:13 Penalty. –** Any premium finance company, insurer, agent,
or broker who willfully and knowingly violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1981, 118:1, eff. July 3, 1981.
