---
title: 'CHAPTER 415-H STOP LOSS INSURANCE'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 415-H
                                             
STOP LOSS INSURANCE
-------------------

### Section 415-H:1

 **415-H:1 Purpose and Intent. –** This chapter shall be known as the
Stop Loss Insurance Act. The purpose of this chapter is to establish
criteria for the issuance of stop loss insurance policies. Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed as imposing any requirement or duty on
any person other than an insurer or as treating any stop loss policy as
a direct policy of health insurance.

**Source.** 2006, 217:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 415-H:2

 **415-H:2 Definitions. –**
                                             
 I. "Actuarial certification'' means a written statement by a member
of the American Academy of Actuaries, or other individual acceptable to
the commissioner, that an insurer is in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter, based upon the individual's examination and including a
review of the appropriate records and the actuarial assumptions and
methods used by the insurer in establishing attachment points and other
applicable determinations in conjunction with the provision of stop loss
insurance coverage.
                                             
 II. "Attachment point'' means the claims amount incurred by an
insured group beyond which the insurer incurs a liability for payment.
                                             
 III. "Expected claims'' means the amount of claims that, in the
absence of a stop loss policy or other insurance, are projected to be
incurred by an insured group through its health plan.

**Source.** 2006, 217:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 415-H:3

 **415-H:3 Stop Loss Insurance Coverage Standards. –**
                                             
 I. An insurer shall not issue or renew a stop loss insurance policy
or certificate that:
                                             
 (a) Has an annual attachment point for claims incurred per
individual which is lower than 
                                             $20,000;
                                             
 (b) Has an annual aggregate attachment point, for groups of 50 or
fewer, that is lower than the greater of:
                                             
 (1) 
                                             $4,000 times the number of group members;
                                             
 (2) 120 percent of expected claims; or
                                             
 (3) 
                                             $20,000;
                                             
 (c) Has an annual aggregate attachment point for groups of 51 or
more that is lower than 110 percent of expected claims; or
                                             
 (d) Provides direct coverage of health care expenses of an
individual.
                                             
 II. An insurer shall determine the number of persons in a group, for
the purposes of this section, on a consistent basis, at least annually.
                                             
 III. For the purposes of determining the dollar amounts set forth in
paragraph I, and upon consideration of the medical components of the
Consumer Price Index (CPI), the commissioner may amend these dollar
amounts and shall publish any change in these dollar amounts at least 6
months prior to their effective dates.

**Source.** 2006, 217:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 415-H:4

 **415-H:4 Actuarial Certification. –** An insurer shall file with
the commissioner annually on or before March 15, an actuarial
certification certifying that the insurer is in compliance with this
chapter. The certification shall be in a form and manner, and shall
contain information, specified by the commissioner. A copy of the
certification shall be retained by the insurer at its principal place of
business.

**Source.** 2006, 217:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 415-H:5

 **415-H:5 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner may adopt rules in
accordance with RSA 541-A that carry out the requirements of this
chapter and prescribe additional standards for stop loss insurance
policies.

**Source.** 2006, 217:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.
