---
title: 'CHAPTER 415-D LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE ACT'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 415-D
                                             
LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE ACT
----------------------------

### Section 415-D:1

 **415-D:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to promote the
public interest, to promote the availability of long-term care insurance
policies, to protect applications for long-term care insurance, as
defined, from unfair or deceptive sales or enrollment practices, to
establish standards for long-term care insurance, to facilitate public
understanding and comparison of long-term care insurance policies, and
to facilitate flexibility and innovation in the development of long-term
care insurance coverage.

**Source.** 2003, 180:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2003.

### Section 415-D:2

 **415-D:2 Scope. –** The requirements of this chapter shall apply to
policies and group insurance certificates delivered or issued for
delivery in this state on or after January 1, 1990. This chapter is not
intended to supersede the obligations of entities subject to this
chapter to comply with the substance of other applicable insurance laws
insofar as such laws do not conflict with this chapter, except that laws
and administrative rules designed and intended to apply to Medicare
supplement insurance policies shall not be applied to long-term care
insurance.

**Source.** 2003, 180:1, Aug. 23, 2003.

### Section 415-D:3

 **415-D:3 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Applicant'' means:
                                             
 (a) In the case of an individual long-term care insurance policy,
the person who seeks to contract for benefits; and
                                             
 (b) In the case of a group long-term care insurance policy or
certificate, the proposed certificate holder.
                                             
 II. "Certificate'' means any certificate issued under a group
long-term care insurance policy, which policy has been delivered or
issued for delivery in this or any other state.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the insurance commissioner of this
state.
                                             
 IV. "Group long-term care insurance'' means a long-term care
insurance policy or certificate that is delivered or issued for delivery
in this state and issued to:
                                             
 (a) One or more employers or labor organizations, as to a trust
or to the trustees of a fund established by one or more employers or
labor organizations, or a combination thereof, for employees or former
employees or a combination thereof or for members or former members or a
combination thereof, of the labor organizations, or
                                             
 (b) Any professional, trade or occupational association for its
members or former or retired members, or combination thereof, if the
association:
                                             
 (1) Is composed of individuals all of whom are or were
actively engaged in the same profession, trade, or occupation; and
                                             
 (2) Has been maintained in good faith for purposes other than
obtaining insurance; or
                                             
 (c)(1) An association or a trust or the trustees of a fund
established, created or maintained for the benefit of members of one or
more associations. Prior to advertising, marketing or offering the
policy within this state, the association or associations, or the
insurer of the association or associations, shall file evidence with the
commissioner that the association or associations have at the outset a
minimum of 100 persons, have been organized and maintained in good faith
for purposes other than that of obtaining insurance, have been in active
existence for at least one year, and have a constitution and bylaws that
provide that:
                                             
 (A) The association or associations hold regular meetings
not less than annually to further purposes of the members;
                                             
 (B) Except for credit unions, the association or
associations collect dues or solicit contributions from members; and
                                             
 (C) The members have voting privileges and representation
on the governing board and committees.
                                             
 (2) Thirty days after the filing, the association or
associations shall be deemed to satisfy the organization requirements,
unless the commissioner makes a finding that the association or
associations do not satisfy those organizational requirements.
                                             
 (d) A group, other than as described in (c)(1) subject to a
finding by the commissioner that:
                                             
 (1) The issuance of the group policy is not contrary to the
best interest of the public;
                                             
 (2) The issuance of the group policy would result in economies
of acquisition or administration; or
                                             
 (3) The benefits are reasonable in relation to the premiums
charged.
                                             
 V. "Long-term care insurance'' means any insurance policy, group
insurance certificate or rider advertised, marketed, offered, or
designed to provide coverage for not less than 12 consecutive months for
each covered person on an expense-incurred, indemnity, prepaid, or other
basis, for one or more necessary or medically necessary diagnostic,
preventive, therapeutic, rehabilitative, maintenance, or personal care
services, provided in a setting other than an acute care unit of a
hospital. The term includes group and individual annuities and life
insurance policies, certificates, or riders that provide directly or
supplement long-term care insurance. The term also includes a policy or
rider that provides for payment of benefits based upon cognitive
impairment or the loss of functional capacity. The term shall also
include qualified long-term care insurance contracts. Long-term care
insurance may be issued by insurers; fraternal benefit societies;
nonprofit health, hospital, and medical service corporations; prepaid
health plans; health maintenance organizations, or any similar
organization to the extent they are otherwise authorized to issue life
or health insurance. Long-term care insurance shall not include any
insurance policy that is offered primarily to provide basic Medicare
supplement coverage, basic hospital expense coverage, basic
medical-surgical expense coverage, hospital confinement indemnity
coverage, major medical expense coverage, disability income or related
asset-protection coverage, accident only coverage, or specified disease
or specified accident coverage. With regard to life insurance, this term
does not include life insurance policies that accelerate the death
benefit specifically for one or more of the qualifying events of
terminal illness, medical conditions requiring extraordinary medical
intervention or permanent institutional confinement, and that provide
the option of a lump-sum payment for those benefits and where neither
the benefits nor the eligibility for the benefits is conditioned upon
the receipt of long-term care. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this chapter, any product advertised, marketed, or offered as long-term
care insurance shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 VI. "Loss ratio standards'' means the minimum anticipated loss ratio
permitted for a long-term care insurance policy or certificate. The
anticipated loss ratio is that which is expected to be incurred over the
lifetime of the policy or, at the option of the insurer, 20 years,
whichever is shorter. Such a loss ratio shall be based on a typical
distribution of business anticipated to be sold in a period of 12 months
and followed to its conclusion. The loss ratio shall be calculated as
the ratio of the present value of all expected future benefits,
excluding dividends, to the present value of all expected future
premiums.
                                             
 VII. "Policy'' means any policy, contract, subscriber agreement,
rider, amendment or endorsement delivered or issued for delivery in this
state or any other state by an insurer; fraternal benefit society;
nonprofit health, hospital, or medical service corporation; prepaid
health plan; health maintenance organization or any similar
organization.
                                             
 VIII. "Qualified long-term care insurance contract'' or "federally
tax-qualified long-term care insurance contract'' means:
                                             
 (a) An individual or group insurance contract that meets the
requirements of Section 7702B(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended, as follows:
                                             
 (1) The only insurance protection provided under the contract
is coverage of qualified long-term care services. A contract shall not
fail to satisfy the requirements of this subparagraph by reason of
payments being made on a per diem or other periodic basis without regard
to the expenses incurred during the period to which the payments
relate;
                                             
 (2) The contract does not pay or reimburse expenses incurred
for services or items to the extent that the expenses are reimbursable
under Title XVIII of the Social Security Act, as amended, or would be so
reimbursable but for the application of a deductible or coinsurance
amount. The requirements of this subparagraph do not apply to expenses
that are reimbursable under Title XVIII of the Society Security Act only
as a secondary payor. A contract shall not fail to satisfy the
requirements of this subparagraph by reason of payments being made on a
per diem or other periodic basis without regard to the expense incurred
during the period to which the payments relate;
                                             
 (3) The contract is guaranteed renewable, within the meaning
of Section 7702B(b)(1)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended;
                                             
 (4) The contract does not provide for a cash surrender value
or other money that can be paid, assigned, pledged as collateral for a
loan, or borrowed except as provided in subparagraph (e);
                                             
 (5) All refunds of premiums, and all policyholder dividends or
similar amounts, under the contract are to be applied as a reduction in
future premiums or to increase future benefits, except that a refund on
the event of death of the insured or a complete surrender or
cancellation of the contract cannot exceed the aggregate premiums paid
under the contract; and
                                             
 (6) The contract meets the consumer protection provisions set
forth in Section 7702B(g) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended.
                                             
 (b) The portion of a life insurance contract that provides
long-term care insurance coverage by rider or as part of the contract
and that satisfies the requirements of Sections 7702B(b) and (e) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.

**Source.** 2003, 180:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2003.

### Section 415-D:4

 **415-D:4 Extraterritorial Jurisdiction--Group Long-Term Care
Insurance. –** No group long-term care insurance coverage may be offered
to a resident of this state under a group policy issued in another state
to a group described in RSA 415-D:3, IV(d), unless approved by this
state.

**Source.** 2003, 180:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2003.

### Section 415-D:5

 **415-D:5 Disclosure and Performance Standards for Long-Term Care
Insurance; Rulemaking. –** The commissioner may adopt rules, under RSA
541-A, that include standards for:
                                             
 I. Full and fair disclosure, that set forth the manner, content, and
required disclosures for the sale of long-term care insurance policies
and certificates, terms of renewability, initial and subsequent
conditions of eligibility, non-duplication of coverage provisions,
coverage of dependents, preexisting conditions, termination of
insurance, continuation or conversion, probationary periods,
limitations, exceptions, reductions, elimination periods, requirements
for replacement, recurrent conditions, and definitions of terms.
                                             
 II. No long-term care insurance policy may:
                                             
 (a) Be cancelled, nonrenewed or otherwise terminated on the
grounds of the age or deterioration of the mental or physical health of
the insured individual or certificate holder.
                                             
 (b) Contain a provision establishing a new waiting period in the
event existing coverage is converted to or replaced by a new or other
form within the same company, except with respect to an increase in
benefits voluntarily selected by the insured individual or group
policyholder.
                                             
 (c) Provide coverage for skilled nursing care only or provide
significantly more coverage for skilled care in a facility than coverage
for lower levels of care.
                                             
 (d) Be misleading or unreasonably confusing in connection with
either the purchase of long-term care insurance or the settlement of
claims.
                                             
 (e) Be contrary to the health care needs of the public.
                                             
 (f) Be so limited in scope as to be of no significant economic
value to the holders of such policy.
                                             
 (g) Be issued if not specifically authorized by statute.
                                             
 (h) In the opinion of the commissioner, be unjust, unfair, and
unfairly discriminatory to the policyholder, certificate holder,
subscriber or any other person insured under the policy or certificate,
or the beneficiary.
                                             
 III. (a) No long-term care insurance policy or certificate shall use
a definition of preexisting condition that is more restrictive than the
following: "Preexisting condition'' means a condition for which medical
advice or treatment was recommended by, or received from a provider of
health care services, within 6 months preceding the effective date of
coverage of an insured person.
                                             
 (b) No long-term care insurance policy or certificate may exclude
coverage for a loss or confinement that is the result of a preexisting
condition unless the loss or confinement begins within 6 months
following the effective date of coverage of an insured person.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner may extend the limitation periods set forth
in subparagraphs (a) and (b) as to specific age group categories in
specific policy forms upon findings that the extension is in the best
interest of the public.
                                             
 (d) The definition of "preexisting condition'' does not prohibit
an insurer from using an application form designed to elicit the
complete health history of an applicant, and, on the basis of the
answers on that application, from underwriting in accordance with that
insurers established underwriting standards. Unless otherwise provided
in the policy or certificate, a preexisting condition, regardless of
whether it is disclosed on the application, need not be covered until
the waiting period described in subparagraph (b) expires. No long-term
care insurance policy or certificate may exclude or use waivers or
riders of any kind to exclude, limit, or reduce coverage or benefits for
specifically named or described preexisting diseases or physical
conditions beyond the waiting period described in subparagraph (b).
                                             
 IV. (a) No long-term care insurance policy may be delivered or
issued for delivery in this state if such policy:
                                             
 (1) Conditions eligibility for any benefits on a prior
hospitalization requirement;
                                             
 (2) Conditions eligibility for benefits provided in an
institutional care setting on the receipt of a higher level of
institutional care; or
                                             
 (3) Conditions eligibility for any benefits other than waiver
of premium, post-confinement, post-acute care, or recuperative benefits
on a prior institutionalization requirement.
                                             
 (b) A long-term care insurance policy containing
post-confinement, post-acute care, or recuperative benefits shall
clearly label in a separate paragraph of the policy or certificate
entitled "Limitations or Conditions on Eligibility for Benefits'' such
limitations or conditions, including any required number of days of
confinement.
                                             
 (c) A long-term care insurance policy or rider that conditions
eligibility of noninstitutional benefits on the prior receipt of
institutional care shall not require a prior institutional stay of more
than 30 days.
                                             
 (d) No long-term care insurance policy or rider that provides
benefits only following institutionalization shall condition such
benefits upon admission to a facility for the same or related conditions
within a period of less than 30 days after discharge from the
institution.
                                             
 (e) The commissioner may adopt rules establishing loss ratio
standards for long-term care insurance policies provided that a specific
reference to long-term care insurance policies is contained in the rule.

**Source.** 2003, 180:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2003.

### Section 415-D:6

 **415-D:6 Cancellation of Insurance; Conversion. –**
                                             
 I. An individual long-term care insurance policy shall not be
cancelled, refused renewal, or otherwise terminated by the insurer,
except where the required premium has not been paid by or on behalf of
the insured; however, this shall not restrict or limit the insurer's
right to rescind or revise a policy in the event of fraud or
misrepresentation during the contestable period.
                                             
 II. If a group policy is cancelled, refused renewal or terminated by
either the insurer or the policyholder, each certificate holder shall be
entitled to have issued to him or her an individual policy or
replacement group certificate of insurance providing benefits equivalent
to those enjoyed by the certificate holder under the group policy from
which conversion is made. Such policy or certificate shall be issued by
the insurer without evidence of insurability, provided the certificate
holder makes application for the policy and pays the monthly premium
within 30 days after receiving written notice of such cancellation,
refusal to renew, or termination. No long-term care insurance policy or
certificate shall contain a provision establishing a new waiting period
in the event existing coverage is converted to or replaced by a new form
or another form within the same company, except with respect to an
increase in benefits voluntarily selected by the insured individual or
group policyholder.
                                             
 III. Unless the group policy from which conversion is made replaces
previous group coverage, the premium for the converted policy shall be
calculated on the basis of the insured's age at inception of coverage
under the group policy from which conversion is made. If the group
policy from which conversion is made replaces previous group coverage,
the premium for the converted policy shall be calculated on the basis of
the insured's age at inception of coverage under the group policy
replaced.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any insured
individual whose eligibility for group long-term care coverage is based
upon that person's relationship to another person, shall be entitled to
continuation of coverage under the group policy upon termination of the
qualifying relationship by death or dissolution of marriage.

**Source.** 2003, 180:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2003.

### Section 415-D:7

 **415-D:7 Right to Return; Free Look. –** Long-term care insurance
applicants shall have the right to return the policy or certificate
within 30 days of its delivery and to have the premium refunded if,
after examination of the policy or certificate, the applicant is not
satisfied for any reason. Long-term care insurance policies and
certificates shall have the notice prominently printed on the first page
or attached thereto stating in substance that the applicant shall have
the right to return the policy or certificate within 30 days of its
delivery and to have the premium refunded if, after examination of the
policy or certificate, the applicant is not satisfied for any reason.
This paragraph shall also apply to denials of applications and any
refund shall be made within 30 days of the return or denial.

**Source.** 2003, 180:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2003.

### Section 415-D:8

 **415-D:8 Outline of Coverage. –** An outline of coverage shall be
delivered to a prospective applicant for long-term care insurance at the
time of initial solicitation through means that prominently direct the
attention of the recipient to the document and its purpose.
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall prescribe a standard format, including
style, arrangement and overall appearance, and the content of an outline
of coverage.
                                             
 II. In the case of agent solicitations, an agent shall deliver the
outline of coverage prior to the presentation of an application or
enrollment form.
                                             
 III. In the case of direct response solicitations, the outline of
coverage shall be presented in conjunction with any application or
enrollment form.
                                             
 IV. The outline of coverage shall include:
                                             
 (a) A description of the principal benefits and coverage provided
in the policy.
                                             
 (b) A statement of the principal exclusions, reductions and
limitations contained in the policy.
                                             
 (c) A statement of the terms under which the policy or
certificate, or both, may be continued in force or discontinued,
including any reservation in the policy of a right to change premium.
Continuation or conversion provisions of group coverage shall be
specifically described.
                                             
 (d) A statement that the outline of coverage is a summary only,
not a contract of insurance, and that the policy or group master policy
contains governing contractual provisions.
                                             
 (e) A description of the terms under which the policy or
certificate may be returned and premium refunded.
                                             
 (f) A brief description of the relationship of cost of care and
benefits.
                                             
 (g) A statement that discloses to the policyholder or certificate
holder whether the policy is intended to be a federally tax-qualified
long-term care insurance contract under Section 7702B(b) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
                                             
 V. A certificate issued pursuant to a group long-term care insurance
policy that is delivered or issued for delivery in this state shall
include:
                                             
 (a) A description of the principal benefits and coverage provided
in the policy.
                                             
 (b) A statement of the principal exclusions, reductions, and
limitations contained in the policy.
                                             
 (c) A statement that the group master policy determines governing
contractual provisions.
                                             
 VI. If an application for a long-term care insurance contract or
certificate is approved, the issuer shall deliver the contract or
certificate of insurance to the applicant no later than 30 days after
the date of approval.
                                             
 VII. At the time of policy delivery, a policy summary shall be
delivered for an individual life insurance policy that provides
long-term care benefits within the policy or by rider. In the case of
direct response solicitations, the insurer shall deliver the policy
summary upon the applicant's request, but regardless of request shall
make delivery no later than at the time of policy delivery. In addition
to complying with all applicable requirements, the summary shall also
include:
                                             
 (a) An explanation of how the long-term care benefit interacts
with other components of the policy, including deductions from death
benefits.
                                             
 (b) An illustration of the amount of benefits, the length of
benefit, and the guaranteed lifetime benefits if any, for each covered
person.
                                             
 (c) Any exclusions, reductions and limitations on benefits of
long-term care.
                                             
 (d) A statement that any long-term care inflation protection
option is not available under this policy.
                                             
 (e) If applicable to the policy type, the summary shall also
include:
                                             
 (1) A disclosure of the effects of exercising other rights
under the policy.
                                             
 (2) A disclosure of guarantees related to long-term care costs
of insurance charges.
                                             
 (3) Current and projected maximum lifetime benefits.
                                             
 (f) The provisions of the policy summary listed above may be
incorporated into a basic illustration required to be delivered in
accordance with Ins 309 or into the life insurance policy summary which
is required to be delivered in accordance with Ins 301.
                                             
 VIII. Any time a long-term care benefit, funded through a life
insurance vehicle by the acceleration of the death benefit, is in
benefit payment status, a monthly report shall be provided to the
policyholder. The report shall include:
                                             
 (a) Any long-term care benefits paid out during the month.
                                             
 (b) An explanation of any changes in the policy such as death
benefits or cash values, due to long-term care benefits being paid out.
                                             
 (c) The amount of long-term care benefits existing or remaining.
                                             
 IX. If a claim under a long-term care insurance contract is denied,
the issuer shall, within 60 days of the date of a written request by the
policyholder or certificate holder, or a representative thereof:
                                             
 (a) Provide a written explanation of the reasons for the denial;
and
                                             
 (b) Make available all information directly related to the
denial.
                                             
 X. Any policy or rider advertised, marketed, or offered as long-term
care or nursing home insurance shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter.

**Source.** 2003, 180:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2003.

### Section 415-D:9

 **415-D:9 Incontestability Period. –**
                                             
 I. For a policy or certificate that has been in force for less than
6 months, an insurer may rescind a long-term care insurance policy or
certificate or deny an otherwise valid long-term care insurance claim
upon a showing of misrepresentation that is material to the acceptance
for coverage.
                                             
 II. For a policy or certificate that has been in force for at least
6 months but less than 2-years, an insurer may rescind a long-term care
insurance policy or certificate or deny an otherwise valid long-term
care insurance claim upon a showing of misrepresentation that is both
material to the acceptance for coverage and which pertains to the
condition for which benefits are sought.
                                             
 III. After a policy or certificate has been in force for 2 years, it
is not contestable upon the grounds of misrepresentation alone; such
policy or certificate may be contested only upon a showing that the
insured knowingly and intentionally misrepresented relevant facts
relating to the insured's health.
                                             
 IV. No long-term care insurance policy or certificate may be field
issued based on medical or health status. For purposes of this section,
"field issued'' means a policy or certificate issued by an agent or a
third party administrator pursuant to the underwriting authority granted
to the agent or third party administrator by an insurer.
                                             
 V. If an insurer has paid benefits under the long-term care
insurance policy or certificate, the benefit payments may not be
recovered by the insurer in the event that the policy or certificate is
rescinded.
                                             
 VI. In the event of the death of the insured, this section shall not
apply to the remaining death benefit of a life insurance policy that
accelerates benefits for long-term care. In this situation, the
remaining death benefits under these policies shall be governed by RSA
408:10. In all other situations, this section shall apply to life
insurance policies that accelerate benefits for long-term care.

**Source.** 2003, 180:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2003.

### Section 415-D:10

 **415-D:10 Nonforfeiture Benefits. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph II, a long-term care insurance
policy shall not be delivered or issued for delivery in this state
unless the policyholder or certificate holder has been offered the
option of purchasing a policy or certificate including a nonforfeiture
benefit. The offer of a nonforfeiture benefit may be in the form of a
rider that is attached to the policy. In the event the policyholder or
certificate holder declines the nonforfeiture benefit, the insurer shall
provide a contingent benefit upon lapse that shall be available for a
specified period of time following a substantial increase in premium
rates.
                                             
 II. When a group long-term care insurance policy is issued, the
offer required in paragraph I shall be made to the group policyholder.
However, if the policy is issued as group long-term care insurance as
defined in RSA 415-D:3, IV(d), other than to a continuing care
retirement community or other similar entity, the offering shall be made
to each proposed certificate holder.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations specifying the
type or types of nonforfeiture benefits to be offered as part of
long-term care insurance policies and certificates, the standards for
nonforfeiture benefits, and the rules regarding contingent benefit upon
lapse, including a determination of the specified period of time during
which a contingent benefit upon lapse will be available and the
substantial premium rate increase that triggers a contingent benefit
upon lapse as described in paragraph I.

**Source.** 2003, 180:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2003.

### Section 415-D:11

 **415-D:11 Approval and Disapproval of Forms. –** No policy of group
long-term care insurance affecting a resident of New Hampshire, whether
such policy is delivered or issued for delivery in this state or any
other state, and no certificate under such policy nor any application,
rider, endorsement or amendment used in connection with the policy shall
be delivered or issued for delivery in this state until a copy of the
form of the policy and of the classification of risks and the premium
rates have been filed with the insurance commissioner, nor until the
expiration of 30 days after filing, unless the commissioner shall sooner
give his written approval for delivery or issue.

**Source.** 2003, 180:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2003.

### Section 415-D:12

 **415-D:12 Authority to Adopt Rules. –** The commissioner shall
issue reasonable rules to promote premium adequacy and to protect the
policyholder in the event of substantial rate increases, and to
establish minimum standards for marketing practices, agent compensation,
agent testing, penalties and reporting practices for long-term care
insurance.

**Source.** 2003, 180:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2003.

### Section 415-D:13

 **415-D:13 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid. The
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or
applications, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.

**Source.** 2003, 180:1, eff. Aug. 23, 2003.
