---
title: 'CHAPTER 415-C CONSUMER GUARANTY CONTRACTS'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 415-C
                                             
CONSUMER GUARANTY CONTRACTS
---------------------------

### Section 415-C:1

 **415-C:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the insurance commissioner.
                                             
 II. "Consumer'' means a natural person who, for personal or family
use and not for commercial or research purposes:
                                             
 (a) Buys or sells residential real property, or
                                             
 (b) Buys other than for purposes of resale any tangible personal
property that is distributed in commerce and that is normally used for
personal, family, or household purposes.
                                             
 III. "Consumer guaranty contract'':
                                             
 (a) Is an agreement in which one party, for consideration,
promises to pay, indemnify, provide a specified or determinable amount
or benefit, or to do some act of value for another party, based upon a
determinable risk contingency or peril, but which is not insurance or
does not warrant full application of the state's insurance statutes or
rules.
                                             
 (b) Includes the following agreements:
                                             
 (1) Service contracts, also known as extended warranties or
warranty service contracts, that apply to motor vehicles, homes, and
consumer products.
                                             
 (2) Prepaid legal contracts.
                                             
 (3) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (4) Contracts deemed by the commissioner by rule or order
subject to this chapter.
                                             
 (c) Does not include any of the following:
                                             
 (1) Expressed or implied warranties.
                                             
 (2) Maintenance agreements.
                                             
 (3) Motor vehicle road service, tourist service and repairs
under RSA 407-C.
                                             
 (4) Warranties, service contracts, or maintenance agreements
offered by public utilities on their transmission devices regulated by
the public utilities commission.
                                             
 (5) Warranties, service contracts, and maintenance agreements
that are conditioned upon or otherwise associated with the sale or
supply of heating fuel.
                                             
 (6) Warranties, service contracts, and maintenance agreements
sold or offered for sale to persons other than consumers. This provision
does not apply to prepaid legal contracts, which may be offered to any
governmental corporation, unit, agency, or department, or to any
employer or association of employers, a labor union or other similar
employee organization, including the trustees of a fund established by
such labor union or employee organization. The term "employee'' and "
employees'' shall have the same meaning as are given to such terms for
the purpose of writing group life insurance in this state.
                                             
 (7) Debt cancellation or debt suspension contracts between a
creditor and a borrower for the cancellation or suspension of the debt.
                                             
 IV. "Contract fee'' means the total purchase price or consideration
paid for a consumer guaranty contract.
                                             
 V. "Contract holder'' means a person who buys a consumer guaranty
contract or permitted transferee.
                                             
 VI. "Maintenance agreement'' means a contract of limited duration
that provides for scheduled maintenance only.
                                             
 VII. "Manufacturer'' means a person who:
                                             
 (a) Manufactures or produces the property and sells the property
under the person's own name or label;
                                             
 (b) Is a wholly owned subsidiary of the person who manufactures
or produces the property;
                                             
 (c) Is a corporation which owns 100 percent of the person who
manufactures or produces the property;
                                             
 (d) Manufactures or produces the property and the property is
sold under the trade name or label of another person;
                                             
 (e) Does not manufacture or produce the property but, by written
contract, licenses the use of the person's trade name or label to
another person that sells the property under the licensor's trade name
or label; or
                                             
 (f) For personal property, does not manufacture or produce the
property, but the property is sold under the person's trade name label.
                                             
 VIII. "Obligor'' means a person who is legally obligated to a
contract holder under the terms of the consumer guaranty contract.
Obligor shall not include service suppliers acting for a registered
obligor.
                                             
 IX. "Person'' means an individual, partnership, corporation,
incorporated or unincorporated association, joint stock company,
reciprocal, syndicate, or any similar entity or combination of entities
acting in concert.
                                             
 X. "Premium'' means the consideration paid to an insurer for a
reimbursement insurance policy.
                                             
 XI. "Prepaid legal services'' contract:
                                             
 (a) Is an agreement that assumes a contractual obligation to
reimburse the beneficiary against or pay on behalf of the beneficiary,
or to provide specified legal services or reimbursement for all or a
portion of legal fees, costs, and expenses related to or arising out of
services provided by or under the supervision of an individual licensed
or admitted to practice law in the state of New Hampshire, in which the
services are to be rendered, in consideration of a specified payment for
an interval of time, regardless of whether the payment is made by the
beneficiaries individually or by a third person for them, in such a
manner that the total cost incurred by assuming the obligation is to be
spread directly or indirectly among a group of persons.
                                             
 (b) Shall not include the provision of or reimbursement for legal
services incidental to insurance coverages. The following are not
considered prepaid legal services contracts:
                                             
 (1) Retainer contracts made with individual clients with the
fees based on estimates of the nature and amount of services that will
be provided to the specific client, and similar contracts made with a
group of clients involved in the same or closely related legal matters,
such as class actions.
                                             
 (2) Plans providing no benefits other than a limited amount of
consultation and advice on simple matters either alone or in combination
with referral services or on the promise of fee discounts for other
matters.
                                             
 (3) Plans providing limited benefits on simple legal matters
on an informal basis, not involving a legally binding promise, in the
context of an employment, educational, or similar relationship.
                                             
 (4) Contracts that provide benefits under automobile club
membership contracts and automobile liability insurance policies with
limited legal services or reimbursement for legal services in
automobile-related matters under the certificates of authority issued by
the commissioner.
                                             
 (5) Legal services or other legal services programs for the
indigent.
                                             
 (6) Legal services provided by unions or employee associations
to their members in matters relating to employment or occupation.
                                             
 (7) Legal services provided by an agency of the federal or
state government or subdivision thereof to its employees or that are
otherwise excluded from the provisions of this chapter by the Federal
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, or any amendments thereto.
                                             
 XII. "Reimbursement insurance policy'' means a policy of insurance
issued to an obligor and by which an insurer agrees to either provide
reimbursement to the obligor under the terms of the insured consumer
guaranty contracts issued or sold by the obligor or, in the event of the
obligor's non-performance, to pay on behalf of the obligor all covered
contractual obligations incurred by the obligor under the terms of the
insured consumer guaranty contracts issued or sold by the obligor.
                                             
 XIII. "Sales representative'' means any person who is not an
obligor, who sells, solicits, negotiates, or issues consumer guaranty
contracts on behalf of an obligor.
                                             
 XIV. (a) "Service contract'' means a contract or agreement for a
separately stated consideration, and a specified period of time or
usage, covering any consumer good, including, but not limited to, any
automobile, household system, or appliance, which promises to provide
for the service, repair, replacement, or maintenance of the property
necessitated by operational or structural failure due to: a defect in
materials or workmanship; normal wear and tear; power surges; or
accidental damage from handling. This definition shall apply regardless
of the name or label of such contract and regardless of the nature of
the service contract obligor. A service contract may provide for the
payment of incidental indemnity when service repair or replacement is
not feasible or economical or under limited circumstances, including,
but not limited to, towing, rental, road hazard, emergency road service,
lodging, meals, food loss, or other minor expenses that directly relate
to the failure of the consumer good.
                                             
 (b) "Service contract'' includes a contract or agreement for a
separately stated consideration, and a specified period of time or usage
that provides for any of the following:
                                             
 (1) Repair or replacement of tires and/or wheels on an
automobile damaged as a result of coming into contact with road hazards
including, but not limited to, potholes, rocks, wood debris, metal
parts, glass, plastic, curbs, or composite scraps;
                                             
 (2) Removal of dents, dings, or creases on an automobile that
can be repaired using the process of paintless dent removal without
affecting the existing paint finish and without replacing automobile
body panels, sanding, bonding, or painting;
                                             
 (3) Repair of chips or cracks in or the replacement of an
automobile windshield as a result of damage caused by road hazards; or
                                             
 (4) Replacement of an automobile key or key-fob if the key or
key-fob becomes inoperable or is lost or stolen.
                                             
 XV. "Service contract holder'' means a person who is the purchaser
or holder of a service contract.
                                             
 XVI. "Service supplier'' means a person, not employed by the
obligor, who is owned by the obligor or contractually obligated to
provide on behalf of the obligor services or obligations specified in
the consumer guaranty contract to be provided to a contract holder.
                                             
 XVII. "Warranty'' means a warranty made solely by the manufacturer,
importer, or seller of property or services without charge, that is not
negotiated or separated from the sale of the product and is incidental
to the sale of the product, that guarantees indemnity for defective
parts, mechanical or electrical breakdown, labor or other remedial
measures, such as repair or replacement of the property or repetition of
services.

**Source.** 2004, 224:1. 2015, 207:1, 6, 8, eff. Sept. 4, 2015.

### Section 415-C:2

 **415-C:2 Exemptions. –**
                                             
 I. Manufacturer's service contracts on the manufacturer's products
need only comply with RSA 415-C:5, 415-C:6, 415-C:7, 415-C:9, 415-C:10,
and RSA 415-C:10-a.
                                             
 II. Consumer guaranty contracts are not insurance and are exempt
from this state's insurance laws, except for the provisions of RSA
400-A:16 through RSA 400-A:25 or as provided by this chapter.
                                             
 III. For activities related to the marketing, selling, offering for
sale, issuing, making, proposing to make, and administration of consumer
guaranty contracts, an obligor or related consumer guaranty contract
seller, administrator, or other related person shall be exempt from this
state's insurance laws, except for the provisions of RSA 400-A:16
through 400-A:25 or as provided by this chapter.
                                             
 IV. An obligor, administrator, seller, or other related person who
provides consumer guaranty contracts and insurance contracts is subject
to the state's laws as they apply to the obligor, administrator, seller,
or other related person for each type of agreement.

**Source.** 2004, 224:1. 2009, 215:6, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 415-C:3

 **415-C:3 Obligor Registration. –**
                                             
 I. No obligor shall offer, administer, sell, solicit, negotiate, or
act under a consumer guaranty contract in this state unless:
                                             
 (a) The obligor registers with the commissioner on a form
prescribed by the commissioner and pays the registration fee required by
RSA 400-A:29, VIII-a(a); or
                                             
 (b) The obligor is authorized as an insurer in this state to
issue specified lines of consumer guaranty contracts, in which case the
insurer is exempt from paragraphs II and III of this section and RSA
415-C:4.
                                             
 II. An obligor's registration shall include the following:
                                             
 (a) A certified copy of the obligor's charter and bylaws.
                                             
 (b) A certificate giving a full statement, under oath of the
obligor's president and secretary, that the fiscal requirements stated
in this chapter are met.
                                             
 (c) Other information in relation to the obligor's condition as
may be required by the commissioner.
                                             
 III. Every obligor registration made pursuant to this chapter shall
expire on the next June 14 following such registration unless renewed
prior to that date. Renewal shall be made by paying an annual renewal
fee pursuant to RSA 400-A:29, VIII-a(b) and supplementing the original
form for any material change to the registration.
                                             
 IV. An obligor's employee is exempt from the registration provisions
stated in this section if the obligor is authorized to do business in
this state.

**Source.** 2004, 224:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2005.

### Section 415-C:4

 **415-C:4 Fiscal Requirements. –** An obligor shall provide proof of
financial responsibility to the insurance department by:
                                             
 I. Posting a bond in the amount of at least 
                                             $25,000 or 5 percent of
all consumer guarantee contracts sold in New Hampshire, whichever is
greater, up to a maximum of 
                                             $250,000 and maintaining a reserve account
in an amount no less than 40 percent of the gross consideration received
for all contract fees from consumer guaranty contracts issued to New
Hampshire residents less claims paid;
                                             
 II. Insuring all consumer guaranty contracts under a reimbursement
insurance policy issued by an insurer authorized to issue such insurance
in this state; or
                                             
 III. Demonstrating that the obligor, as either a stand alone company
or together with the obligor's parent, maintains a net worth or
stockholders' equity of 
                                             $25,000,000 or more as evidenced by the
obligor's annual audited financial statement or form 10K or 20F filed
with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission. Proof of the
above shall be deemed acceptable if not rejected in writing by the
insurance commissioner within 60 days of submission.

**Source.** 2004, 224:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2005.

### Section 415-C:5

 **415-C:5 Recordkeeping Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. Books and records:
                                             
 (a) An obligor shall keep accurate accounts, books, and records
concerning transactions regulated under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) An obligor's accounts, books, and records shall include:
                                             
 (1) Copies of each type of consumer guaranty contract issued.
                                             
 (2) The name and address of each contract holder to the extent
that the contract holder has furnished the name and address.
                                             
 (3) A list of the locations where consumer guaranty contracts
are marketed, sold, offered for sale, issued, made, or proposed to be
made.
                                             
 (4) Claims files that shall contain at least the date and
description of all claims or requests for services or expenditures
related to the consumer guaranty contracts.
                                             
 (c) Except as provided in paragraph II, an obligor shall retain
all records required under subparagraph (b) pertaining to each consumer
guaranty contract holder for at least 3 years after the specified period
of coverage has expired.
                                             
 (d) An obligor may keep all records required under this chapter
on a computer disk or other similar technology. If the records are
maintained in other than hard copy, the records shall be capable of
duplication to legible hard copy at the request of the commissioner.
                                             
 II. An obligor discontinuing business in this state shall maintain
its records until it furnishes the commissioner satisfactory proof that
it has discharged all obligations to contract holders in this state.
                                             
 III. An obligor shall make all accounts, books, and records
concerning transactions regulated under this chapter or other pertinent
laws available to the commissioner upon request.

**Source.** 2004, 224:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2005.

### Section 415-C:6

 **415-C:6 Contract Disclosures. –**
                                             
 I. Consumer guaranty contracts shall not be issued, sold, or offered
for sale in this state unless the obligor or a sales representative with
express authority from the obligor has:
                                             
 (a) Provided a receipt for, or other written evidence of, the
purchase of the consumer guaranty contract to the contract holder; and
                                             
 (b) Provided a copy of the consumer guaranty contract, including
its terms and conditions, to the contract holder within a reasonable
period of time from the date of purchase.
                                             
 II. Consumer guaranty contracts marketed, sold, or offered for sale,
issued, made, or proposed to be made in this state shall be dated and
written in clear, understandable language and the entire contract shall
be printed or typed in easy to read type.
                                             
 III. Consumer guaranty contracts shall state:
                                             
 (a) The total purchase price of the consumer guaranty contract.
The purchase price is not required to be preprinted on the service
contract and may be negotiated at the time of sale with the service
contract holder.
                                             
 (b) The specific products and services to be provided and any
limitations, exceptions, or exclusions.
                                             
 (c) The existence of any deductible amount, if applicable.
                                             
 (d) Any terms, restrictions, or conditions governing the
transferability, cancellation, and termination of the consumer guaranty
contract by either the obligor or contract holder.
                                             
 (e) All of the obligations and duties of the contract holder,
such as the duty to meet certain conditions, protect against any further
damage, and the requirement for certain service and maintenance.
                                             
 (f) The procedure for obtaining prior approval, if prior approval
is required.
                                             
 (g) The procedure that the contract holder must take to make
claims and receive service under the terms and conditions of the
consumer guaranty contract, including a toll-free telephone number for
service.
                                             
 (h) The procedure that a contract holder may take to discuss with
the obligor questions or complaints. This procedure shall include a
statement substantially similar to the following: "In the event you do
not receive satisfaction under this contract, you may contact the New
Hampshire insurance department.'' The statement shall include the
current address and phone number of the department.
                                             
 IV. If any preexisting condition is excluded from coverage, the
consumer guaranty contract must state the basis upon which the service
or promised performance may be denied for such preexisting condition.

**Source.** 2004, 224:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2005.

### Section 415-C:7

 **415-C:7 Prohibited Acts and Terms. –**
                                             
 I. No obligor, its designee, or any other representative of an
obligor, including a seller or administrator, shall in connection with
the sale, or offer to sell, or any advertisement or in connection with
any benefits, advantages, conditions, terms, or services available under
a consumer guaranty contract:
                                             
 (a) Make, publish, print, distribute, issue, circulate,
advertise, or place before the public, any statement or representation
that is false or misleading;
                                             
 (b) Mislead by permitting or causing the omission of a material
statement that under the circumstances should have been made in order to
make the statements that were made not misleading.
                                             
 (c) Require the purchase of a consumer guaranty contract or
represent that the purchase is mandatory.
                                             
 (d) Create or maintain a fraud.
                                             
 (e) Use in its name the words insurance, casualty, guaranty,
surety, mutual, or any other words descriptive of the insurance,
casualty, guaranty or surety business; or a name deceptively similar to
the name or description of any insurance or surety corporation, or any
other obligor. This section shall not apply to a company that was using
any of the prohibited language in its name prior to the effective date
of this chapter. However, a company using the prohibited language in its
name shall conspicuously disclose in its consumer guaranty contracts a
statement substantially as follows: "This agreement is not an insurance
contract.''
                                             
 (f) Fail to act promptly upon communications with respect to
claims arising under a consumer guaranty contract.
                                             
 (g) Fail to effectuate fair and equitable settlements or
compromises of claims in which liability has become reasonably clear.
                                             
 (h) Unfairly discriminate based solely on age, place or area of
residence, race, color, creed, national origin, ancestry, marital or
civil union status, lawful occupation including military service,
gender, religion, or blindness or other disability.
                                             
 II. An obligor shall not make, permit, or cause any practice that:
                                             
 (a) Fails to perform the services promised under the contract in
a timely, competent, or workmanlike manner; or
                                             
 (b) Has the effect of creating or maintaining a fraud.
                                             
 III. No consumer guaranty contract issued, sold, or covering
property located in this state shall provide that:
                                             
 (a) The consumer is not a party to the contract;
                                             
 (b) The obligor has no liability to the consumer;
                                             
 (c) The consumer does not have the right to bring an action to
enforce the terms of the contract or otherwise challenge the denial of a
claim which the consumer believes is wrongful. Consumer guaranty
contracts may include provisions requiring the parties to submit to
alternative dispute resolution, including a provision requiring binding
arbitration that would expressly limit the right of the consumer to
bring an action in a court of law, if such provision complies with and
does not impede the rights of the consumer as provided under RSA 542.
All arbitration provisions shall state that they are subject to RSA 542;
or
                                             
 (d) Any civil action or alternative dispute resolution procedure
brought in connection with the consumer guaranty contract shall be
brought in the courts of a jurisdiction other than New Hampshire.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair or in any
way affect any rule or law applicable to or governing consumer guaranty
contracts.

**Source.** 2004, 224:1. 2008, 255:3. 2015, 207:3, eff. Sept. 4, 2015.

### Section 415-C:8

 **415-C:8 Reimbursement Insurance Policies. –**
                                             
 I. Consumer guaranty contracts insured under a reimbursement
insurance policy shall state:
                                             
 (a) The name, address, and toll-free number of the reimbursement
insurer; and
                                             
 (b) The obligation of the reimbursement insurer to reimburse or,
in the event of the obligor's non-performance, to pay on behalf of the
obligor any sums the obligor is legally obligated to pay or shall
provide the service which the obligor is legally obligated to undertake
according to the obligor's contractual obligations under the consumer
guaranty contracts issued or sold by the obligor. In the event the
obligor does not provide for covered services within 60 days after the
contract holder has submitted proof of loss to the obligor, the contract
holder is entitled to apply directly to the reimbursement insurance
company for satisfaction.
                                             
 II. This chapter shall not prevent or limit the right of an insurer
which issued a reimbursement insurance policy to seek indemnification or
subrogation against an obligor if the issuer pays or is obligated to pay
the contract holder sums that the obligor was obligated to pay pursuant
to the provisions of the consumer guaranty contract or under a
contractual agreement.
                                             
 III. As applicable, an insurer that issued a reimbursement insurance
policy shall not terminate the policy until a notice of termination in
accordance with RSA 417-C has been mailed or delivered to the obligor.
The termination of a reimbursement insurance policy shall not reduce the
obligor's responsibility for consumer guaranty contracts issued by the
obligor prior to the date of the termination.

**Source.** 2004, 224:1. 2015, 207:4, eff. Sept. 4, 2015.

### Section 415-C:9

 **415-C:9 Examination. –** For the purpose of determining an
obligor's financial stability and protecting consumer interests in the
case of complaint, the commissioner shall have the power to examine
under RSA 400-A:37 and to investigate the affairs of every obligor
engaged in the business of consumer guaranty contracts in this state to
determine compliance or noncompliance with this chapter. The expenses of
examinations shall be paid to the state by the company or companies
examined.

**Source.** 2004, 224:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2005.

### Section 415-C:10

 **415-C:10 Penalties. –** The commissioner, after proper notice and
opportunity for hearing, may take action to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, or rules adopted pursuant to this chapter, and may:
                                             
 I. Revoke or suspend the obligor's registration.
                                             
 II. Order the obligor to cease and desist from further consumer
guaranty contract operations.
                                             
 III. Impose a penalty of not more than 
                                             $1000 for each violation or

                                             $10,000 for each violation the commissioner finds to be willful.
                                             
 IV. Order the obligor to make restitution.

**Source.** 2004, 224:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2005.

### Section 415-C:10-a

 **415-C:10-a Action Against an Obligor, Designee or Representative
of an Obligor. –**
                                             
 I. When an obligor, its designee, or any other representative of an
obligor, including a seller or administrator, in any action or
proceeding brought by the insurance commissioner has been found to be in
violation of this chapter or has been ordered to cease and desist, and
said finding or order has become final, any consumer claiming to be
adversely affected by the act or practice giving rise to such finding or
order, and to whom restitution has not been provided under RSA 415-C:10,
IV or to whom the obligor, its designee or representative has not made
voluntary restitution acceptable to the consumer within 30 days of the
finding or order, may bring suit against said obligor to recover such
damages or loss that have been suffered by him or her because of such
action or practice.
                                             
 II. For the sole purposes of providing the consumer with the
procedural rights set forth under RSA 541 and RSA 541-A, failure of the
commissioner to take action under RSA 415-C:10 within 120 days from the
date of the receipt of a complaint from an alleged injured person shall
constitute a finding that the alleged act or practice is not in
violation of this chapter. This finding may be appealed in accordance
with RSA 541. If upon appeal the decision of the commissioner is not
upheld, the consumer may proceed under RSA 415-C:10-a, I. This provision
shall not bar the commissioner from bringing an enforcement action for
violation of this chapter more than 120 days after receipt of a
complaint.

**Source.** 2008, 255:6, eff. Aug. 25, 2008.

### Section 415-C:11

 **415-C:11 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner may adopt rules under
RSA 541-A that are reasonable and necessary for the implementation and
administration of this chapter, including rules relative to enforcement
procedures and procedures governing registration requirements,
verification of fiscal responsibility, and examinations by the
department.

**Source.** 2004, 224:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2005.

### Section 415-C:12

 **415-C:12 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter, or
the application of the provision to any person or circumstances, shall
be held invalid, the remainder of the chapter, and the application of
the provision to persons or circumstances other than those as to which
it is held invalid, shall not be affected.

**Source.** 2004, 224:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2005.
