---
title: CHAPTER 416 SURETY COMPANIES
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 416
                                             
SURETY COMPANIES
----------------

### Section 416:1

 **416:1 Determination of Solvency. –** Fifty percent of the amount
received on all outstanding contracts shall be treated as a liability by
the insurance commissioner in determining the question of the solvency
of any surety company.

**Source.** 1885, 53:2. PS 172:2. PL 282:2. RL 332:2.

### Section 416:2

 **416:2 Bonds, Approval. –** The judge, head of department, or other
officer authorized to approve the bond of any person required by law to
give a bond, may accept as a surety upon the bond any such company which
has been licensed to do business in this state, and, if satisfied with
the financial ability of the company, he need not require other
sureties.

**Source.** 1885, 48:1. PS 172:3. PL 282:3. RL 332:3.

### Section 416:3

 **416:3 Expense of Bond. –** A court or officer, whose duty it is to
pass upon the account of any person required by law to give a bond, may,
whenever the person has procured any such company as surety upon his
bond, allow a reasonable sum for the expense of procuring such surety in
the settlement of his account.

**Source.** 1885, 48:2. PS 172:4. PL 282:4. RL 332:4.

### Section 416:4

 **416:4 Estoppel of Surety. –** Any company which shall execute a
bond as surety under the provisions of this chapter shall be estopped to
deny its corporate power to execute the instrument or to assume the
liability.

**Source.** 1885, 48:3. PS 172:5. PL 282:5. RL 332:5.

Bonds and Funds of Companies
----------------------------

### Section 416:5

 **416:5 Reinsurance. –** No surety company, whether organized under
the laws of this or any other state or territory, shall assume any
liability as surety on any bond which shall in amount exceed 10 percent
of its net assets, without reinsuring in some surety company authorized
to do business in this state the amount by which any liability may
exceed said 10 percent.

**Source.** 1913, 53:1. PL 282:6. RL 332:6.

### Section 416:6

 **416:6 Investments. –** Surety companies organized under the laws
of this state shall invest their funds in securities that are legal
investments for savings banks, and in such other investments as may be
approved by the insurance commissioner.

**Source.** 1913, 53:2. PL 282:7. RL 332:7.

Foreign Companies
-----------------

### Section 416:7

 **416:7 Conditions of Entry. –** Any surety company incorporated and
organized under the laws of another state, for the purpose of
transacting business as surety on obligations, may transact business in
this state upon complying with the provisions of all laws relating to
foreign insurance companies and their agents, and not otherwise.

**Source.** 1885, 53:1. PS 172:1. PL 282:1. RL 332:1.
