---
title: 'CHAPTER 417-E COVERAGE FOR CERTAIN BIOLOGICALLY-BASED MENTAL ILLNESSES'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 417-E
                                             
COVERAGE FOR CERTAIN BIOLOGICALLY-BASED MENTAL ILLNESSES
--------------------------------------------------------

### Section 417-E:1

 **417-E:1 Coverage for Certain Biologically-Based Mental Illnesses.
–**
                                             
 I. For the purposes of this chapter "mental illness'' means a
clinically significant or psychological syndrome or pattern that occurs
in a person and that is associated with present distress, a painful
symptom or disability, impairment in one or more important areas of
functioning, or with a significantly increased risk of suffering death,
pain, disability, or an important loss of freedom.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, each insurer that
issues or renews any policy of group accident or health insurance and
each nonprofit health service corporation under RSA 420-A and health
maintenance organization under RSA 420-B providing benefits for disease
or sickness in the state of New Hampshire shall provide benefits for
treatment and diagnosis of certain biologically-based mental illnesses
under the same terms and conditions and which are no less extensive than
coverage provided for any other type of health care for physical
illness.
                                             
 III. The following mental illnesses, as defined in the most current
edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) of Mental
Disorders published by the American Psychiatric Association, shall be
covered under this section:
                                             
 (a) Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders.
                                             
 (b) Schizoaffective disorder.
                                             
 (c) Major depressive disorder.
                                             
 (d) Bipolar disorder.
                                             
 (e) Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa.
                                             
 (f) Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
                                             
 (g) Panic disorder.
                                             
 (h) Pervasive developmental disorder or autism.
                                             
 (i) Chronic post-traumatic stress disorder.
                                             
 IV. The benefits required under this section shall begin when
benefits provided under RSA 415:18-a and RSA 420-B:8-b, as applicable
are exhausted.
                                             
 V. The commissioner may adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, as may be
necessary to effectuate any provisions of the Mental Health Parity Act
of 2008 that relate to the business of insurance.
                                             
 VI. Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any
obligation to provide services to an individual under an individualized
family service plan or an individualized education program, as required
under the federal Individuals With Disabilities Education Act, the state
children's health insurance program authorized by 42 U.S.C. section
1397aa et seq., or the provision of services to an individual under any
other federal or state law.

**Source.** 1994, 298:1. 1997, 190:13, 14. 2002, 204:3. 2009, 235:8.
2010, 188:13; 363:1. 2011, 224:282, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 417-E:2

 **417-E:2 Coverage for Treatment of Pervasive Developmental Disorder
or Autism. –**
                                             
 I. For the purposes of this chapter, treatment of pervasive
developmental disorder or autism as required under RSA 417-E:1, III(h)
shall include the following:
                                             
 (a) Professional services and treatment programs, including
applied behavioral analysis, necessary to produce socially significant
improvements in human behavior or to prevent loss of attained skill or
function. To be eligible for coverage, applied behavior analysis must be
provided by a person professionally certified by the national Behavior
Analyst Certification Board or performed under the supervision of a
person professionally certified by the national Behavior Analyst
Certification Board.
                                             
 (b) Prescribed pharmaceuticals subject to the same terms and
conditions of the policy as other prescribed pharmaceuticals.
                                             
 (c) Direct or consultative services provided by a licensed
professional including a licensed psychiatrist, licensed advanced
practice registered nurse, licensed psychologist, or licensed clinical
social worker; and
                                             
 (d) Services provided by a licensed speech therapist, licensed
occupational therapist, or licensed physical therapist.
                                             
 II. An insurer may require submission of a treatment plan, including
the frequency and duration of treatment, signed by the primary care
provider, an appropriately credentialed treating specialist, a child
psychiatrist, a pediatrician with a specialty in
behavioral-developmental pediatrics, a neurologist with a specialty in
child neurology, or a licensed psychologist with training in child
psychology, that the treatment is medically necessary for the patient
and is consistent with nationally recognized treatment standards for the
condition such as those set forth by the American Academy of Pediatrics.
An insurer may require an updated treatment plan no more frequently than
on a semi-annual basis. Coverage shall not be denied on the basis that
services are habilitative in nature.
                                             
 III. The policy, contract, or certificate may limit coverage for
applied behavior analysis to 
                                             $36,000 per year for children 0 to 12
years of age, and 
                                             $27,000 from ages 13 to 21. An insurer may not apply
payments for coverage unrelated to autism spectrum disorders to any
maximum benefit established under this paragraph.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any
obligation by a school district or the state of New Hampshire to provide
services to an individual under an individualized family service plan or
an individualized education program, as required under the federal
Individuals With Disabilities Education Act, the state children's health
insurance program authorized by 42 U.S.C. section 1397aa et seq., or the
provision of services to an individual under any other federal or state
law.
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to the insurance coverage requirements established under this
section.

**Source.** 2010, 363:2. 2011, 224:283, eff. July 1, 2011.
