---
title: |
    CHAPTER 417-B CANCELLATION, REFUSAL TO WRITE, REFUSAL TO RENEW CERTAIN
    PROPERTY AND LIABILITY INSURANCE
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 417-B
                                             
CANCELLATION, REFUSAL TO WRITE, REFUSAL TO RENEW CERTAIN PROPERTY AND LIABILITY INSURANCE
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 417-B:1

 **417-B:1 Application of Chapter. –** This chapter shall apply to
policies of insurance other than automobile insurance, workers'
compensation insurance, and excess insurance on risks located or
residents in this state which insure any of the following
contingencies:
                                             
 I. Loss of or damage to real property which is used solely for
residential purposes, which is owner occupied, and which consists of not
more than 4 dwelling units.
                                             
 II. Loss of or damage to personal property owned by natural persons
except personal property used in the conduct of a commercial or
industrial enterprise.
                                             
 III. Legal liability of a natural person or persons for loss of,
damage to, or injury to, persons or property, but not including policies
primarily insuring risks arising from the conduct of a commercial or
industrial enterprise.

**Source.** 1971, 453:1. 1983, 396:1. 2006, 196:13, eff. July 30, 2006.

### Section 417-B:2

 **417-B:2 Cancellation; Refusal to Write; Refusal to Renew;
Insufficient Grounds. –** No insurer shall cancel or refuse to write or
renew a policy of insurance insuring against any of the contingencies
set forth in RSA 417-B:1 solely because of the age, residence, race,
color, creed, national origin, ancestry, marital status, or lawful
occupation, including the military service, of anyone who is or seeks to
become insured or solely because another insurer has refused to write a
policy, or has cancelled or has refused to renew an existing policy in
which that person was the named insured.

**Source.** 1971, 453:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1971.

### Section 417-B:2-a

 **417-B:2-a Underwriting on the Basis of Credit Information. –** No
insurer shall cancel, refuse to write, or refuse to renew a policy under
this chapter solely on the basis of credit information obtained from a
credit rating, a credit history, or a credit scoring model, without
consideration of any other applicable and permitted underwriting factor
independent of credit information.

**Source.** 2010, 125:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 417-B:3

 **417-B:3 Cancellation Grounds. –** No insurer, after a policy has
been in effect for 90 days, or if a policy is a renewal, effective
immediately, shall cancel a policy except for one or more of the
following reasons:
                                             
 I. Nonpayment of premium, including nonpayment of any additional
premiums, calculated in accordance with the current rating manual of the
insurer, justified by a physical change in the insured property or a
change in its occupancy or use.
                                             
 II. Conviction of the named insured of a crime having as one of its
necessary elements an act increasing any hazard insured against.
                                             
 III. Discovery of fraud or material misrepresentation by the named
insured in pursuing a claim under the policy.
                                             
 IV. Discovery of grossly negligent acts or omissions by the insured
substantially increasing any of the hazards insured against.
                                             
 V. Physical changes in the insured property which result in the
property becoming uninsurable.
                                             
 VI. Specific request of the insured.

**Source.** 1971, 453:1. 1983, 396:2. 2006, 196:16, eff. July 30, 2006.

### Section 417-B:3-a

 **417-B:3-a Nonrenewal for Filing a Claim. –** The nonrenewal of a
homeowner's insurance policy is prohibited if the nonrenewal is based
solely on the insured having filed a single valid claim within any one
previous or current policy term. For policies that contain no fixed
expiration date or that are issued for other than annual periods a term
shall be considered each 12 month anniversary from the date of policy
issuance. Inquiries about coverage on a policy do not constitute a valid
claim.

**Source.** 1992, 133:2. 2003, 144:12. 2014, 83:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2014.

### Section 417-B:4

 **417-B:4 Cancellation; Refusal to Renew; Notice. –** No
cancellation or refusal to renew by an insurer of a policy of insurance
insuring against any of the contingencies set forth in RSA 417-B:1 shall
be effective unless the insurer physically (not electronically) delivers
or mails, to the named insured at the address shown in the policy a
written notice of the cancellation or refusal to renew. Such notice
shall:
                                             
 I. State the date on which such cancellation or refusal to renew
shall become effective. The effective date shall not be less than 45
days after the date the notice is mailed or delivered to the named
insured provided however, the effective date may be 10 days from the
date of mailing or delivery when:
                                             
 (a) The policy is being cancelled or not renewed for nonpayment
of premium; or
                                             
 (b) The policy is not a renewal policy and the cancellation
notice is mailed or delivered within 90 days of the policy's effective
date.
                                             
 II. State the specific reason or reasons of the insurer for
cancellation or refusal to renew or be accompanied by a statement that
upon written request of the named insured, mailed or delivered to the
insurer not less than 10 days prior to the effective date of
cancellation or refusal to renew, the insurer will specify the reason or
reasons for such cancellation, or refusal to renew. The insurer shall
supply such information within 5 days of receipt by it of such request.
                                             
 III. Any policy written for a term of less than one year shall be
considered as if written for a term of one year. Any policy written for
a term longer than one year, or any policy with no fixed expiration
date, shall be considered as if written for successive policy periods or
terms of one year.

**Source.** 1971, 453:1. 1983, 396:3. 2009, 215:10. 2010, 212:12, eff.
Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 417-B:5

 **417-B:5 Liability of Giving Information. –** There shall be no
liability on the part of, and no cause of action of any nature shall
arise against the insurance commissioner, any insurer, the authorized
representatives, agents, and employees of either for any statement made
by any of them in complying with this chapter or for the providing of
information pertaining thereto.

**Source.** 1971, 453:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1971.

### Section 417-B:6

 **417-B:6 Rules and Regulations. –** The commissioner may issue such
rules, regulations, and orders as may be necessary to carry out the
purposes and provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1971, 453:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1971.

### Section 417-B:7

 **417-B:7 Penalty; Severability; Records. –**
                                             
 I. Failure by an insurer to comply with any section of this chapter,
or rules, regulations and orders issued pursuant thereto shall subject
an insurer to a fine not exceeding 
                                             $500 in the discretion of the
insurance commissioner, or suspension or revocation of such insurer's
license, or both.
                                             
 II. If any provisions or clause of this chapter or application
thereof to any person or situation is held invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter which
can be given effect without the invalid provisions or applications, and
to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be
severable.
                                             
 III. The insurance commissioner may require that each insurer shall
maintain records of the numbers of cancellations and refusals to write
or renew policies and the reasons therefor and shall supply to the
insurance commissioner such information as he may request.

**Source.** 1971, 453:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1971.

### Section 417-B:8

 **417-B:8 Insurers. –** As used in this chapter, "insurer'' means
any insurance company, association, or exchange authorized to issue
policies of insurance in the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1971, 561:10, eff. Sept. 10, 1971.
