---
title: 'CHAPTER 417-D WOMEN''S HEALTH CARE'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 417-D
                                             
WOMEN'S HEALTH CARE
-------------------

### Section 417-D:1

 **417-D:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the insurance commissioner.
                                             
 II. "Insurer'' means any entity issuing accident or health insurance
or accident and health insurance policies, contracts, certificates, or
other evidence of coverage pursuant to RSA 415, 415-A, 420-A, or 420-B.
                                             
 III. "Low-dose mammography'' means the X-ray examination of the
breast using equipment dedicated specifically for mammography, including
the X-ray tube, filter, compression device, screens, films, and
cassettes, with a radiation exposure which is diagnostically valuable
and in keeping with the recommended "Average Patient Exposure Guides''
as published by the Conference of Radiation Control Program Directors,
Inc.

**Source.** 1988, 267:2. 1997, 190:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 417-D:2

 **417-D:2 Low-Dose Mammography Coverage. –**
                                             
 I. Each insurer that issues or renews any policy of accident and
health insurance providing benefits for hospital expense,
medical-surgical expense, or major medical expense shall provide in each
group or individual policy, contract, or certificate of insurance issued
or renewed for persons who are residents of this state, coverage for
screening by low-dose mammography for all women 35 years of age or older
for the presence of occult breast cancer within the provisions of the
policy, contract, or certificate. The coverage shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) A baseline mammogram for women 35 to 39 years of age.
                                             
 (b) A mammogram every 1 to 2 years, even if no symptoms are
present, for women 40 to 49 years of age.
                                             
 (c) An annual mammogram for women 50 years of age or older.
                                             
 II. Such benefits shall be at least as favorable as for other
radiological examinations and subject to the same dollar limits,
deductibles, and co-insurance factors.

**Source.** 1988, 267:2. 1996, 75:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 417-D:2-a

 **417-D:2-a Pregnancy, Delivery, and Postpartum Coverage. –** Each
insurer that issues or renews any policy of accident and health
insurance providing maternity benefits for hospital expense,
medical-surgical expense, or major medical expense shall provide in each
group or individual policy, contract, or certificate of insurance issued
or renewed for persons who are residents of this state the following in
providing coverage during pregnancy and delivery and the postpartum
period:
                                             
 I. The length of hospital stay and the number of postpartum visits
shall be determined by the attending health care provider based on
clinical information that demonstrates that the mother and infant are
clinically stable based on nationally accepted guidelines pursuant to
paragraph IV and that appropriate care for the mother and newborn can be
provided for upon discharge. The length of stay shall not be determined
by the health insurer or the hospital based on economic criteria.
                                             
 II. Upon notification of the pregnancy by the insured to the
insurer, the insurer shall inform the pregnant woman in writing
regarding the insurer's prenatal, maternity, and postpartum benefits,
including but not limited to prenatal visits, diagnostic tests, prenatal
education, hospital length of stay, postpartum care, homemaker services,
and contraceptive counseling and referrals.
                                             
 III. The insurer shall pay for medically necessary prenatal
homemaker services when a woman is confined to bedrest or her activities
of daily living are otherwise restricted on the recommendation of her
attending health care provider who shall consult with the applicable
case manager.
                                             
 IV. Any length of hospital stay shorter than the current minimum
nationally accepted guidelines for perinatal care, such as Guidelines
for Perinatal Care prepared by the American Academy of Pediatrics and
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, shall be at the
recommendation of the attending health care provider in consultation
with the mother. In such cases the insurer shall pay for at least 2
postpartum visits. During one such visit, the collection of an adequate
sample from the newborn for screening for genetic and metabolic diseases
shall take place in accordance with RSA 132 and applicable rules.
                                             
 V. Postpartum visits shall include a physical assessment of mother
and infant. The assessment shall include but not be limited to: infant
nutrition and feeding, infant behavior, family interactions, safety and
injury prevention, infant and maternal health promotion, and community
resources. Providers of postpartum visits shall be licensed health care
providers experienced in perinatal care.
                                             
 VI. The insurer shall pay for appropriate medically necessary
postpartum homemaker services as determined by the attending health care
provider who shall consult with the applicable case manager.
                                             
 VII. No attending health care provider shall be penalized by an
insurer for following the provisions of this section. Insurers shall not
deny payment for services that are within standards of good and
generally accepted medical practice as reflected by scientific and peer
medical literature and recognized within the organized medical community
in the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1996, 75:4, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 417-D:2-b

 **417-D:2-b Reconstructive Surgery. –** Every insurer subject to
this chapter that provides individual or group coverage for mastectomy
surgery shall provide coverage for reconstruction of the breast on which
surgery has been performed and surgery and reconstruction of the other
breast to produce a symmetrical appearance if the patient elects
reconstruction and in the manner chosen by the patient and the
physician.

**Source.** 1997, 311:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 417-D:3

 **417-D:3 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner may adopt rules, under
RSA 541-A, relative to the administration of this chapter.

**Source.** 1988, 267:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1989.

### Section 417-D:4

 **417-D:4 Penalty. –** Any insurer that violates any provision of
this chapter or any rule adopted pursuant to it, may, at the discretion
of the commissioner, have its certificate of authority indefinitely
suspended or revoked.

**Source.** 1988, 267:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1989.
