---
title: 'CHAPTER 417-F COVERAGE FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 417-F
                                             
COVERAGE FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES
-------------------------------

### Section 417-F:1

 **417-F:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Emergency services'' means health care services that are
provided to an enrollee, insured, or subscriber in a licensed hospital
emergency facility by a provider after the sudden onset of a medical
condition that manifests itself by symptoms of sufficient severity that
the absence of immediate medical attention could be expected to result
in any of the following:
                                             
 (a) Serious jeopardy to the patient's health.
                                             
 (b) Serious impairment to bodily functions.
                                             
 (c) Serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part.
                                             
 II. "Insurer'' means any entity providing managed care coverage or
accident or health insurance or accident and health insurance policies,
contracts, certificates, or other evidence of coverage to enrollees,
insureds, or subscribers pursuant to RSA 415, 415-A, 419, 420, 420-A,
420-B, or 420-J.

**Source.** 1997, 134:1. 2000, 104:3, eff. July 7, 2000.

### Section 417-F:2

 **417-F:2 Claims Processing. –** When processing a claim for
reimbursement for emergency services, the insurer shall consider the
presenting symptoms as well as the health care services provided.

**Source.** 1997, 134:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 417-F:3

 **417-F:3 Prior Authorization. –** A participating provider or other
authorized representative of the plan that gives prior authorization
shall not rescind or modify the authorization after the health care
provider has rendered the authorized emergency services care in good
faith and the enrollee's, insured's, or subscriber's coverage was
effective on the date of service.

**Source.** 1997, 134:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.
