---
title: CHAPTER 417 UNFAIR INSURANCE TRADE PRACTICES
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 417
                                             
UNFAIR INSURANCE TRADE PRACTICES
--------------------------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 417:1

 **417:1 Purpose of Chapter. –** The purpose of this chapter is to
regulate trade practices in the business of insurance, in accordance
with the intent of Congress as expressed in the Act of Congress of March
9, 1945 (Public Law 15, 79th Congress), by defining or providing for the
determination of all such practices which constitute in this state
unfair methods of competition or unfair or deceptive acts or practices
and by prohibiting the trade practices so defined or determined.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1, par. 1, eff. June 12, 1947.

### Section 417:2

 **417:2 Definitions. –**
                                             
 I. The term "person'' shall mean any individual, corporation,
association, partnership, reciprocal exchange, inter-insurer, Lloyd's
insurers, fraternal benefit society and any other legal entity, engaged
in the business of insurance, including agents, brokers, and adjusters.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' shall mean the commissioner of insurance of this
state.
                                             
 III. "Creditor or lender'' shall include their successors or
assigns.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1. RSA 417:2. 1986, 157:1, eff. May 28, 1986.

### Section 417:3

 **417:3 Unfair Methods Prohibited. –** No person shall engage in
this state in any trade practice which is defined in this chapter or
determined pursuant to this chapter as an unfair method of competition
or an unfair or deceptive act or practice in the business of insurance.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1, par. 3, eff. June 12, 1947.

### Section 417:4

 **417:4 Unfair Methods, Acts, and Practices Defined. –** The
following are hereby defined as unfair methods of competition and unfair
and deceptive acts and practices in the business of insurance:
                                             
 I. Misrepresentations. Misrepresenting, directly or indirectly, in
the offer or sale of any insurance or in connection with any inducement
or attempted inducement of any insured or person with ownership rights
under an issued insurance policy to lapse, forfeit, surrender, assign,
effect a loan against, retain, exchange, or convert the policy, by:
                                             
 (a) Making, issuing, circulating, or causing to be made, issued
or circulated any estimate, illustration, circular, or statement
misrepresenting the terms of any policy issued or to be issued or the
benefits or advantages therein or the dividends or share of surplus to
be received thereon;
                                             
 (b) Making any incomplete comparison of insurance policies;
                                             
 (c) Making any false or misleading representation as to the
dividends or share of surplus previously paid on similar policies;
                                             
 (d) Making any false or misleading representation as to the
financial condition of any insurer, or as to the legal reserve system
upon which any life insurer operates;
                                             
 (e) Using any name or title of any policy or class of policies
misrepresenting the true nature thereof;
                                             
 (f) Employing any device, scheme, or artifice to defraud;
                                             
 (g) Obtaining money or property by means of any untrue statement
of a material fact or any omission to state a material fact necessary in
order to make the statement made, in light of the circumstances under
which it was made, not misleading; the burden of establishing
truthfulness or completeness shall be upon the party stating or omitting
to state a material fact; or
                                             
 (h) Engaging in any other transaction, practice, or course of
business which operates as a fraud or deceit upon the purchaser,
insured, or person with policy ownership rights.
                                             
 II. Misrepresentation in Insurance Applications or Transactions.
Making false or fraudulent statements or representations on or relative
to an application for insurance, for the purpose of obtaining a fee,
commission, money or benefit from an insurer, agent, or individual.
                                             
 III. False Information and Advertising Generally.
                                             
 (a) Making, publishing, disseminating, circulating, or placing
before the public, or causing, directly or indirectly, to be made,
published, disseminated, circulated, or placed before the public, in a
newspaper, magazine, or other publication, or in the form of a notice,
circular, pamphlet, letter, or poster, or over any radio or television
station, or in any other way, an advertisement, announcement, or
statement containing any assertion, representation, or statement with
respect to any insurer, its financial condition, or the terms of any
contracts issued or to be issued or the benefits or advantages promised
thereby, or the dividends or share of the surplus to be received thereon
or with respect to any person in the conduct of such person's insurance
business, which is untrue, incomplete, deceptive, or misleading.
                                             
 (b) The burden of establishing truth and completeness shall be on
the person making, publishing, circulating or placing said
advertisement, announcement, or statement before the public.
                                             
 IV. Defamation. Making, publishing, disseminating, or circulating,
directly or indirectly, or aiding, abetting, or encouraging the making,
publishing, disseminating, or circulating of any oral or written
statement or any pamphlet, circular, article or literature which is
false or maliciously critical of or derogatory to the financial
condition of an insurer, and which is calculated to injure any person
engaged in the business of insurance.
                                             
 V. Boycott; Coercion and Intimidation.
                                             
 (a) Entering into any agreement to commit or by any concerted
action committing any act of boycott or individually or by any concerted
action entering into any agreement to commit or committing any act of
coercion or intimidation resulting or tending to result in unreasonable
restraint of, or a monopoly in, the business of insurance.
                                             
 (b) Except as contained in the policy no insurer, corporation,
partnership, or individual shall make any contract or agreement with any
person insured or to be insured except as initiated by or agreed to by
the person insured or to be insured that the whole or any part of the
insurance which is subject to the provisions of this title, shall be
placed by any particular corporation, partnership, or individual or be
written by or in any particular company or insurer, or by or in any
group of companies or insurers or by any agent or group of agents. Any
contracts made in contravention of this section shall be null and void.
                                             
 VI. False Financial Statements. Knowingly filing with any
supervisory or other public official or knowingly making, publishing,
disseminating, circulating, or delivering to any person; or knowingly
placing before the public, or causing directly or indirectly, to be
made, published, disseminated, circulated, delivered to any person, or
placed before the public, any false statement of financial condition of
an insurer; or knowingly making any false entry in any book, report, or
statement of any insurer or knowingly misleading any public official to
whom such insurer is required by law to report, or who has authority by
law to examine into its condition or into any of its affairs or
knowingly omitting to make a true entry of any material fact pertaining
to the business of such insurer in any book, report or statement of such
insurer.
                                             
 VII. Stock Operations and Advisory Board Contracts. Issuing or
delivering, or permitting agents, officers, or employees to issue or
deliver, agency company stock or other capital stock, or benefit
certificates or shares in any common-law corporation, or securities or
any special or advisory board contracts or other contracts of any kind
promising returns and profits as an inducement to insurance.
                                             
 VIII. Unfair Discrimination.
                                             
 (a) Making or permitting any unfair discrimination between
individuals of the same class and equal expectation of life in the rates
charged for any contract of life insurance or of life annuity or in the
dividends or other benefits payable thereon, or in any other of the
terms and conditions of such contract.
                                             
 (b) Making or permitting any unfair discrimination between
individuals of the same class and of essentially the same hazard in the
amount of premium, policy fees, or rates charged for any policy or
contract of health insurance or in the benefits payable thereunder, or
in any of the terms or conditions of such contract, or in any other
manner whatsoever.
                                             
 (c) Making any unreasonable distinction or discrimination between
persons as to the policy, premiums, or rates charged for policies upon
the lives or health of such persons, or in any other manner whatever;
demanding or requiring by an insurer a greater premium from any person
than is at that time required by such insurer from persons of the same
age, sex, general condition of health and prospect of longevity; making,
or requiring any rebate, diminution, or discount upon the amount to be
paid on such policy in case of death of such person insured; inserting
in the policy any condition, making any stipulation whereby such person
insured shall bind oneself or one's heirs, executors, administrators and
assigns to accept any sum less than the full amount of value of such
policy in case of a claim accruing thereon by reason of the death or
disability of such person insured, other than such as are imposed on
persons in similar cases. Any such stipulations or conditions so made or
inserted shall be void.
                                             
 (d) Making or permitting any unfair distinction or discrimination
in any contract of insurance or annuity contract.
                                             
 (e) Refusing to insure risks solely because of age (except in the
case of life, accident or health insurance), place or area or residence,
race, color, creed, national origin, ancestry, marital status, lawful
occupation including the military service (except in the case of life,
accident or health insurance), of anyone who is or seeks to become
insured or solely because another insurer has refused to write a policy,
or has cancelled or has refused to renew an existing policy in which
that person was the name insured or, except in the instance of excess
coverages, solely because the insured does not insure collateral
primary, personal types of insurance with the insurer. The exemption in
this subparagraph shall not permit a mortgage life insurance policy or
certificate to cease, cancel or terminate solely on the basis of the
mortgagor's age, until the mortgagor has reached the age of 80.
                                             
 (f) Refusing to insure or to continue to insure, or limiting the
amount, extent or kind of coverage available solely because the
applicant who is also the proposed insured has been or may become the
victim of domestic abuse or violence. Nothing in this subparagraph shall
prohibit an insurer from underwriting a risk on the basis of the
physical or medical history or condition of the proposed insured, or
other relevant factors relating to the proposed insured, at the time of
application regardless of the underlying cause of the condition and in
accordance with subparagraph (a) of this paragraph. No insurer shall be
held criminally or civilly liable for any cause of action which may
result from compliance with this subparagraph.
                                             
 (g) Charging a higher premium for private passenger automobile or
homeowner insurance solely on the basis of information obtained from a
credit rating, a credit history, or a credit scoring model.
                                             
 IX. Rebates.
                                             
 (a) Except as otherwise expressly provided by law, knowingly
permitting or offering to make or making any contract of insurance or
agreement as to such contract other than as plainly expressed in the
contract issued thereon, or paying or allowing, or giving or offering to
pay, allow, or give, directly or indirectly, as inducement to such
insurance, or annuity, any rebate of premiums payable on the contract,
or any special favor or advantage in the dividends or other benefits
thereon, or any valuable consideration or inducement whatever not
specified in the contract; or giving, or selling, or purchasing or
offering to give, sell, or purchase as inducement to such insurance or
annuity or in connection therewith any stocks, bonds, or other
securities of any insurance company or other corporation, association,
or partnership, or any dividends or profits accrued thereon, or anything
of value whatsoever not specified in the contract.
                                             
 (b) Nothing in paragraphs VIII or IX(a) shall be construed as
including within the definition of discrimination or rebates any of the
following practices:
                                             
 (1) Paying bonuses to policyholders or otherwise abating their
premiums in whole or in part out of surplus accumulated from
nonparticipating insurance, provided that any such bonuses or abatement
of premiums shall be fair and equitable to policyholders and for the
best interests of the company and its policyholders;
                                             
 (2) In the case of life insurance policies issued on the
industrial debit plan making allowance to policyholders who have
continuously for a specified period made premium payments directly to an
office of the insurer in an amount which fairly represents the saving in
collection expenses;
                                             
 (3) Readjustment of the rate of premium for a group insurance
policy based on the loss or expense experience thereunder, at the end of
the first or any subsequent policy year of insurance thereunder, which
may be made retroactive only for such policy year;
                                             
 (4) Issuing insurance policies covering bona fide employees of
the insurer at a rate less than the rate charged other persons in the
same class;
                                             
 (5) Issuing policies on a salary saving, payroll deduction,
preauthorized, postdated, automatic check or draft plans at a reduced
rate commensurate with the savings made by the use of such plan;
                                             
 (6) Paying commissions or other compensation to duly licensed
agents or brokers, or allowing or returning to participating
policyholders, members or subscribers, dividends, savings, or unabsorbed
premium deposits;
                                             
 (7) Paying by an insurance agent of part or all of commissions
on public insurance to a nonprofit association of insurance agents,
which is affiliated with a recognized state or national insurance
agents' association, to be used in whole or in part for one or more
civic enterprises;
                                             
 (8) Reduction of premium rate for policies of large amounts,
but not exceeding savings in issuance and administration expenses
reasonably attributable to such policies as compared with policies of
similar plan issued in smaller amounts.
                                             
 (c) Knowingly receiving or accepting, directly or indirectly, any
rebate of premium or part thereof, or agents, or brokers commission
thereon payable on any policy of insurance or annuity contract or any
favor or advantage, a share in the dividend, or other benefit to accrue
thereon, or receiving anything of value as an inducement to such
insurance or contract or in connection therewith which is not specified,
promised, or provided for in the policy or contract, except as provided
in paragraph IX(b).
                                             
 (d) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as including
within the definition of securities as inducement to purchase insurance,
the selling or offering for sale, contemporaneously with life insurance
or annuities, of mutual fund shares or face amount certificates of
regulated investment companies under offerings registered with the
securities and exchange commission and the state of New Hampshire
pursuant to RSA 421-B where such shares or such face amount certificates
or such insurance or annuities may be purchased independently of and not
contingent upon purchase of the other, at the same price and upon the
same terms and conditions as were purchased independently.
                                             
 X. Title Insurance Commissions, Rebates and Discounts. Paying,
allowing, or permitting commissions, rebates, or discounts to any person
having an interest in or lien upon real property, which is the subject
of the title insurance involved, or to any person acting for or on
behalf of a person with such an interest or lien.
                                             
 XI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XII. Collecting Proper Premium. Knowingly collecting as premium or
charge for insurance any sum in excess of or less than the premium or
charge applicable to such insurance and as specified in the policy, in
accordance with the applicable classifications and rates as filed with
and approved by the commissioner, except a premium finance charge,
consultant's fee, policy fee, and/or service fee as allowed by law or
regulation; or, in cases where classifications, premiums, or rates are
not required by this title to be so filed and approved, such premiums
and charges shall not be in excess of or less than those specified in
the policy and as fixed by the insurer. This provision shall not be
deemed to prohibit the charging and collecting, by surplus line brokers
of the amount of applicable state and federal taxes in addition to the
premium required by the insurer. Nor shall it be deemed to prohibit the
charging and collecting, by an insurer, of amounts actually to be
expended for medical examination of an applicant for insurance or for
reinstatement of an insurance policy. Nor shall it be deemed to prohibit
the charging or collecting by an insurance agent or broker of a
reasonable service charge or fee as may be determined by regulation.
                                             
 XIII. Separate Charge for Insurance. Arranging or participating in
any plan to offer or effect in this state as an inducement to the
purchase or rental by the public of any property or services, any
insurance for which there is no separate charge to the insured. This
section does not apply to:
                                             
 (a) Insurance offered as a guarantee of the performance of goods,
and designed to protect the purchasers or users of such goods;
                                             
 (b) Title insurance;
                                             
 (c) Towing and labor services of motorist service clubs.
                                             
 XIV. Coverage Reduction. Reduction by an insurance company
authorized to do business in this state of liability limits or
increasing premiums on any policy during its term, without the consent
of the insured.
                                             
 XV. Unfair Claim Settlement Practices by Insurers.
                                             
 (a) Any of the following acts by an insurer, if committed without
just cause and not merely inadvertently or accidentally, shall
constitute unfair claim settlement practices:
                                             
 (1) Knowingly misrepresenting to claimants or insureds
pertinent facts or policy provisions relating to coverages at issue;
                                             
 (2) Failing to acknowledge and act promptly upon
communications with respect to claims arising under insurance policies;
                                             
 (3) Failing to adopt and implement reasonable standards for
the prompt investigation of claims arising under insurance policies;
                                             
 (4) Not attempting in good faith to effectuate prompt, fair
and equitable settlements or compromises of claims in which liability
has become reasonably clear;
                                             
 (5) Compelling claimants to institute litigation to recover
amounts due under insurance policies by offering substantially less than
the amounts ultimately recovered in actions brought by them;
                                             
 (6) Adopting or making known to insureds or claimants a policy
of appealing from arbitration awards in favor of insureds or claimants
for the purpose of compelling them to accept settlements or compromises
less than the amount awarded in arbitration;
                                             
 (7) Attempting settlement or compromise of a claim on the
basis of an application which was altered without notice to, or
knowledge or consent of the insured;
                                             
 (8) Attempting to settle or compromise a claim for less than
the amount which the insured had been led to believe the insured was
entitled to by written or printed advertising material accompanying or
made part of an application;
                                             
 (9) Attempting to delay the investigation or payment of claims
by requiring an insured and the insured's physician to submit a
preliminary claim report and then requiring the subsequent submission of
formal proof of loss forms, both of which submissions contain
substantially the same information;
                                             
 (10) Making any claim payment not accompanied by a statement
setting forth the benefits included within the claim payment;
                                             
 (11) Failing to affirm or deny coverage of claims within a
reasonable time after proof of loss forms have been submitted;
                                             
 (12) Refusing payment of a claim solely on the basis of an
insured's request to do so without making an independent evaluation of
the insured's liability based upon all available information;
                                             
 (13) Failure of an insurer to maintain a complete record of
all complaints which it has received, whether or not they were deemed
valid, the time it took to process the complaint, and the disposition
thereof and file an annual report thereof with the insurance
department.
                                             
 (14) Knowingly underestimating the value of any claim by an
insurer or by an adjuster representing the insurer.
                                             
 (b) Evidence as to numbers and types of complaints to the
insurance department against an insurer, and said department's complaint
experience with other insurers writing similar lines of insurance, shall
be admissible in evidence in an administrative or judicial proceeding
brought under this title, provided that no insurer shall be deemed in
violation of this section solely by reason of the numbers and types of
such complaints.
                                             
 XVI. Coercion in Requiring Insurance.
                                             
 (a) No creditor or lender engaged in the business of financing
the purchase of real or personal property or of lending money on the
security of real or personal property may require, as a condition to
such financing or lending, or as a condition to the renewal or extension
of any such loan or to the performance of any other act in connection
with such financing or lending, that the purchaser or borrower, or the
purchaser's or borrower's successors shall negotiate through a
particular insurance company or companies, insurance agent or agents,
broker or brokers, type of company or types of companies, any policy of
insurance or renewal of a policy insuring such property. This provision
does not prevent the exercise by any mortgagee of the right to approve
on a reasonable nondiscriminatory basis only insurance companies
authorized to do business in this state, selected by the borrower.
                                             
 (b) There shall be no interference either directly or indirectly
with such borrower's, debtor's or purchaser's free choice of an agent
and of an insurer which complies with the foregoing requirements, and
the creditor or lender may not refuse the policy so tendered by the
borrower, debtor or purchaser. Upon notice of any refusal of such
tendered policy, the insurance commissioner shall order the creditor or
lender to accept the tendered policy, if the commissioner determines
that the refusal is not in accordance with the foregoing requirements of
this subparagraph. Failure to comply with such an order of the insurance
commissioner is a violation of this section.
                                             
 (c) Whenever the instrument requires that the purchaser,
mortgagor, or borrower furnish insurance of any kind on real or personal
property which is being conveyed or which is collateral security to a
loan, the mortgagee or lender shall refrain from disclosing or using any
and all such insurance information to its own advantage and to the
detriment of either the borrower, purchaser, mortgagor, insurer, or
company or agency complying with the requirements relating to
insurance.
                                             
 (d) Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, a creditor or
lender of a loan secured by an interest in real property shall not
require the borrower to keep the mortgaged property insured under a
property insurance policy in a sum in excess of the value of the
buildings on the real property.
                                             
 (e) Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, no creditor or
lender shall require as a condition to closing a loan that the borrower
provide an original insurance policy at said closing; provided, however,
that the creditor or lender may require the borrower to produce at
closing a binder showing the borrower as a named insured and creditor or
lender as mortgagee, and confirming that insurance has been issued, is
in force, and will remain in full force until a copy of the final policy
is delivered to the creditor or lender or until the creditor or lender
has received notice of cancellation in accordance with the policy
conditions.
                                             
 (f) No insurer may automatically write insurance on a debtor who
has contracted credit based on the principle that the insurance is
applicable unless specifically rejected by the debtor, unless the
premium or such other identifiable charge as may be applicable is paid
in full by the creditor.
                                             
 XVII. Complaint Handling Procedures Applicable to Insurance
Companies.
                                             
 (a) Failing to maintain a procedural means within the company,
headed by a responsible officer, to process and respond adequately to
policyholders' and certificate holders' complaints.
                                             
 (b) Failing to record and assemble all records of policyholders'
and certificate holders' complaints in a central location to facilitate
periodic review by insurance departments.
                                             
 (c) Failing to record, maintain and produce, when requested by
appropriate authority, a summary of all complaints received, whether or
not they were deemed valid, the time it took to process the complaints,
and the disposition thereof and failing to file an annual report thereof
with the insurance department.
                                             
 (d) Failing to provide within this state reasonable means whereby
any person aggrieved by the application of an insurer's rating system,
claims practices, sales practices or underwriting procedures may be
heard, in person or by an authorized representative, upon the person's
written request to review the manner in which such procedures were
applied in connection with insurance afforded or tendered to the
person.
                                             
 XVIII. Conflict of Interest. Failing to establish a reasonable
procedure whereby insurance company officers, directors, trustees or
responsible employees can disclose to the company board of directors or
trustees any material interest or affiliation likely to conflict with
their official duties.
                                             
 XIX. Human Immunodeficiency Virus. No person engaged in the business
of insurance in this state shall test for the presence of an antibody or
antigen to a human immunodeficiency virus other than in accordance with
the provisions of this paragraph. Such persons shall not be subject to
any provision of RSA 141-F.
                                             
 (a) No person may test any individual in connection with an
application for insurance for the presence of an antibody or antigen to
a human immunodeficiency virus unless such individual gives written
consent on a form designed by the commissioner of the department of
health and human services with consultation and approval by the
commissioner of insurance. The form shall contain information about the
medical interpretations of positive and negative test findings,
disclosure of test results, and the purpose for which the test results
may be used.
                                             
 (b) If the laboratory analysis is performed within this state,
only laboratories certified by the department of health and human
services shall be used to test for the presence of an antibody or
antigen to a human immunodeficiency virus. If the laboratory analysis is
conducted without this state, only laboratories licensed by the United
States Department of Health and Human Services under the Clinical
Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988, as amended, shall be used to
perform such tests.
                                             
 (c) In the event of a positive test result on a blood, urine, or
oral specimen, or a positive test result on an FDA approved test, a
person who tests for the presence of an antibody or antigen to a human
immunodeficiency virus shall disclose the test results, but only to:
                                             
 (1) The individual tested;
                                             
 (2) Such other person or entity as the individual tested may
authorize by written consent to receive the test results, which consent
shall be clearly identifiable as part of the form described in
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.
                                             
 (d) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (c), if the
test results are positive or indeterminate and the individual tested has
not given written consent authorizing a physician to receive the test
results, such individual shall be urged, at the time the individual is
informed of the positive or indeterminate test results, to contact the
commissioner of the department of health and human services for
appropriate counseling.
                                             
 (e) A person who requires the test for the presence of an
antibody or antigen to a human immunodeficiency virus shall maintain all
test results and records pertaining to test results as confidential and
protected against inadvertent or unwarranted intrusion. Such test
results obtained by subpoena or any other method of discovery shall not
be released or made public outside the proceedings.
                                             
 (f) The commissioner of insurance shall adopt rules, under RSA
541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (1) Recordkeeping designed to maintain the confidentiality of
an individual tested under this paragraph.
                                             
 (2) Who may have access to such records and the conditions of
such access.
                                             
 XX. Coercion in Requiring Certain Automobile or Glass Repair.
                                             
 (a) No insurance company, and no agent or adjuster for such
insurance company, that issues or renews in this state any policy of
insurance covering, in whole or in part, motor vehicles shall require
any insured person or entity under that policy to use a particular
company or location for the providing of automobile glass replacement or
automobile repair services or products insured in whole or in part by
that policy.
                                             
 (b) No such insurance company, agent or adjuster shall engage in
any act or practice of intimidation, coercion, threat, for or against
any such insured person or entity to use such a particular company or
location to provide such services or products.
                                             
 (c) Nothing shall prohibit any insurance company, agent or
adjuster from providing to such insured person or entity the name of an
automobile glass company or automobile repair company with which
arrangements may have been made with respect to automobile glass or
repair prices or services. If a name is provided, there must be
disclosure by the insurance company, agent or adjuster to the insured
person or entity that any other automobile glass company or automobile
repair company or location may be used at the discretion of the insured
person or entity. However, the insurer may limit payment for such work
based on the fair and reasonable price in the area by repair shops or
facilities providing similar services with the usual and customary
guarantees as to materials and workmanship. If an independent repair
shop or facility and an insurer are unable to agree on a price, then for
the purposes of this section "fair and reasonable price'' shall mean the
price available from a recognized, competent and conveniently located,
independent repair shop or facility which is willing and able to repair
the damaged automobile within a reasonable time.
                                             
 XXI. "Most Favored Nation'' or "Equally Favored Nation'' Provisions.
Using or enforcing any "most favored nation'' or "equally favored
nation'' provision in any contract for medical care provider services.
For the purposes of this paragraph "most favored nation'' or "equally
favored nation'' provisions mean a requirement that a provider give the
insurer the benefit of any lower fee schedules or charges for services
which the provider may subsequently agree to with other persons or
entities.
                                             
 XXII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XXIII. Medicare Products and Medicare Supplemental Health
Insurance.
                                             
 (a)(1) Selling, soliciting or negotiating the purchase of
Medicare products (Part C and Part D) or Medicare supplemental (Medigap)
health insurance in this state through the use of cold lead
advertising.
                                             
 (2) Using an appointment that was made to discuss Medicare
products or to solicit the sale of Medicare products in order to solicit
sales of life insurance or annuity products.
                                             
 (3) Soliciting the sale of Medicare products door-to-door
prior to receiving an invitation from a consumer.
                                             
 (b) In this paragraph:
                                             
 (1) "Cold lead advertising'' means making use directly or
indirectly of a method of marketing that fails to disclose in a
conspicuous manner that a purpose of the marketing is insurance sales
solicitation and that a contact will be made by an insurance producer or
insurance company.
                                             
 (2) "Medicare products'' means Medicare Part C (Medicare
Advantage) and Medicare Part D (prescription drugs).
                                             
 (3) "Medicare supplemental health insurance'' means a group or
individual policy of accident and sickness insurance or a subscriber
contract of hospital and medical service associations or health
maintenance organizations, other than a policy issued pursuant to a
contract under section 1876 of the federal Social Security Act 42 U.S.C.
section 1395 et seq. or an issued policy under a demonstration project
specified in 42 U.S.C. section 1395 ss (g)(1), which is advertised,
marketed, or designed primarily as a supplement to reimbursements under
Medicare for the hospital, medical, or surgical expenses of persons
eligible for Medicare. "Medicare supplemental health insurance'' does
not include Medicare Advantage plans established under Medicare Part C,
Outpatient Prescription Drug plans established under Medicare Part D, or
any Health Care Prepayment Plan (HCPP) that provides benefits pursuant
to an agreement under section 1833(a)(1)(A) of the Social Security Act.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1, par. 4. RSA 417:4. 1965, 122:1. 1971, 519:1;
561:7, 8. 1986, 157:2. 1988, 262:10. 1991, 26:1. 1993, 160:1. 1994,
320:1. 1995, 310:181, 182. 1996, 40:1; 238:1-8. 1997, 158:11; 174:1;
282:4. 2000, 206:1. 2003, 144:8. 2004, 245:5, 6. 2006, 196:11. 2007,
30:1. 2009, 96:1, II. 2010, 258:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 417:5

 **417:5 Power of Commissioner. –** The commissioner shall have power
to examine and investigate into the affairs of every person engaged in
the business of insurance in this state in order to determine whether
such person has been or is engaged in any unfair method of competition
or any unfair or deceptive act or practice.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1, par. 5, eff. June 12, 1947.

### Section 417:5-a

 **417:5-a Cumulative Authority. –** The enumeration in this chapter
of powers vested in the commissioner and of specific unfair methods of
competition and unfair or deceptive acts and practices in the business
of insurance is not exclusive or restrictive or intended to limit the
powers of the commissioner or any court of review but the provisions of
such chapter are in all respects cumulative of and supplemental to the
insurance code and all other applicable New Hampshire statutes and
common law.

**Source.** 1971, 519:2, eff. Sept. 5, 1971.

### Section 417:6

 **417:6 Notice of Hearing. –** Whenever the commissioner shall have
reason to believe that any such person has been engaged or is engaging
in any unfair method of competition or any unfair or deceptive act or
practice defined in RSA 417:4, and that a proceeding by the commissioner
in respect thereto would be to the public interest, the commissioner
shall issue and serve upon such person a statement of the charges and a
notice of a hearing to be held at a time and place fixed in the notice,
which shall not be less than 10 days after the date of the service of
the notice. The notice of the hearing may be in the form of a notice to
show cause, stating the proposed action to be taken unless such person
shows cause at a hearing to be held as specified in the notice, why the
proposed action should not be taken, and stating the basis of the
proposed action.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1, par. 6. RSA 417:6. 1971, 519:3. 1996, 238:9,
eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 417:7

 **417:7 Hearing; Witnesses; Production of Books. –** At the time and
place fixed for such hearing, such person shall have an opportunity to
be heard. The commissioner upon such hearing may administer oaths,
examine and cross-examine witnesses, receive oral and documentary
evidence, and shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, compel their
attendance, and require the production of books, papers, records,
correspondence, or other documents which the commissioner deems relevant
to the inquiry. The commissioner, upon such hearing may, and upon the
request of any party shall, cause to be made a written or electronic
record of all the evidence offered or introduced and all proceedings had
at such hearing. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require the
observance at such hearing of formal rules of pleading or evidence.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1, par. 7. RSA 417:7. 1971, 519:4. 1996, 238:10,
eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 417:8

 **417:8 Appearances. –** Upon good cause shown, the commissioner may
permit any person to intervene, appear and be heard at such hearing.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1, par. 8, eff. June 12, 1947.

### Section 417:9

 **417:9 Service of Charges, Etc. –** Statements of charges, notices,
orders, and other processes of the commissioner under this chapter may
be served by anyone duly authorized by the commissioner, either in the
manner provided by law for service of process in civil actions, or by
registering and mailing a copy thereof to the person affected by such
statement, notice, order, or other process at such person's or its
residence or principal office or place of business. The verified return
by the person so serving such statement, notice, order, or other
process, setting forth the manner of such service, shall be proof of the
same, and the return postcard receipt for such statement, notice, order,
or other process, registered and mailed as provided in this section,
shall be proof of the service of the same.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1, par. 9. 1996, 238:11, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 417:10

 **417:10 Orders and Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. If after hearing or at the expiration of the period set forth in
a show cause order issued pursuant to this chapter, any person is found
to have violated RSA 417:3, the commissioner may suspend, revoke, or
refuse to renew the license of that person. The commissioner, in the
commissioner's discretion, in addition to or in lieu of such suspension,
revocation, or refusal to renew, may impose upon that person an
administrative penalty of not more than 
                                             $2,500 for each method of
competition, act, or practice found to be in violation of RSA 417:3. The
commissioner shall collect the amount so imposed and may bring an action
in the name of the state to enforce collection.
                                             
 II. In lieu of the monetary penalties provided for under paragraph
I, the commissioner, after hearing, may order relief for actual economic
losses to restore, in whole or in part, any individual consumer, as
opposed to a group or class of consumers, in interest to the position
that the consumer formerly occupied either by the return of that which
the consumer formerly had or by receipt of its equivalent in money.
Unless the parties agree, an order of relief under this paragraph shall
not exceed 
                                             $2,500 for each method of competition, act, or practice
found to be in violation of RSA 417:3 and where a pattern of conduct or
practice has been established. Relief may be ordered under this
paragraph only when the consumer in interest has agreed that such relief
shall constitute a waiver of any action for the same cause that might
otherwise be filed before an administrative agency or any court. Relief
ordered under this paragraph shall not apply to disputes regarding
claims or losses.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1, par. 10. RSA 417:10. 1971, 519:5. 1996, 238:12.
2004, 210:3, eff. Aug. 10, 2004.

### Section 417:11

 **417:11 Appeal. –** Any party to the proceedings aggrieved by any
order or decision of the insurance commissioner pursuant to RSA 417:10
shall be entitled to an appeal to the supreme court in accordance with
the provisions of RSA 541, except that in the case of a fine imposed by
any order or decision, the party aggrieved shall be entitled to an
appeal to the superior court in the county in which the party resides,
if a resident, or, if a nonresident, in the Merrimack county superior
court and a trial de novo in said court.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1, par. 11. RSA 417:11. 1971, 519:6; 561:12. 1996,
238:13, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 417:12

 **417:12 Procedure as to Undefined Unfair Acts and Practices. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever the commissioner shall have reason to believe that any
person engaged in the business of insurance is engaging in this state in
any method of competition or in any act or practice in the conduct of
such business which is not defined in RSA 417:4 nor which has been
determined pursuant to this section to be an unfair method of
competition, or an unfair or deceptive act or practice in the business
of insurance and that such method of competition is unfair or that such
act or practice is unfair or deceptive, and that a proceeding by the
commissioner in respect thereto would be in the public interest, the
commissioner shall issue and serve upon such person a statement of the
charges and a notice of hearing to be held at a time and place fixed in
the notice, which shall not be less than 10 days after the date of the
service of the notice. The notice of the hearing may be in the form of a
notice to show cause, stating the proposed action to be taken unless
such person shows cause at a hearing to be held as specified in the
notice, why the proposed action should not be taken, and stating the
basis of the proposed action.
                                             
 II. At the expiration of the period set forth in the show cause
order issued pursuant to paragraph I, or if after such hearing, the
commissioner shall determine that the method of competition or the act
or practice in question is in violation of this chapter and if such
method of competition, act, or practice has not been discontinued, the
commissioner shall reduce the findings to writing and shall issue and
cause to be served on the person charged with the violation an order
requiring such person to cease and desist from engaging in such method
of competition, act or practice.
                                             
 III. Upon showing by any person that such person has an interest
likely to be affected adversely, the commissioner shall permit such
person to intervene, appear and be heard at such hearing by counsel or
in person.
                                             
 IV. An order of the commissioner to cease and desist shall become
final:
                                             
 (a) Upon the expiration of the period set forth in the show cause
order; or
                                             
 (b) Upon receipt of the order by the person involved.
                                             
 V. Any party aggrieved by any order or decision of the insurance
commissioner pursuant to this section shall be entitled to an appeal in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 541.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1, par. 12. RSA 417:12. 1971, 519:7. 1996, 238:14,
eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 417:13

 **417:13 Penalty. –** If any person violates a cease and desist
order issued by the commissioner pursuant to RSA 417:12, the
commissioner may suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew the license of that
person. The commissioner in the commissioner's discretion, in addition
to or in lieu of such suspension, revocation, or refusal to renew, may
impose upon that person an administrative penalty of not more than

                                             $2,500 for each method of competition, act, or practice found to be in
violation of this chapter pursuant to RSA 417:12. The commissioner shall
collect the amount so imposed and may bring an action in the name of the
state to enforce collection.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1, par. 13. RSA 417:13. 1971, 519:8. 1996, 238:15,
eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 417:14

 **417:14 Procedure Additional. –** The powers vested in the
commissioner by this chapter shall be in addition to any other powers to
enforce any penalties, fines or forfeitures authorized by law with
respect to the methods, acts and practices hereby declared to be unfair
or deceptive.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1, par. 14, eff. June 12, 1947.

### Section 417:15

 **417:15 Failure to Obey Subpoena. –** In case of refusal of any
person to comply with any subpoena issued under this chapter or to
testify to any matter to which such person may be lawfully interrogated,
the superior court of Merrimack county or the county where said party
resides on application of the commissioner may issue an order requiring
such person to comply with such subpoena and to testify. Any failure to
obey such order of the court may be punished by the court as contempt of
court.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1, par. 15. 1996, 238:16, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 417:16

 **417:16 Immunity From Prosecution. –** If any person shall ask to
be excused from attending and testifying or from producing any books,
papers, records, correspondence, or other documents at any hearing on
the ground that the testimony or evidence required of such person may
tend to be self-incriminating or subject such person to a penalty or
forfeiture, and shall notwithstanding be directed to give such testimony
or produce such evidence, the person must nonetheless comply with such
direction, but shall not thereafter be prosecuted or subjected to any
penalty or forfeiture for or on account of any transaction, matter or
thing concerning which such person may testify or produce evidence
pursuant thereto, and no testimony so given or evidence produced shall
be received against the person upon any criminal action, investigation
or proceeding; provided, however, that no such individual so testifying
shall be exempt from prosecution or punishment for any perjury committed
by such individual while so testifying and the testimony or evidence so
given or produced shall be admissible against the individual upon any
criminal action, investigation or proceeding concerning such perjury,
nor shall the individual be exempt from the refusal, revocation, or
suspension of any license, permission or authority conferred, or to be
conferred, pursuant to the insurance law of this state. Any such
individual may execute, acknowledge, and file in the office of the
commissioner a statement expressly waiving such immunity or privilege in
respect to any transaction, matter, or thing specified in such statement
and thereupon the testimony of such person or such evidence in relation
to such transaction, matter, or thing may be received or produced before
any judge or justice, court, tribunal, grand jury or otherwise, and if
so received or produced such individual shall not be entitled to any
immunity or privilege on account of any testimony such individual may so
give or evidence so produced.

**Source.** 1947, 189:1, par. 16. 1996, 238:17, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 417:17

 **417:17 Prohibitions. –** Any domestic insurance company may have
as a director a person who is also a director of another insurance
company, which may be a foreign or domestic company; provided, however,
that if the effect is to substantially lessen competition generally in
the insurance business or to tend to create a monopoly therein, it shall
be deemed a violation of this chapter. In the administration and
enforcement of this section the commissioner shall have the powers and
duties conferred and imposed upon the commissioner by other applicable
sections of this chapter with respect to violations of it.

**Source.** 1949, 47:1. 1996, 238:18, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

Consumer Interests and Insurance Unfair Trade Practices
-------------------------------------------------------

### Section 417:18

 **417:18 Definitions. –** As used in this subdivision the following
words shall have the following meaning:
                                             
 I. "Insurance unfair trade practices law'' and similar phrases
means those practices prohibited by RSA 417.
                                             
 II. "Consumer'' means any natural person who is offered or
supplied goods or services for personal, family, or household purposes.
                                             
 III. "Supplier'' means any individual, corporation, association,
partnership, reciprocal exchange, inter-insurer, Lloyd's insurer,
fraternal benefit society, and any other legal entity engaged in the
business of insurance, including agents, brokers, and adjusters.
                                             
 IV. "State insurance supervisory authority'' means the New
Hampshire insurance commissioner, or other official charged with the
responsibility of regulating the insurance business in the state in
question.

**Source.** 1971, 519:9, eff. Sept. 5, 1971.

### Section 417:19

 **417:19 Action Against Supplier. –**
                                             
 I. When a supplier, in any action or proceeding brought by the
insurance commissioner, has been found to be in violation of this
chapter or has been ordered to cease and desist, and said finding or
order has become final, any consumer claiming to be adversely affected
by the act or practice giving rise to such finding or order may bring
suit against said supplier to recover any damages or loss suffered
because of such action or practice.
                                             
 II. For the sole purpose of providing the consumer with the
procedural rights set forth under RSA 541 and RSA 541-A, failure of the
commissioner to take action under RSA 417:6 or RSA 417:12 within 120
days from the date of the receipt of a complaint from an alleged injured
person shall constitute a finding that the alleged act or practice is
not in violation of this chapter. This finding may be appealed in
accordance with RSA 541. If upon appeal the decision of the commissioner
is not upheld, the petitioner may proceed under RSA 417:19, I. Nothing
contained in this section shall be construed to limit the commissioner's
authority to pursue any legal or regulatory action pursuant to this
chapter or any provision in title XXXVII.

**Source.** 1971, 519:9. 2009, 178:5, eff. Sept. 11, 2009.

### Section 417:20

 **417:20 Administration of Actions. –**
                                             
 I. Actions under this chapter shall be administered, so far as
practicable, to avoid a multiplicity of actions seeking relief for or on
behalf of the same consumers.
                                             
 II. Actions under this chapter shall be administered, so far as
practicable, to facilitate voluntary settlements.
                                             
 III. Whenever a consumer shall prevail in an action brought under
RSA 417:19, I, the consumer shall be allowed to recover, in addition to
damages, the cost of the suit, including reasonable attorneys' fees.
Upon the termination of all suits under this section, the court shall
inquire into the reasonableness of attorneys' fees charged to the
claimants and revise such fees where necessary to make them reasonable.

**Source.** 1971, 519:9. 1996, 238:19, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 417:21

 **417:21 Effect of Finding or Order. –** A final finding or order
rendered in any proceeding before the insurance commissioner pursuant to
RSA 417:10, to the effect that the defendant has engaged in an unfair
insurance practice, shall be prima facie evidence against the defendant
in any action or proceeding brought by any consumer against the
defendant under the provisions of RSA 417:19, I. This section shall not
apply to consent judgments. No consumer may recover more than once from
the same supplier for the same act or practices.

**Source.** 1971, 519:9, eff. Sept. 5, 1971; 561:9, eff. Sept. 10, 1971.

### Section 417:22

 **417:22 Venue. –** An action under this chapter may be brought in
Merrimack county superior court or any district of the United States in
which the claim arose or in which the defendant resides, is found, has
an agent, is licensed to do business, or is doing business.

**Source.** 1971, 519:9, eff. Sept. 5, 1971.

Insurance Fraud Investigation Unit
----------------------------------

### Section 417:23

 **417:23 Insurance Fraud Investigation Unit Established. –** There
is established in the department of insurance the insurance fraud
investigation unit. The unit shall assist the commissioner, or any law
enforcement agency, in investigating insurance fraud or other
insurance-related criminal activity and in developing and implementing
programs to prevent insurance fraud and abuse. The unit shall have the
power to subpoena witnesses and administer oaths in any investigation it
conducts, and to compel the production of any books, papers or other
memoranda or documents by subpoena duces tecum. The unit shall promptly
notify the attorney general of any insurance application, claim, or
activity which involves criminal conduct. When required by the
commissioner and the attorney general, the unit shall cooperate with the
attorney general in the investigation and prosecution of criminal
violations.

**Source.** 1993, 357:6. 2000, 260:1, eff. Aug. 11, 2000.

### Section 417:24

 **417:24 Staff. –** The commissioner shall appoint full-time,
classified persons who shall be qualified by training and experience to
perform the duties of their positions.

**Source.** 1993, 357:6. 2003, 144:9, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 417:25

 **417:25 Attorney General. –** When requested by the commissioner,
the attorney general may assign an assistant attorney general to assist
the unit in the performance of its duties.

**Source.** 1993, 357:6, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 417:26

 **417:26 Evidence Collection. –** If, by its own inquiries or as a
result of complaints, the insurance department has any reason to believe
that a person has engaged in, or is engaging in, any criminal activity
or any violations involving title XXXVII, it may administer oaths, serve
subpoenas ordering the attendance of witnesses or production of
material, and collect evidence. Service of such subpoenas and subpoenas
duces tecum may be made by:
                                             
 I. Delivering a duly executed copy to the person to be served or an
agent authorized by law to receive service of process;
                                             
 II. Delivering a duly executed copy to the person's principal place
of business or abode in this state, if any; or
                                             
 III. Mailing a duly executed copy via registered mail, return
receipt requested, to the person to be served, or an agent authorized by
law to receive service of process.

**Source.** 1996, 285:1. 2000, 260:2. 2007, 37:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 417:27

 **417:27 Inspection. –** If material that the unit seeks to obtain
by request is located outside the state, the person so requested may
make such material available for examination by the unit or its
representative at the place where it is located. The unit may designate
representatives, including officials of the state in which the material
is located, to inspect the material on its behalf, and it may respond to
similar requests from officials of other states.

**Source.** 1996, 285:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 417:28

 **417:28 Reporting of Fraudulent Claims by Insurers. –** Any person
or entity regulated under title XXXVII which has reason to believe that
an insurance fraud or insurance-related criminal activity has been
committed shall make a report to the unit within 60 days or within a
shorter period under such circumstances as the commissioner may
prescribe by rule. No waiver of any such regulated person's or entity's
applicable privilege or claim of confidentiality in the documents,
materials or information shall occur as a result of such disclosure to
the unit. Such report shall be made on a form prescribed by the unit and
shall contain the information requested and such additional information
as the unit may require. The unit shall review such report and select
such claims as, in its judgment, warrant further investigation. In the
absence of fraud or malice, no public official or insurance company or
person who furnishes information on behalf of the insurance company
shall be liable for damages in a civil action or subject to criminal
prosecution for any oral or written statement made or any other action
taken that is necessary to supply information required pursuant to this
section.

**Source.** 1996, 285:1. 1997, 284:18. 2007, 37:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 417:29

 **417:29 Fraud Unit Material Information Disclosure. –** The unit's
papers, documents, reports, or evidence relative to the subject of
investigation under this section shall remain confidential and shall not
be subject to public inspection or disclosure. Further, such papers,
documents, reports, or evidence relative to the subject of an
investigation under this section shall be privileged and shall not be
subject to subpoena, discovery, or disclosure in any proceeding other
than the action initiated by the unit, except as specifically authorized
in this subdivision. For the purposes of this section, investigative
materials shall include the testimony of unit personnel concerning any
matter of which they have knowledge pursuant to a pending insurance
fraud investigation by the unit.

**Source.** 1996, 285:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 417:30

 **417:30 Insurer Antifraud Initiatives. –**
                                             
 I. Except for insurance companies writing only credit, home
warranty, travel, or title insurance, every insurance company licensed
to write direct business in this state shall have antifraud initiatives
reasonably calculated to detect, prosecute, and prevent fraudulent
insurance acts, including a written antifraud plan submitted to the
commissioner.
                                             
 II. Antifraud plans submitted to the commissioner shall be
privileged and confidential and shall not be a public record and shall
not be subject to discovery or subpoena in a civil or criminal action.
                                             
 III. The provisions of RSA 400-A:36, III shall apply to the
furnishing of information by an insurer to the unit or to any other
insurer involved in the prevention or detection of fraudulent insurance
acts.
                                             
 IV. If the commissioner finds that an insurer licensed to do
business in New Hampshire has failed to submit a plan, as required under
paragraph I of this section, reasonably calculated to detect, prosecute,
and prevent fraudulent insurance acts, or has submitted but failed to
execute that plan, the commissioner may issue a fine or suspend the
right of the insurer to do business in this state until such time as
that insurer comes into compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1997, 284:19. 2000, 260:3, 4. 2007, 37:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 417:31

 **417:31 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant
to RSA 400-A:15, I, as necessary for the implementation of this
subdivision.

**Source.** 2007, 37:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.
