---
title: 'CHAPTER 420-M PURCHASING ALLIANCES'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 420-M
                                             
PURCHASING ALLIANCES
--------------------

### Section 420-M:1

 **420-M:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to:
                                             
 I. Increase the affordability, efficiency, and fairness of health
insurance coverage for employers by setting standards for the licensure
and oversight of purchasing alliances through which employers and their
employees may purchase health coverage.
                                             
 II. Allow employers and their employees to obtain better value in
purchasing health insurance by consolidating purchasing responsibilities
and resources, thereby increasing purchasing expertise and reducing the
administrative cost of health plan contracting, enrollment, premium
collection, and payment for multiple employers.
                                             
 III. Foster competition based on value.

**Source.** 2010, 346:1, eff. July 20, 2010.

### Section 420-M:2

 **420-M:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the insurance commissioner.
                                             
 II. "Eligible dependents'' means "eligible dependents'' as defined
in RSA 420-G:2, V.
                                             
 III. "Eligible employee'' means "eligible employee'' as defined in
RSA 420-G:2, VI.
                                             
 IV. "Employee enrollee'' means an eligible employee, self-employed
individual, or an eligible dependent of an eligible employee who is
enrolled in a health benefit plan offered through an alliance by a
participating carrier.
                                             
 V. "Health benefit plan'' means "health coverage'' as defined in RSA
420-G:2, IX.
                                             
 VI. "Health carrier'' or "carrier'' means "health carrier'' as
defined in RSA 420-G:2, VIII.
                                             
 VII. "Member employer'' means an employer who enrolls in an
alliance.
                                             
 VIII. "Participating carrier'' means a carrier that contracts with
the alliance.
                                             
 IX. "Purchasing alliance'' or "alliance'' means a non-risk bearing
corporation or other entity licensed pursuant to RSA 420-G:10-a that
provides health insurance coverage to member employers and their
employees.
                                             
 X. "Qualified purchasing alliance'' means a purchasing alliance that
has obtained certification from the commissioner under RSA 420-M:13 as a
qualified purchasing alliance with authority to operate in the same
manner as a qualified association trust pursuant to RSA 420-G:10.
                                             
 XI. "Small employer'' means "small employer'' as defined in RSA
420-G:2, XVI.

**Source.** 2010, 346:1, eff. July 20, 2010.

### Section 420-M:3

 **420-M:3 Jurisdiction of the Commissioner; Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall regulate the establishment and conduct of
purchasing alliances.
                                             
 II. No person or entity, other than a qualified association trust,
shall market, sell, offer, or arrange the sale of one or more health
benefit plans to 2 or more employers or their eligible employees without
first being licensed by the commissioner pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 III. A person or entity, not licensed by the commissioner as a
purchasing alliance and engaged in the purchase, sale, marketing, or
distribution of health insurance or health care benefit plans shall not
hold itself out as a health insurance purchasing alliance, health
insurance purchasing cooperative, or a health insurance purchasing
association.

**Source.** 2010, 346:1, eff. July 20, 2010.

### Section 420-M:4

 **420-M:4 Purchasing Alliance Application and Licensing. –** To
obtain authority to operate as a purchasing alliance, an application
shall be completed and filed with the commissioner by an authorized
representative of the corporation or other entity established to operate
as a purchasing alliance. An application shall not be deemed filed until
all information necessary to properly process the application has been
received by the commissioner. Upon filing, the commissioner shall make a
determination concerning the application and shall provide notice of the
determination to the applicant. If approved, a copy of a license shall
be provided to the purchasing alliance. The license shall serve as
authorization to operate pursuant to this chapter.

**Source.** 2010, 346:1, eff. July 20, 2010.

### Section 420-M:5

 **420-M:5 Preparation of a Business Plan and Other Required
Documents. –**
                                             
 I. The application for a purchasing alliance shall include a
business plan containing the following information:
                                             
 (a) A detailed, written plan of operations explaining how the
applicant intends to fulfill the purposes and requirements of this
chapter;
                                             
 (b) The specific steps that the alliance will use to increase
affordability, efficiency, and fairness of health insurance coverage;
                                             
 (c) The specific steps that the alliance will use to allow
employers and their employees to obtain better value in purchasing
health insurance;
                                             
 (d) The scope of services to be offered and the resources and
expertise to be used to implement and administer those services;
                                             
 (e) A provision requiring that any coverage procured by the
alliance shall require that the members of the alliance be notified
directly by the insurer of cancellation due to nonpayment of premium;
                                             
 (f) The personal biographical information and descriptions of the
officers of the alliance;
                                             
 (g) A written statement demonstrating that those involved in the
operation of the alliance have the expertise and experience to
effectively and professionally represent employers and their eligible
employees; and
                                             
 (h) An affirmative demonstration that financial controls are in
place as a condition of licensure.
                                             
 II. In addition to the business plan, each applicant shall file with
the commissioner the following information or documents:
                                             
 (a) A plan that affirmatively demonstrates that the alliance has
the technical expertise and capacity to serve a significant group of
employers and their eligible employees;
                                             
 (b) A plan that demonstrates that the alliance has the technical
capacity to provide service quality;
                                             
 (c) The applicant's articles of incorporation, bylaws, or other
formation and business operation documents;
                                             
 (d) A list of officers and directors of the applicant and the
contract administrator, if one is employed, and personal biographical
information or firm descriptions for each;
                                             
 (e) Evidence of security and prudence in the accounting, deposit,
collection, handling, and transfer of moneys; and
                                             
 (f) A description of the service area in which the alliance will
be marketing and offering services.
                                             
 III. Material changes in the operations or the business plan shall
not take effect without approval from the commissioner.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner shall conduct financial and performance audits
or examinations of an alliance on a regular basis. The commissioner
shall require audited financial statements from an alliance. The costs
of examinations or audits shall be paid by the alliance.
                                             
 V. A purchasing alliance shall submit an annual report no later than
April 1 of each year that includes quarterly financial statements that
show:
                                             
 (a) The alliance is operating in a sound financial fashion;
                                             
 (b) The alliance is not a risk-bearing entity; and
                                             
 (c) The alliance is utilizing sound financial controls and money
management.

**Source.** 2010, 346:1, eff. July 20, 2010.

### Section 420-M:6

 **420-M:6 Revocation of License and Insolvency. –**
                                             
 I. The following intentional acts shall constitute grounds for
denial, non-renewal, suspension, or revocation of an application or
existing license, following notice and an opportunity for hearing:
                                             
 (a) Failure to comply with the provisions of RSA 420-G;
                                             
 (b) Failure to comply with the business plan filed and approved
by the commissioner;
                                             
 (c) Failure to maintain adequate financial controls;
                                             
 (d) Failure to extend alliance health benefit plan coverage to
eligible employees;
                                             
 (e) Failure to comply with a lawful order of the commissioner;
                                             
 (f) Engaging in an unfair or deceptive act or practice;
                                             
 (g) Filing any necessary form, including the application form,
with the commissioner that contains false or materially incorrect
information or omissions; or
                                             
 (h) Misappropriation, conversion, illegal withholding, or refusal
to pay over upon proper demand any moneys that belong to a person or
participating carrier and that have been entrusted to the alliance in
its fiduciary capacity.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall require the removal and replacement of
managerial or marketing staff or third party contractors if necessary to
remedy compliance or performance problems.
                                             
 III. In the event the alliance becomes insolvent, the commissioner
shall place the alliance in receivership if necessary to protect the
interests of alliance enrollees.

**Source.** 2010, 346:1, eff. July 20, 2010.

### Section 420-M:7

 **420-M:7 Powers and Duties of Purchasing Alliances; Restrictions on
Purchasing Alliances. –**
                                             
 I. A purchasing alliance shall:
                                             
 (a) Offer health benefit plans that are available to all member
employers;
                                             
 (b) Establish administrative and accounting procedures for
operating the alliance, for providing services to member employers and
enrollees, and for preparing an annual budget;
                                             
 (c) Develop standard enrollment procedures for enrolling
employers and their eligible employees and dependents;
                                             
 (d) Establish procedures for open enrollment periods;
                                             
 (e) Establish conditions of participation for small employers
that conform to the requirements of RSA 420-G and include, but are not
limited to, the following:
                                             
 (1) Assurances that the member employer is an employer group
and is not formed for the purpose of securing health benefits coverage;
and
                                             
 (2) Prepayment of premiums or other mechanisms to assure that
payment will be made for coverage;
                                             
 (f) Establish membership criteria that allow any employer to
participate in the alliance or that limit participation in the alliance
to employers that are members of or affiliated with an association,
trade group, or other entity that has been in existence for at least 10
years and was established and maintained for purposes other than the
provision of health coverage;
                                             
 (g) Provide that each eligible employee is permitted to enroll in
any health benefit plan offered by any participating carrier so long as
the health benefit plan provides coverage where he or she works or
lives;
                                             
 (h) Establish conditions of participation for participating
carriers;
                                             
 (i) Develop and make available a list of objective criteria that
shall be met by a participating carrier offering coverage to alliance
members;
                                             
 (j) Establish conditions of participation for agents or brokers;
                                             
 (k) Provide to alliance members clear, standardized information
on the health benefit plan including information on:
                                             
 (1) Price;
                                             
 (2) Benefits;
                                             
 (3) Enrollee costs;
                                             
 (4) Quality;
                                             
 (5) Patient satisfaction;
                                             
 (6) Enrollment; and
                                             
 (7) Grievance procedures and rights and responsibilities;
                                             
 (l) Transmit enrollment and eligibility information to
participating carriers on a timely basis;
                                             
 (m) Specify in contracts with participating carriers how all
premiums shall be transmitted and the frequency of that transmission and
how penalties and grace periods on late payments of premiums shall be
calculated;
                                             
 (n) Have a fiduciary duty with respect to all moneys received or
owed to it to assure payments of its obligations and a full accounting
to its members and the commissioner; and
                                             
 (o) Submit to the commissioner quarterly financial statements,
annual reports, and proposed material changes in the policy and/or
operations or the business plan.
                                             
 II. A purchasing alliance may:
                                             
 (a) Receive, review, and act on grievances against participating
carriers by member employers or enrollees;
                                             
 (b) Require participating carriers to maintain health care data;
                                             
 (c) Maintain a trust account or accounts for deposit of all
moneys received and collected for the operation of the alliance;
                                             
 (d) Establish procedures and mechanisms for billing and
collection of premiums from member employers, including collection of
any share of the premium paid by employee enrollees;
                                             
 (e) Review information and recommendations from consumers,
employers, participating carriers, or health care providers and other
sources, and issue periodic reports or recommendations to the
commissioner to improve the delivery of health services and the
purchasing of health coverage;
                                             
 (f) Develop model contracts that describe for potential
contractors the requirements of the alliance and provide a copy of the
contract to interested carriers;
                                             
 (g) Place into its contracts between the alliance and member
employers the following:
                                             
 (1) A provision stating that, for administrative purposes, the
alliance shall be the policyholder or contract holder of the health
benefit plan on behalf of member employers, their eligible employees,
and eligible dependents; and
                                             
 (2) A provision stating that the participating carrier shall
issue a certificate of coverage, or equivalent document, specifying the
essential features of the health benefit plan's coverage to each
enrolled eligible employee;
                                             
 (h) Undertake any activity necessary to administer the alliance,
including marketing and publicizing the alliance, and assuring that
participating carriers, contractors, participating employers, and
enrollees are in compliance with alliance requirements;
                                             
 (i) Establish contracts with participating carriers to provide
health coverage to alliance members;
                                             
 (j) Establish contracts with employer members;
                                             
 (k) Contract with qualified, independent third parties for
services necessary to carry out the powers and duties of the alliance;
                                             
 (l) Appoint advisory committees, as necessary, to provide
technical assistance in the operation of the program and in carrying out
the purposes of this chapter;
                                             
 (m) Assess member employers a fee for costs incurred or
anticipated in connection with the operation of the alliance;
                                             
 (n) Require as a condition of membership that employers include a
minimum percentage of employees in coverage purchased through the
alliance;
                                             
 (o) Reject or allow a carrier to reject an employer from
membership or drop or allow a carrier to drop a member employer if the
member fails to pay premiums or engages in fraud or material
misrepresentation in connection with a health benefit plan purchased
through the alliance;
                                             
 (p) Contract with licensed insurance agents or brokers to market
and service coverage made available through the alliance to its members.
Compensation for agents and brokers shall not vary based on the actual
or expected health status or medical utilization of the group to which
coverage is sold;
                                             
 (q) Define a set of standardized requirements that the alliance
shall use to purchase insurance from a carrier;
                                             
 (r) Require that member employers and their eligible employees
continue to pay administrative fees that are part of the contract with
the alliance if a member employer or enrollee cancels prior to
completion of a contract period or membership period established by the
alliance;
                                             
 (s) Negotiate the premium rates charged for coverage offered
through the alliance and, for small employer members, ensure that rates
are consistent with the rating restrictions contained in RSA 420-G;
                                             
 (t) Request such information from participating carriers as is
necessary to carry out the powers and duties of this chapter;
                                             
 (u) Sue or be sued, including taking action necessary for
securing legal remedies on behalf of the alliance, member employers, or
enrollees;
                                             
 (v) Apply for loans or loan guarantees from the New Hampshire
business finance authority for the purpose of funding startup costs;
                                             
 (w) Receive and accept loans, grants, funds, or anything of value
from a public or private entity including:
                                             
 (1) Employer premiums;
                                             
 (2) Employer participation fees;
                                             
 (3) Employer late fees;
                                             
 (4) Employer reinstatement fees;
                                             
 (5) Agent and broker fees paid by the employer;
                                             
 (6) Interest earned on accounts;
                                             
 (7) Funds paid by the participating carriers for a pooled
marketing effort;
                                             
 (8) Public sector and private sector grants, gifts, loans, or
donations; or
                                             
 (9) Other lawful sources;
                                             
 (x) Receive and accept contributions of property, labor, or any
other thing of value;
                                             
 (y) Expend funds to pay:
                                             
 (1) Participating carriers under their contracts;
                                             
 (2) Third parties for services provided under contract;
                                             
 (3) Employer billing adjustments;
                                             
 (4) Agent and broker fees;
                                             
 (5) The alliance's administrative expenses; and
                                             
 (6) All other expenditures duly authorized by the board;
                                             
 (z) Exercise all powers reasonably necessary to carry out the
powers granted and duties imposed under this chapter; and
                                             
 (aa) Enter into all other contracts as are necessary to carry out
the powers and duties of the alliance.
                                             
 III. A purchasing alliance shall not:
                                             
 (a) Purchase health care services directly, assume risk for the
cost or provision of health care services, or otherwise contract with
health care providers for the provision of health care services to
enrollees.
                                             
 (b) Exclude from membership in the alliance an employer, eligible
employee, or eligible dependent of an eligible employee who meets the
alliance's membership criteria and who agrees to pay fees for membership
and the premium for health coverage through the alliance and who abides
by the bylaws and rules of the alliance.
                                             
 (c) As a condition of membership, require an employer, eligible
employee, or eligible dependent to subscribe to limited health coverage
or non-health coverage related products or services.
                                             
 (d) Engage in any act or practice that results in the selection
of member employers and enrollees based on industry type, experience,
gender, family status, education, health status, income, employer size,
or other factors related to the risk profile of the group.
                                             
 (e) Require or take any action inconsistent or in conflict with
state laws or regulations.

**Source.** 2010, 346:1. 2011, 155:1, eff. Aug. 7, 2011.

### Section 420-M:8

 **420-M:8 Contracts With Participating Carriers. –** The contracts
entered into by the alliance shall:
                                             
 I. Establish performance standards for specific contractual
elements;
                                             
 II. Set liquidated damages for breach of the contract;
                                             
 III. Require the insurer to notify the member employers of
cancellation of the policy;
                                             
 IV. Require the member employers in the event of cancellation to
arrange for continuation coverage for their employees to the extent
provided under federal and state law; and
                                             
 V. Contain a provision stating that if after timely receipt of the
premium payment from the employer, the alliance fails to make the
premium payment to the insurer, with the result that coverage is
terminated, that the alliance shall be liable for benefits to the same
extent as the insurer or carrier would have been liable if coverage had
not been terminated.

**Source.** 2010, 346:1, eff. July 20, 2010.

### Section 420-M:9

 **420-M:9 Requirements for Participating Carriers. –**
                                             
 I. To qualify as a participating carrier, a carrier shall
demonstrate the following characteristics:
                                             
 (a) That it is licensed and in good standing with the insurance
department;
                                             
 (b) That it has the ability to administer health coverage, to
provide adequate service, and to comply with all contractual
requirements of the alliance;
                                             
 (c) That it has the ability to provide enrollees with access to
covered services;
                                             
 (d) That it has the ability to provide coverage for enrollees in
any service area in which the carrier plans to participate through the
alliance;
                                             
 (e) That it has the ability to arrange and pay for quality health
care services;
                                             
 (f) That it has the ability to provide standard data required by
the alliance, in a manner prescribed by the alliance, including
information on:
                                             
 (1) Plan performance;
                                             
 (2) Enrollee satisfaction;
                                             
 (3) Provider payment and incentive structures; and
                                             
 (4) Such other data requirements prescribed by the alliance;
                                             
 (g) That it has the ability to meet quality of care standards
established by government and industry authorities; and
                                             
 (h) That it is financially strong and has competent management.
                                             
 II. Participating carriers that contract with or employ health care
providers shall have the ability to accomplish the following in a manner
satisfactory to the alliance:
                                             
 (a) Review and report on the cost and quality of care covered;
                                             
 (b) Review and report on the appropriateness of care covered;
and
                                             
 (c) Provide accessible health care services.
                                             
 III. Each participating carrier shall:
                                             
 (a) Meet the standards established by the alliance pursuant to
this chapter;
                                             
 (b) Provide data and information as required by the alliance;
                                             
 (c) Comply with all laws and rules regarding underwriting,
rating, claims handling, sales, solicitation, licensing, fair marketing,
unfair trade practices, the provisions of this chapter, and other
applicable state statutes;
                                             
 (d) Enroll and terminate individuals in the manner specified by
the alliance; and
                                             
 (e) Comply with other requirements established by the alliance
pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit participating carriers
from contracting with particular health care providers or types,
classes, or categories of health care providers, or setting
reimbursement methodology.
                                             
 V. In the event that the participating carrier elects to terminate
its contract with the alliance, the participating carrier shall:
                                             
 (a) Provide advance notice of its decision to the alliance; and
                                             
 (b) Provide notice of the decision at least 180 days prior to the
non-renewal of health coverage to the member employers and employee
enrollees.

**Source.** 2010, 346:1, eff. July 20, 2010.

### Section 420-M:10

 **420-M:10 Marketing Health Benefit Plans. –**
                                             
 I. The alliance shall establish marketing standards for use by
participating carriers.
                                             
 II. Any marketing, advertisement, or educational material for health
coverage sold through the alliance shall be approved by the alliance
prior to its use.
                                             
 III. The alliance shall make approved marketing materials available
to member employers in an efficient and standardized manner. These
materials shall include, but not be limited to, an accurate summary of
benefit plans, rates, cost, and accreditation information relating to
the offerings of the participating carrier.
                                             
 IV. This section shall not be construed to prohibit or to compel the
alliance or a participating carrier from using the services of an agent
or broker.

**Source.** 2010, 346:1, eff. July 20, 2010.

### Section 420-M:11

 **420-M:11 Conflict of Interest. –** No officer or board member or
director or contract administrator of a purchasing alliance or members
of their households may be employed by, be a consultant for, be a member
of the board of directors of, or be affiliated with, or otherwise be a
representative of a carrier or other insurer. This section shall not
preclude an officer or board member or director or contract
administrator of a purchasing alliance from purchasing health coverage
through the alliance.

**Source.** 2010, 346:1, eff. July 20, 2010.

### Section 420-M:12

 **420-M:12 Purchasing Alliance Distinguished From Multiple Employer
Welfare Arrangement. –** Purchasing alliances shall not be risk bearing
entities, and shall not enter into a self-insured arrangement.

**Source.** 2010, 346:1, eff. July 20, 2010.

### Section 420-M:13

 **420-M:13 Qualified Purchasing Alliance. –** A purchasing alliance
that has a minimum of 3,000 enrollees may elect to obtain certification
from the commissioner as a qualified purchasing alliance. To obtain
certification, a purchasing alliance shall demonstrate:
                                             
 I. Either that membership in the alliance is open to all employers
without discrimination or that the alliance has established membership
criteria that limit membership in the alliance to employers that are
members of or affiliated with an association, trade group, or other
entity that has been in existence for at least 10 years and was
established and maintained for purposes other than the provision of
health coverage; and
                                             
 II. That the health benefit plan or plans offered to its members and
the provider payment policies associated with those plans will promote
more cost effective use of health care services by providing a better
alignment of financial incentives with:
                                             
 (a) Health care quality improvement and efficiency; and
                                             
 (b) Health promotion and disease prevention.

**Source.** 2010, 346:1. 2011, 155:2, eff. Aug. 7, 2011.
