---
title: 'CHAPTER 420-A HEALTH SERVICE CORPORATIONS'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 420-A
                                             
HEALTH SERVICE CORPORATIONS
---------------------------

### Section 420-A:1

 **420-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the insurance commissioner.
                                             
 II. "Covered dependent'' means the spouse, an adult dependent, or a
child or an adopted child of the subscriber who is named in the
subscription certificate issued to the subscriber and with respect to
whom appropriate premium is specified in the certificate.
                                             
 II-a. "Date of enrollment'' means the first day of coverage under
the plan, or, if there is a waiting period, the first day of the waiting
period, which is typically the first day of work.
                                             
 III. "Health service corporation'' means a nonprofit sharing
corporation without capital stock organized under the laws of the state
for the purpose of establishing, maintaining, and operating a health
service plan or plans whereby the expense of health-related care may be
partially or wholly provided to its subscribers by the payment of
benefits for facilities, professional services, appliances, medicines,
or supplies furnished directly or indirectly by the health service
corporation to its subscribers.
                                             
 IV. "Provider'' means any physician, hospital, or other institution,
organization, or other person who furnishes health care services.
                                             
 V. "Subscriber'' means a person to whom a subscription certificate
is issued by the health service corporation and which sets forth the
kinds and extent of health services for which the health service
corporation is liable to make payment and which constitutes the contract
between the subscriber and the health service corporation.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1. 2007, 289:12, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 420-A:2


                                             


                                             [RSA 420-A:2 effective until January 1, 2017 at 12:01 a. m.; see also
RSA 420-A:2 set out below.
                                             ]

 **420-A:2 Applicable Statutes. –**
                                             
 Every health service corporation shall be governed by this chapter
and the relevant provisions of RSA 161-H, and shall be exempt from this
title except for the provisions of RSA 400-A:39, RSA 401-B, RSA 402-C,
RSA 404-F, RSA 415-A, RSA 415-F, RSA 415:6, II(4), RSA 415:6-g, RSA
415:6-k, RSA 415:6-m, RSA 415:6-o, RSA 415:6-r, RSA 415:6-s, RSA
415:6-u, RSA 415:18, V, RSA 415:18, VII(g), RSA 415:18, XVI and XVII,
RSA 415:18, VII-a, RSA 415:18-a, RSA 415:18-j, RSA 415:18-o, RSA
415:18-r, RSA 415:18-t, RSA 415:18-u, RSA 415:18-v, RSA 415:18-w, RSA
415:18-x, RSA 415:18-z, RSA 415:22, RSA 417, RSA 417-E, RSA 420-J, and
all applicable provisions of title XXXVII wherein such corporations are
specifically included. Every health service corporation and its agents
shall be subject to the fees prescribed for health service corporations
under RSA 400-A:29, VII.


                                             [RSA 420-A:4 effective January 1, 2017 at 12:01 a.m. until October 1,
2017 at 12:02 a.m.; see also RSA 420-A:4 set out above and set out
below.
                                             ]


                                             
**420-A:2 Applicable Statutes.** --
                                             
 Every health service corporation shall be governed by this chapter
and the relevant provisions of RSA 161-H, and shall be exempt from this
title except for the provisions of RSA 400-A:39, RSA 401-B, RSA 402-C,
RSA 404-F, RSA 415-A, RSA 415-F, RSA 415:6, II(4), RSA 415:6-g, RSA
415:6-k, RSA 415:6-m, RSA 415:6-o, RSA 415:6-r, RSA 415:6-s, RSA
415:6-t, RSA 415:6-u, RSA 415:18, V, RSA 415:18, XVI and XVII, RSA
415:18, VII-a, RSA 415:18-a, RSA 415:18-j, RSA 415:18-o, RSA 415:18-r,
RSA 415:18-t, RSA 415:18-u, RSA 415:18-v, RSA 415:18-w, RSA 415:18-x,
RSA 415:18-y, RSA 415:18-z, RSA 415:22, RSA 417, RSA 417-E, RSA 420-J,
and all applicable provisions of title XXXVII wherein such corporations
are specifically included. Every health service corporation and its
agents shall be subject to the fees prescribed for health service
corporations under RSA 400-A:29, VII.


                                             [RSA 420-A:2 effective October 1, 2017 at 12:02 a.m. until January 1,
2021 at 12:01 a. m.; see also RSA 420-A:2 set out above and set out
below.
                                             ]


                                             
**420-A:2 Applicable Statutes.** --
                                             
 Every health service corporation shall be governed by this chapter
and the relevant provisions of RSA 161-H, and shall be exempt from this
title except for the provisions of RSA 400-A:39, RSA 401-B, RSA 402-C,
RSA 404-F, RSA 415-A, RSA 415-F, RSA 415:6, II(4), RSA 415:6-g, RSA
415:6-k, RSA 415:6-m, RSA 415:6-o, RSA 415:6-r, RSA 415:6-t, RSA
415:6-u, RSA 415:18, V, RSA 415:18, XVI and XVII, RSA 415:18, VII-a, RSA
415:18-a, RSA 415:18-j, RSA 415:18-o, RSA 415:18-r, RSA 415:18-t, RSA
415:18-u, RSA 415:18-v, RSA 415:18-w, RSA 415:18-y, RSA 415:18-z, RSA
415:22, RSA 417, RSA 417-E, RSA 420-J, and all applicable provisions of
title XXXVII wherein such corporations are specifically included. Every
health service corporation and its agents shall be subject to the fees
prescribed for health service corporations under RSA 400-A:29, VII.


                                             [RSA 420-A:2 effective January 1, 2021 at 12:01 a.m.; see also RSA
420-A:2 set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
**420-A:2 Applicable Statutes.** --
                                             
 Every health service corporation shall be governed by this chapter
and the relevant provisions of RSA 161-H, and shall be exempt from this
title except for the provisions of RSA 400-A:39, RSA 401-B, RSA 402-C,
RSA 404-F, RSA 415-A, RSA 415-F, RSA 415:6, II(4), RSA 415:6-g, RSA
415:6-k, RSA 415:6-m, RSA 415:6-o, RSA 415:6-r, RSA 415:6-u, RSA 415:18,
V, RSA 415:18, XVI and XVII, RSA 415:18, VII-a, RSA 415:18-a, RSA
415:18-j, RSA 415:18-o, RSA 415:18-r, RSA 415:18-t, RSA 415:18-u, RSA
415:18-v, RSA 415:18-w, RSA 415:18-z, RSA 415:22, RSA 417, RSA 417-E,
RSA 420-J, and all applicable provisions of title XXXVII wherein such
corporations are specifically included. Every health service corporation
and its agents shall be subject to the fees prescribed for health
service corporations under RSA 400-A:29, VII.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1; 345:9. 1999, 323:7. 2000, 207:6. 2003, 286:4.
2006, 187:3. 2007, 289:35. 2008, 389:3. 2010, 362:3. 2011, 133:3; 189:8,
10. 2012, 278:3. 2014, 299:3, eff. Sept. 30, 2014; 299:6, eff. Oct. 1,
2017. 2015, 263:8, eff. Jan. 1, 2017; 263:9, eff. Oct. 1, 2017 at 12:01
a.m.; 263:12, eff. Jan. 1, 2021. 2016, 326:3, eff. Aug. 23, 2016; 326:4,
eff. Oct. 1, 2017 at 12:02 a.m.; 326:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2021 at 12:01 a.m.;
326:9, eff. Jan. 1, 2017 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 420-A:3

 **420-A:3 Incorporation. –** Persons desiring to form a health
service corporation may incorporate under RSA 292, but subject to the
following provisions:
                                             
 I. The certificate of incorporation of each health service
corporation shall have endorsed upon it or attached to it the approval
of the commissioner, if the commissioner finds the same to be in
accordance with this chapter.
                                             
 II. The certificate shall include a statement of the territory in
which the health service corporation will operate and a statement of the
purposes of such corporation.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:4

 **420-A:4 License to Health Service Corporation. –**
                                             
 I. No health service corporation organized under the laws of this
state shall do business unless it has obtained a license from the
commissioner.
                                             
 II. No health service corporation organized under the laws of any
other state or country shall be licensed to do business in this state
except as provided in RSA 420-A:29.
                                             
 III. Application for such license shall be made in the form required
by the commissioner and shall contain the information the commissioner
deems necessary. The application shall be accompanied by a copy of each
of the following documents:
                                             
 (a) Articles of incorporation.
                                             
 (b) Bylaws.
                                             
 (c) Proposed contracts to be issued to subscribers showing a
table of rates to be charged and the benefits to which they will be
entitled.
                                             
 (d) Proposed contracts, if any, between the health service
corporation and providers.
                                             
 (e) Financial statements.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner shall issue a license when the commissioner
finds:
                                             
 (a) The applicant is established as a bona fide nonprofit health
service corporation;
                                             
 (b) The applicant has paid an annual license fee in accordance
with RSA 400-A:29;
                                             
 (c) The contracts between the applicant and providers, if any,
obligate the respective providers to provide the service or thing to
which the subscriber may be entitled under the terms of the contract to
be issued to subscribers;
                                             
 (d) The rates to be charged and the benefits to be provided are
reasonable and nondiscriminatory;
                                             
 (e) The financial condition of the applicant is sound and
provides assurance of its ability to meet its obligations; and
                                             
 (f) The applicant is reliable, entitled to public confidence and
has complied with the laws of the state applicable to it.
                                             
 V. Any such license may be revoked for cause shown and after notice
and hearing upon failure to maintain the requirements of this chapter.
                                             
 VI. All such licenses shall expire on June 14, but may be renewed
upon payment of the annual license fee.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1. 2000, 162:4, eff. July 22, 2000.

### Section 420-A:5

 **420-A:5 Directors. –** The directors of a health service
corporation:
                                             
 I. Shall at all times include representation from the following
groups:
                                             
 (a) The general public exclusive of those falling within
subparagraphs (b) and (c) and paragraph II.
                                             
 (b) Physicians actively engaged in practice.
                                             
 (c) Administrators or trustees of hospitals, if any, which have
contracted with the health service corporation to render nonprofit
hospital service or indemnity to subscribers.
                                             
 II. May include representatives of other health care providers. The
number of directors described in subparagraph I(a) shall exceed the
combined total of the number of directors described in subparagraphs
I(b) and (c) and this paragraph.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:6

 **420-A:6 Liability of Directors, Officers, and Trustees. –**
                                             
 I. A health service corporation may indemnify any person who serves
as director, officer, or trustee of such corporation by contract or by
including an indemnity provision in its articles of agreement or bylaws
substantially in accordance with RSA 293-A:8.50 through RSA 293-A:8.58.
Indemnity may be offered for any and all damages occurring on or after
January 1, 1991.
                                             
 II. A health service corporation may amend its articles of agreement
to contain a provision eliminating or limiting the personal liability of
a director, officer, or trustee to such corporation and its members and
subscribers for monetary damages for breach of fiduciary duty as a
director, an officer, or both, except with respect to:
                                             
 (a) Any breach of the director's, officer's or trustee's duty of
loyalty to the corporation and its members and subscribers.
                                             
 (b) Acts or omissions which are not in good faith or which
involve intentional misconduct or a knowing violation of law.
                                             
 (c) Actions for which a director, officer, or trustee derived an
improper personal benefit.
                                             
 III. Paragraph II shall not be construed to eliminate or limit the
liability of a director, an officer, a trustee or any combination
thereof, for any act or omission occurring prior to July 13, 1991.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:7

 **420-A:7 License to Agents. –**
                                             
 I. No person, for himself or in behalf of any person, shall sell or
offer to sell any such health service as is provided for in this chapter
without being licensed therefor by the commissioner pursuant to RSA
402-J.
                                             
 II. Upon written notice by a health service corporation licensed to
do business in this state of its appointment of a person to act as its
agent under this chapter, the commissioner shall, if the commissioner is
first satisfied that the appointee is a suitable person and intends to
hold himself out in good faith as an agent, upon payment of the proper
fee by the applicant, issue to the appointee a license to act as such
agent.
                                             
 III. A license previously issued may be renewed upon the application
of the health service corporation upon payment of the proper fee.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner may at any time after granting such license,
for cause shown and after notice and hearing, determine such licensee to
be unsuitable to act as such agent, and shall thereupon revoke such
license and notify both the health service corporation and the agent of
such revocation.
                                             
 V. Unless revoked by the commissioner, or unless the health service
corporation by written notice to the commissioner cancels the agent's
authority to act for it, such license issued to an agent, or any renewal
of such license, shall expire on June 14 of the second year after its
issue.
                                             
 VI. If a person acts or aids in any manner in the negotiation of
health insurance contracts, or solicits or receives any risk or
application for such service, without a license from the insurance
commissioner, or if the license granted to such person or to the health
service corporation for which the person acts as agent has been revoked,
such person shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor if a natural
person, or guilty of a felony if any other person; but any contract
issued on an application thus procured shall bind the health service
corporation if otherwise valid. This paragraph shall not apply to any
office employee of the health service corporation, or to any persons
rendering their services without compensation.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1. 2000, 315:22. 2005, 206:8, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 420-A:8

 **420-A:8 Filing and Approval of Contracts and Rates. –**
                                             
 I. No health service corporation shall enter into any contract with
subscribers until it shall have filed with the commissioner a copy of
the form of such contract, including all riders and endorsements to the
contract and until the commissioner's approval thereof shall have been
obtained. Any form of contract not disapproved by the commissioner
within 90 days after the filing shall be deemed to have been approved as
filed.
                                             
 II. No health service corporation shall enter into any contract with
subscribers until it shall have filed with the commissioner a full
schedule of rates to be paid by the subscribers and shall have obtained
the said commissioner's approval. The commissioner may refuse such
approval if the commissioner finds such rates are excessive, inadequate,
or discriminatory. For the purpose of determining the proper rates to be
charged for such services, the commissioner may employ a competent
actuary who shall be paid by the health services corporation for which
the services are rendered.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:9

 **420-A:9 Contracts With Subscribers. –** Every contract between a
health service corporation and a subscriber shall be in writing, a copy
of which shall be furnished to the subscriber and shall contain the
following provisions:
                                             
 I. A statement of the amount payable to the health service
corporation by the subscriber and the manner in which such amount is
payable.
                                             
 II. A statement of the nature and extent of the benefits to be
provided, and, if any benefits are to be limited or excepted, an
enumeration of such limitations or exceptions shall be printed with the
same prominence as the statement of the benefits conferred.
                                             
 III. A statement that a maternity benefits rider will be made
available at the subscriber's request, if maternity care is not covered
under the contract. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to
apply to supplemental health insurance and disability insurance
policies.
                                             
 IV. A statement of the terms and conditions upon which the contract
may be cancelled or otherwise terminated at the option of either party.
                                             
 V. A statement that the contract includes the endorsements thereon
and attached papers, if any, and that it comprises the entire contract.
                                             
 VI. A provision that no statement by the subscriber in the
application for a contract shall void the contract or be used in any
legal proceeding thereunder unless such application or an exact copy is
included or attached to the contract.
                                             
 VII. A statement of the period of grace which will be allowed the
subscriber for making any payment due under the contract. Such period
shall be not less than 10 days.
                                             
 VIII. Notwithstanding any provision of any policy of insurance
issued under the provisions of this section, whenever such policy
provides for reimbursement for any service which may be legally
performed by a person licensed as an advanced practice registered nurse,
reimbursement under such policy shall not be denied when such service is
rendered by a person so licensed.
                                             
 IX. No health service corporation shall, when issuing or renewing a
policy or contract of insurance or any certificate under such policy or
contract covered by this chapter, deny coverage or limit coverage to any
resident of this state on the basis of health risk or condition except
that a waiting period consistent with insurance department rules may be
imposed for pre-existing medical conditions. If a health service
corporation accepts an application for group coverage, such acceptance
shall be subject to the following:
                                             
 (a) If the group has coverage in effect through another plan, the
health service corporation shall accept all persons covered under the
existing plan. If the group does not have coverage in effect through
another plan, the health service corporation shall accept all persons
for which the group seeks coverage.
                                             
 (b) Once a group policy has been issued, any person becoming
eligible for coverage shall become covered by enrolling within 31 days
after becoming eligible. Any person so enrolling shall not be required
to submit evidence of insurability based on medical conditions. If a
person does not enroll at this time, such person is a late enrollee.
                                             
 (c) Once a group policy has been issued, the health service
corporation shall provide the group with an annual open enrollment
period for late enrollees. During the open enrollment period, any late
enrollee shall be permitted to enroll without submitting any evidence of
insurability based on medical conditions. For late enrollees only, the
pre-existing condition provisions shall apply for 18 months from the
date of enrollment.
                                             
 X. An insurer issuing policies of group insurance shall allocate the
costs associated with maternity and childbirth over both males and
females covered by its entire block of business in this state. In cases
in which, because of the amount written in the state, allocation to an
entire block of business needs to occur, the carrier may apply for a
waiver from the commissioner.
                                             
 XI. A statement allowing subscribers with Medicare supplement
insurance benefits a period of at least one year after the incurral of a
covered expense within which the subscriber shall furnish any proof of
loss required by the insurer. Failure to furnish such proof within such
time shall not invalidate or reduce any claim if it shall be shown not
to have been reasonably possible to furnish such proof and such proof
was furnished as soon as was reasonably possible.
                                             
 XII. A provision that such contract shall be signed by the president
and secretary before it shall become effective.
                                             
 XIII. A statement that all benefits payable shall be paid to the
participating providers except those in reimbursement of payments made
by the subscriber to a non-participating provider and for which the
corporation was liable at the time of payment.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1. 2009, 54:5, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 420-A:10

 **420-A:10 Part-Time Employees. –** A health service corporation
shall not exclude part-time employees and shall offer the same insurance
benefits to part-time employees as it offers to the employee groups of
which the part-time employees would be members if they were full-time
employees. The insurer shall offer to include the part-time employees as
part of the employer's employee group, at the full rate to be paid by
the employer, at a rate prorated between the employer and the employee,
or at the employee's expense. A part-time employee shall be any employee
who regularly works at least half of the weekly hours of the full-time
employee in the employee group of which the part-time employee would be
a member if such employee were a full-time employee, but who works a
minimum of at least 15 hours per week.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:10-a

 **420-A:10-a Dependent Coverage. –**
                                             
 I. A policy may, at the election of the carrier, insure, originally
or by subsequent amendment, upon application of an adult member of a
family who shall be deemed the policyholder, any 2 or more eligible
members of that family, including husband, wife, dependent children, or
any other person dependent upon the policyholder. In the event a carrier
elects to provide coverage for dependent children, the term "dependent
child'' shall include a subscriber's child by blood or by law, who is
under age 26.
                                             
 I-a. The coverage of any family member insured by such policy,
pursuant to paragraph I, who is mentally or physically incapable of
earning his or her own living as of the date on which such dependent's
status as a covered family member would otherwise expire because of age,
shall continue under such policy while such policy remains in force or
is replaced by another policy as long as such incapacity continues and
as long as such dependent remains chiefly financially dependent on the
policyholder or the employee or his or her estate is chargeable for the
care of such dependent; provided, that due proof of such incapacity is
received by the insurer within 31 days of such expiration date. If such
coverage is continued in accordance with this paragraph, such dependent
shall be entitled upon the termination of such incapacity to coverage
offered by the New Hampshire high risk pool under RSA 404-G.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require:
                                             
 (a) Coverage for services provided to a dependent before the
effective date of this section; or
                                             
 (b) That an employer pay all or part of the cost of family
coverage that includes a dependent as provided pursuant to this
section.
                                             
 III. A subscriber that elects family coverage during any applicable
open enrollment period may enroll any dependent eligible pursuant to
this section.
                                             
 IV. Coverage for a dependent provided pursuant to this section shall
be provided until the earlier of the following:
                                             
 (a) The dependent is disqualified for dependent status as set
forth in paragraph I of this section; or
                                             
 (b) The date upon which the employer under whose contract
coverage is provided to a dependent ceases to provide coverage to the
subscriber.
                                             
 V. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit a health
insurance carrier to refuse an election for coverage by a dependent
pursuant to paragraph III, based upon the dependent's prior
disqualification pursuant to subparagraph IV(a).
                                             
 VI. (a) Notice regarding coverage for a dependent as provided
pursuant to this section shall be provided to a subscriber:
                                             
 (1) In the certificate of coverage prepared for subscribers on
or about the date of commencement of coverage; and
                                             
 (2) Within 30 days following the effective date of this
section.
                                             
 (b) Such notice shall include information regarding the required
special open enrollment period.

**Source.** 2007, 352:2. 2009, 235:9. 2010, 243:9, eff. Sept. 23, 2010.

### Section 420-A:11

 **420-A:11 Cancellation or Nonrenewal of Group Insurance Contracts.
–** No group accident or health insurance contract, authorized under
this chapter, may be cancelled or nonrenewed by the health service
corporation, except for nonpayment of premium, unless the group contract
holder receives either a notice of cancellation or nonrenewal or an
offer of renewal in accordance with this section. The notice of
cancellation or nonrenewal or offer of renewal shall be delivered to the
group contract holder or mailed to the group contract holder's last
address as shown in the records of the health service corporation at
least 45 days prior to the renewal date of the contract. Notice of
cancellation for lack of participation, if permitted by the terms of the
contract, shall be delivered to the group contract holder or mailed to
the group contract holder's last address as shown in the records of the
health service corporation, at least 30 days prior to the effective date
of the cancellation.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:12

 **420-A:12 Cancellation or Nonrenewal of Non-Group Insurance
Contracts. –** No non-group accident or health insurance contract,
authorized under this chapter, may be cancelled or nonrenewed by the
health service corporation except for nonpayment of premium, unless the
insured receives either a notice of cancellation or nonrenewal or an
offer of renewal in accordance with this section. The notice of
cancellation or nonrenewal or offer of renewal shall be delivered to the
insured or mailed to the insured's last address as shown in the records
of the health service corporation at least 30 days prior to the renewal
date of the contract.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:13

 **420-A:13 Coverage for Autologous Bone Marrow Transplant. –**

                                             [Repealed 2010, 61:3, II, eff. May 18, 2010.
                                             ]

### Section 420-A:14

 **420-A:14 Coverage for Scalp Hair Prostheses. –**
                                             
 I. Every health service corporation and every other similar
corporation licensed under the laws of another state, which provides
coverage for other prostheses, shall provide to each group, or to the
portion of each group comprised of certificate holders of such insurance
who are residents of this state and whose principal place of employment
is in this state, coverage for expenses for scalp hair prostheses worn
for hair loss suffered as a result of alopecia areata, alopecia totalis,
alopecia medicamentosa resulting from the treatment from any form of
cancer or leukemia, or permanent loss of scalp hair due to injury. Such
coverage, however, shall be subject to a written recommendation by the
treating physician stating that the hair prosthesis is a medical
necessity. Such coverage shall be subject to the same limitations and
guidelines as other prostheses, provided, that such coverage for
alopecia medicamentosa shall not exceed 
                                             $350 per year.
                                             
 II. For the purposes of this section:
                                             
 (a) "Prostheses'' means artificial appliances used to replace
lost natural structures. Prostheses include, but are not limited to,
artificial arms, legs, breasts, or glass eyes.
                                             
 (b) "Scalp hair prostheses'' means artificial substitutes for
scalp hair that are made specifically for a specific individual.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1. 2001, 276:4, eff. Sept. 14, 2001.

### Section 420-A:15

 **420-A:15 Coverage During Adoption Proceedings. –** All contracts
issued by a health service corporation which provide coverage for a
family member of the subscriber shall, as to such family member's
coverage, also provide that health insurance benefits applicable for
children are payable with respect to any minor from the date such minor
is placed in the custody of the subscriber pursuant to an adoption
proceeding under the provisions of RSA 170-B. Such health insurance
benefits shall terminate upon dismissal or withdrawal of the petition
for adoption.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:15-a

 **420-A:15-a Third-Party Payment of Covered, Court-Ordered Services.
–** The existence of a court order under RSA 169-B, RSA 169-C, or RSA
169-D for a service, program, or placement that is covered under any
insurance for the minor shall not be considered in determining
qualification for third-party payment under such insurance. Benefits for
such services shall be subject to the same dollar limits, deductibles,
co-payments and co-insurance factors and to the terms and conditions of
the policy or certificate, including any managed care provisions.
However, the claimant or claimant's representative shall have 48 hours
from the commencement of a court-ordered service, placement, or program
to seek any pre-authorization, pre-certification, or referral required
under the terms of the policy. The determination of these preservice
claims for court-ordered services for a minor shall be made as soon as
possible, taking into account the medical exigencies, but in no event
later than 48 hours after receipt of the request and sufficient
information, unless the claimant or claimant's representative fails to
provide sufficient information to determine whether, or to what extent,
benefits are covered or payable. In the case of such failure, the
insurer shall notify the claimant or claimant's representative within 24
hours of receipt of the request and shall advise the claimant or
claimant's representative of the specific information necessary to
determine to what extent benefits are covered or payable. The claimant
or claimant's representative shall be afforded a reasonable amount of
time, taking into account the circumstances, but not less than 48 hours,
to provide the specified information. Thereafter, notification of the
claim determination shall be made as soon as possible, but in no case
later than 48 hours after the earlier of:
                                             
 I. The insurer's receipt of the specified additional information;
or
                                             
 II. The end of the period afforded the claimant or claimant's
representative to provide the specified additional information.

**Source.** 2004, 117:2, eff. Aug. 15, 2004.

### Section 420-A:15-b

 **420-A:15-b Coverage for Dependents. –** If the coverage for
dependent children includes coverage for dependent children who are
full-time students, as defined by the appropriate educational
institution, beyond the age of 18, such dependent coverage shall include
coverage for a dependent's medically necessary leave of absence from
school for a period not to exceed 12 months or the date on which
coverage would otherwise end pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
policy, whichever comes first. Any breaks in the school semester shall
not disqualify the dependent child from coverage under this section.
Documentation and certification of the medical necessity of a leave of
absence shall be submitted to the insurer by the student's attending
physician and shall be considered prima facie evidence of entitlement to
coverage under this section. The date of the documentation and
certification of the medical necessity of a leave of absence shall be
the date the insurance coverage under this section commences.

**Source.** 2007, 289:13, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 420-A:16

 **420-A:16 Notification of Allowable Benefit. –** All health service
corporations and every other similar corporation licensed under the laws
of another state shall provide to each subscriber, on request, a written
statement of the dollar amount of allowable benefit for any procedure
which is requested by the appropriate procedure code.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:16-a

 **420-A:16-a Patients' Bill of Rights. –** Every health service
corporation and every other similar corporation licensed under the laws
of another state shall provide to each new subscriber who is a resident
of this state a copy of the patients' bill of rights law under RSA
151:21.

**Source.** 1997, 331:19, eff. Jan. 1, 1998 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 420-A:17

 **420-A:17 Coverage for Nonprescription Enteral Formulas. –**
                                             
 I. Every health service corporation and every other similar
corporation licensed under the laws of another state that issues or
renews any policy of individual or group accident or health insurance
providing benefits for medical or hospital expenses shall provide to
each individual or group, or to the portion of each group comprised of
certificate holders of such insurance who are residents of this state,
coverage for the provision of nonprescription enteral formulas for the
treatment of impaired absorption of nutrients caused by disorders
affecting the absorptive surface, functional length, or motility of the
gastrointestinal tract. Such coverage shall be provided when the
prescribing physician has issued a written order stating that the
enteral formula is needed to sustain life, is medically necessary, and
is the least restrictive and most cost effective means for meeting the
needs of the patient.
                                             
 II. Every health service corporation and every other similar
corporation licensed under the laws of another state that issues or
renews any policy of individual or group accident or health insurance
providing benefits for medical or hospital expenses, shall provide to
each individual or group, or to the portion of each group comprised of
certificate holders of such insurance who are residents of this state,
coverage for the provision of nonprescription enteral formulas and food
products required for persons with inherited diseases of amino acids and
organic acids. Such coverage shall be provided when the prescribing
physician has issued a written order stating that the enteral formula or
food product is medically necessary and is the least restrictive and
most cost effective means for meeting the needs of the patient. Coverage
for inherited diseases of amino acids and organic acids shall, in
addition to the enteral formula, include food products modified to be
low protein in an amount not to exceed 
                                             $1,800 annually for any insured
individual.
                                             
 III. The benefits included in this section shall not be subject to
any greater deductible than any other benefits provided by the insurer.
The coinsurance required by the enrolled participant shall not exceed
the amount allowed under the contract for the reasonable and customary
charge for the service provided.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1. 2010, 188:7, eff. Aug. 20, 2010.

### Section 420-A:17-a

 **420-A:17-a Coverage for Diabetes Services and Supplies. –** Every
health service corporation and every similar corporation licensed under
the laws of another state that issues or renews any policy, plan, or
contract of individual or group accident or health insurance providing
benefits for medical or hospital expenses, shall provide to each
individual or group, or to the portion of each group comprised of
certificate holders of such insurance who are residents of this state,
coverage for the medically appropriate and necessary outpatient
self-management training and educational services, pursuant to a written
order of a primary care physician or practitioner, including but not
limited to medical nutrition therapy for the treatment of diabetes,
provided by a certified, registered or licensed health care professional
with expertise in diabetes, subject to the terms and conditions of the
policy. Each health service corporation that issues or renews any
individual or group policy, plan, or contract of accident or health
insurance providing benefits for medical or hospital expenses which
provides a prescription rider shall cover medically appropriate or
necessary insulin, oral agents and equipment used to treat diabetes
subject to the terms and conditions of the policy. Each health service
corporation that issues or renews any individual or group policy, plan,
or contract of accident or health insurance providing benefits for
medical or hospital expenses which provides for durable medical
equipment coverage shall provide coverage for medically appropriate or
necessary equipment used to treat diabetes subject to the terms and
conditions of the policy.

**Source.** 1997, 258:7. 2010, 188:13, eff. Aug. 20, 2010.

### Section 420-A:17-b

 **420-A:17-b Coverage for Dental Procedures. –**
                                             
 I. Every health service corporation and every similar corporation
licensed under the laws of another state that issues or renews any group
policy of accident or health insurance providing benefits for medical or
hospital expenses, shall provide to each covered individual or
certificate holder who is a resident of New Hampshire coverage for the
medically necessary hospital or surgical day care facility charges and
administration of general anesthesia administered by a licensed
anesthesiologist or anesthetist for dental procedures performed on a
covered person who:
                                             
 (a) Is a child under the age of 6 who is determined by a licensed
dentist in conjunction with a licensed primary care physician to have a
dental condition of significant dental complexity which requires certain
dental procedures to be performed in a surgical day care facility or
hospital setting; or
                                             
 (b) Is a person who has exceptional medical circumstances or a
developmental disability as determined by a licensed primary care
physician which place the person at serious risk.
                                             
 II. All of the terms and conditions of the covered person's policy
shall apply to these services.

**Source.** 1998, 280:3. 2003, 278:4. 2010, 188:8, eff. Aug. 20, 2010.

### Section 420-A:17-c

 **420-A:17-c Coverage for Prescription Contraceptive Drugs and
Prescription Contraceptive Devices and for Contraceptive Services. –**
Every health service corporation and every other similar corporation
licensed under the laws of another state that issues or renews any
policy of group accident or health insurance providing benefits for
medical or hospital expenses, which provides coverage for outpatient
services shall provide to each group, or to the portion of each group
comprised of certificate holders of such insurance who are residents of
this state, coverage for outpatient contraceptive services under the
same terms and conditions as for other outpatient services. "Outpatient
contraceptive services'' means consultations, examinations, and medical
services, provided on an outpatient basis and related to the use of
contraceptive methods to prevent pregnancy which has been approved by
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Each health service corporation
and every other similar corporation licensed under the laws of a
different state that issues or renews any group policy of accident or
health insurance providing benefits for medical or hospital expenses
which provides a prescription rider shall cover all prescription
contraceptive drugs and prescription contraceptive devices approved by
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration under the same terms and
conditions as other prescription drugs. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as altering the terms and conditions of a contract relating to
prescription drugs and outpatient services.

**Source.** 1999, 252:2. 2010, 188:13, eff. Aug. 20, 2010.

### Section 420-A:17-d

 **420-A:17-d Prompt Payment Required. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Every health service corporation, and every other similar
corporation licensed under the laws of another state that issues or
renews any policy of individual or group accident or health insurance
providing benefits for medical or hospital expenses for its insured
persons shall pay for services rendered by New Hampshire health care
providers within 30 calendar days upon receipt of a clean non-electronic
claim or 15 calendar days upon receipt of a clean electronic claim.
                                             
 (b) When the health service corporation is denying or pending the
claim, the corporation shall have 15 calendar days upon receipt of an
electronic claim or 30 days upon receipt of a non-electronic claim to
notify the health care provider or subscriber of the reason for denying
or pending the claim and what, if any, additional information is
required to adjudicate the claim. Upon the health service corporation's
receipt of the requested additional information, the health service
corporation shall adjudicate the claim within 45 calendar days. If the
required notice is not provided, the claim shall be treated as a clean
claim and shall be adjudicated pursuant to subparagraph (a).
                                             
 (c) Payment of a claim shall be considered to be made on the date
a check was issued or electronically transferred. The health services
corporation shall mail checks no later than 5 business days after the
date a check was issued. Failure to mail a check within 5 business days
shall constitute a violation subject to enforcement under RSA 415:20.
                                             
 (d) The corporation's failure to comply with the time limits in
this section shall not have the effect of requiring coverage for an
otherwise non-covered claim. This section shall only apply to payments
made on a claims basis and shall not apply to capitation or other forms
of periodic payment.
                                             
 II. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Clean claim'' means a claim for payment of covered health
care expenses that is submitted to a health service corporation on the
corporation's standard claim form using the most current published
procedural codes, with all the required fields completed with correct
and complete information in accordance with the corporation's published
filing requirements.
                                             
 (b) "Electronic claim'' means the transmission of data for
purposes of payment of covered health care services in an electronic
data format specified by the corporation and, if covered by the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), is in such form
and substance as to be in compliance with such act.
                                             
 III. Any initial clean claim submission not paid within the time
periods specified in subparagraph I(a) shall be deemed overdue. In that
case:
                                             
 (a) The health service corporation shall pay the health care
provider or the insured person the amount of the overdue claim plus an
interest payment of 1.5 percent per month beginning from the date the
payment was due; and
                                             
 (b) The health care provider may recover from the health service
corporation, upon a judicial finding of bad faith, reasonable attorney's
fees for advising and representing a health care provider in a
successful action against an health service corporation for payment of
the claim.
                                             
 IV. Exceptions to the requirements of this section are as follows:
                                             
 (a) No health service corporation shall be in violation of this
section for a claim submitted by a health care provider if:
                                             
 (1) Failure to comply is caused by a directive from a court or
a federal or state agency;
                                             
 (2) The corporation is in liquidation or rehabilitation or is
operating in compliance with a court-ordered plan of rehabilitation; or
                                             
 (3) The corporation's compliance is rendered impossible due to
matters beyond the corporation's control which are not caused by such
corporation.
                                             
 (b) No health service corporation shall be in violation of this
section for any claim submitted more than 90 days after the service was
rendered.
                                             
 (c) No health service corporation shall be in violation of this
section while the claim is pending due to a fraud investigation that has
been reported to a state or federal agency, or an internal or external
review process.
                                             
 V. The commissioner may assess an administrative fine against any
health service corporation or may suspend or revoke the license or
certificate of authority of any health service corporation after
determining that the health service corporation has established a
pattern of overdue payments and that the contemplated enforcement action
would not promote the deterioration of the financial condition of an
at-risk insurer. Such fine shall not exceed 
                                             $300,000 per calendar year
examined. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to alter the
commissioner's authority to investigate or take action, including, but
not limited to, action pursuant to RSA 415:20, in response to individual
instances of noncompliance.

**Source.** 2000, 274:4; 314:4. 2005, 162:3. 2010, 188:9. 2012, 99:3,
eff. July 28, 2012.

### Section 420-A:17-e

 **420-A:17-e Retroactive Denials Prohibited; Exceptions. –**
                                             
 I. In this section "retroactive denial of a previously paid claim''
means any attempt by a health service corporation to retroactively
collect payments already made to a health care provider with respect to
a claim by requiring repayment of such payments, reducing other payments
currently owed to the provider, withholding or setting off against
future payments, reducing or affecting the future claim payments to the
provider in any other manner.
                                             
 II. No health service corporation shall impose on any health care
provider any retroactive denial of a previously paid claim or any part
thereof unless:
                                             
 (a) The corporation has provided the reason for the retroactive
denial in writing to the health care provider; and
                                             
 (b) The time which has lapsed since the date of payment of the
challenged claim does not exceed 18 months. The retroactive denial of a
previously paid claim may be permitted beyond 18 months from the date of
payment only for the following reasons:
                                             
 (1) The claim was submitted fraudulently;
                                             
 (2) The claim payment was incorrect because the
physician/provider or the insured was already paid for the health care
services identified in the claim;
                                             
 (3) The health care services identified in the claim were not
delivered by the physician/provider;
                                             
 (4) The claim payment was for services covered by Title XVIII,
Title XIX, or Title XXI of the Social Security Act;
                                             
 (5) The claim payment is the subject of an adjustment with a
different insurer, administrator, or payor and such adjustment is not
affected by a contractual relationship, association, or affiliation
involving claims payment, processing, or pricing; or
                                             
 (6) The claim payment is the subject of legal action.
                                             
 III. A health service corporation shall notify a health care
provider at least 15 days in advance of the imposition of any
retroactive denials of previously paid claims. The health care provider
shall have 6 months from the date of notification under this paragraph
to determine whether the insured has other appropriate insurance, which
was in effect on the date of service. Notwithstanding the contractual
terms between the health service corporation and provider, the health
service corporation shall allow for the submission of a claim that was
previously denied by another insurer due to the insured's transfer or
termination of coverage.

**Source.** 2002, 143:3. 2006, 104:3, eff. Aug. 7, 2006.

### Section 420-A:17-f

 **420-A:17-f Coverage for Certified Midwives. –** Every health
service corporation and every other similar corporation licensed under
the laws of another state that issues or renews any policy of group
accident or health insurance providing maternity benefits shall also
provide to each group, or to the portion of each group comprised of
certificate holders of such insurance who are residents of this state,
coverage consistent with the terms and conditions of the policy for
services rendered by a midwife certified under RSA 326-D. Such coverage
shall be subject to each insurer's standards and mechanisms for
credentialing and contracting pursuant to RSA 420-J:4 and RSA 420-J:8
respectively, where applicable, and contingent upon services being
provided in a licensed health care facility or at home and within the
scope of practice of a certified midwife. Benefits provided shall not be
subject to any greater co-payment, deductible, or coinsurance than any
other similar benefits provided by the insurer.

**Source.** 2006, 8:3. 2008, 298:3. 2010, 188:13, eff. Aug. 20, 2010.

### Section 420-A:17-g

 **420-A:17-g Coverage for Children's Early Intervention Services.
–** Every health service corporation and every other similar corporation
licensed under the laws of another state that issues or renews any
policy of group accident or health insurance providing benefits for
medical, rehabilitation, or hospital expenses, which provides coverage
for outpatient services shall provide to each group, or to the portion
of each group comprised of certificate holders of such insurance who are
residents of this state, coverage for expenses arising from the services
of licensed and credentialed occupational therapists, physical
therapists, speech-language pathologists, and clinical social workers
working with children from birth to 36 months of age with an identified
developmental disability and/or delay as specified in rules adopted
pursuant to RSA 171-A:18, IV as long as the providing therapist receives
a referral from the child's primary care physician if applicable. The
benefits included in this section may be subject to deductibles,
copayments, co-insurance, or other terms and conditions of the policy,
and may have a cap of 
                                             $3,200 per child per year not to exceed 
                                             $9,600
by the child's third birthday. Notwithstanding any provision of law or
rule to the contrary, the coverage under this section shall apply to the
medical assistance program, pursuant to RSA 161 and RSA 167.

**Source.** 2007, 338:3. 2010, 188:13, eff. Aug. 20, 2010.

### Section 420-A:18

 **420-A:18 Investments. –** No health service corporation shall
invest its funds otherwise than as provided in RSA 411-A relating to the
investments and holding of real estate by domestic life insurance
companies; provided that not exceeding 10 percent of a health service
corporation's total admitted assets may be invested in such investments
as are prudent for a domestic life insurance company to make, and
provided further that, notwithstanding RSA 411-A:12, no such health
service corporation may acquire and hold directly or indirectly through
its subsidiaries or affiliates more than 10 percent of the outstanding
voting stock of any life insurance company formed under the laws of this
or another state or any corporation owning or holding the stock of such
life insurance company.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:19

 **420-A:19 Prohibiting Limitations on Liability; Disclosure of
Information. –**
                                             
 I. No contract between a health service corporation and a physician,
for the purpose of delineating the rights and obligations of the parties
within the provider network, shall limit the liability of the health
service corporation for any actions of the physician for which the
health service corporation might otherwise be liable.
                                             
 II. No contract between a health service corporation and a health
care provider shall limit what information such health care provider may
disclose to patients or to prospective patients regarding the
provisions, terms, or requirements of the health service corporation's
products as they relate to the needs of such provider's patients except
for trade secrets of significant competitive value.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:20

 **420-A:20 Reports and Examinations. –** Every health service
corporation shall annually, on or before March 1, file in the office of
the commissioner a statement, verified by at least 2 of its principal
officers, showing its condition on the preceding December 31, which
shall be in such form and contain such matters as the commissioner may
prescribe. Examination of the financial condition of each health service
corporation by the commissioner shall be made as often as the
commissioner deems necessary. The commissioner or designee shall have
the power of visitation and examination into the affairs of any health
service corporation and free access to all of the books, papers, and
documents that relate to the business of the corporation, and may summon
and qualify witnesses under oath and examine its officers, agents, or
employees or other persons in relation to the affairs, transactions, and
condition of the corporation. All costs of such examination shall be
paid by the health service corporation.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:21

 **420-A:21 Reserves. –** Every health service corporation shall
collect reasonable rates as described in RSA 420-A:22, designed to
permit it to accumulate and maintain a contingency reserve fund.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:22

 **420-A:22 Annual Review. –** Annually, in the month of April, the
commissioner may review the rates of every health service corporation,
and shall, not later than 60 days after April 1 of each year, provided
that the corporation has filed all pertinent data, make adjustments
thereto, if any, as are just and reasonable. Whenever the contingency
reserve fund of a health service corporation shall be less than 8
percent of its annual premium income, the commissioner shall permit the
corporation to charge rates designed to enable it to increase its
contingency reserve fund by an amount equal to at least 2 percent of the
annual premium income of the corporation. If the liabilities of a health
service corporation exceed its assets, however, the commissioner shall
permit the corporation to charge rates designed to enable the
corporation to accumulate such a reserve fund by an amount equal to at
least 5 percent of the annual premium income of the corporation until
such time as the assets of the corporation equal its liabilities. In no
event shall the commissioner permit a health service corporation to
charge rates which would result in a reserve fund in excess of 20
percent of the annual premium volume of the corporation. This section
shall not preclude the granting of appropriate rate changes at any other
times. In connection with a rate decision, the commissioner may also
make reasonable supplemental orders to the health service corporation
and may attach reasonable conditions and limitations to such orders as
the commissioner finds, on the basis of competent and substantial
evidence, necessary to insure that benefits and services are provided at
minimum cost under efficient and economical management of the
corporation.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:23

 **420-A:23 Appeals. –** All orders and decisions of the commissioner
concerning matters within the commissioner's jurisdiction under this
chapter shall be subject to rehearing and appeal as provided in RSA 541.
RSA 541:18 and RSA 541:19 shall apply to orders and decisions of the
insurance commissioner affecting the rates of health service
corporations.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:24

 **420-A:24 Agreements With Providers. –** Any health service
corporation may enter into agreements with eligible persons whereby such
persons become providers of a plan operated by the corporation. Any
health service corporation may enter into contracts for the payment of
health services to the subscribers or members of similar nonprofit
health service corporations of other states subject to the supervision
of such other states, or of counties of this state in which the
corporation does not transact business. The corporation shall maintain
in its office complete records of all health services rendered to
subscribers and covered dependents in such form as will include the kind
of services rendered, the amounts claimed for such services by the
providers and the amount paid by the corporation.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:25

 **420-A:25 Administrative Services. –** Any health service
corporation may contract to furnish administrative services to any
health-related organization, agency, entity, or plan.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:26

 **420-A:26 Nonliability of Corporation. –** No health service
corporation holding a license under this chapter shall be liable for
injuries resulting from negligence, malfeasance, nonfeasance, or
malpractice on the part of any officer or employee or on the part of any
provider in the course of rendering health care service or supplies to
subscribers.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:27

 **420-A:27 Taxation. –** Except as otherwise expressly provided for
by law, every health service corporation doing business pursuant to this
chapter is hereby declared to be a nonprofit and benevolent organization
and to be exempt from all taxes, other than taxes on real property
situated within this state, fees on motor vehicles registered in this
state, fees prescribed by this chapter, and the premium tax under RSA
400-A:32. Except for payments made by the state of New Hampshire no tax
shall be levied on any premiums, fees-for-service and other payments for
health, dental, and employee benefit coverages from political
subdivisions of the state of New Hampshire, or from employees or
retirees of such political subdivisions, either directly or indirectly.
Nor shall any tax be levied on any revenues of such a health service
corporation that are derived from any business of the corporation where
the corporation has assumed no insurance risk and is providing
administrative services only.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:28

 **420-A:28 Relationship of Provider and Patient. –** Nothing in this
chapter shall be deemed to alter the relationship of physician and
patient. No health service corporation shall in any way influence the
subscriber in the free choice of hospital or physician or other
provider. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to abridge the right
of any hospital, physician or other provider to decline patients in
accordance with lawful standards and practices of such provider.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:29

 **420-A:29 Foreign Corporations; Reciprocity. –** Any corporation
organized under the laws of another state or country which except as to
state of organization is a health service corporation and which the
commissioner finds has fully complied with the laws of such other state
or country, shall be entitled to do business within this state subject
to this chapter after obtaining a license as provided in RSA 420-A:4;
provided, however, that no such corporation organized under the laws of
another state or country shall be entitled to such license, or to do
business in this state, unless such other state or country grants
substantially similar rights and privileges to health service
corporations organized under the laws of this state. The commissioner
shall determine whether rights and privileges granted by other states or
countries are substantially similar to those granted by this state, and
the commissioner's determination shall be final.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:30

 **420-A:30 Exceptions. –** Fraternal benefit societies and life or
accident insurance companies are not affected by this chapter.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:31

 **420-A:31 Rules. –** The commissioner is authorized and empowered
to adopt such rules in accordance with RSA 541-A which are reasonable
and necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 420-A:32

 **420-A:32 Workers' Compensation Law Not Affected. –** No provision
of this chapter or any contract for hospital service by such health
service corporation shall in any way affect the operation of workers'
compensation laws of the state.

**Source.** 1997, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.
