---
title: 'CHAPTER 420-N FEDERAL HEALTH CARE REFORM 2010'
---

TITLE XXXVII
                                             
INSURANCE
=============

CHAPTER 420-N
                                             
FEDERAL HEALTH CARE REFORM 2010
-------------------------------

### Section 420-N:1

 **420-N:1 Purpose and Scope. –** The intent of this chapter is to
preserve the state's status as the primary regulator of the business of
insurance within New Hampshire and the constitutional integrity and
sovereignty of the state of New Hampshire under the Tenth Amendment to
the United States Constitution and part I, article 7 of the New
Hampshire constitution and to create a legislative oversight committee
to supervise the insurance commissioner's administration of the
insurance reforms required under the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act of 2009, Public Law 111-148, as amended by the Health Care and
Education Reconciliation Act of 2010, Public Law 111-152, including any
federal regulations, interpretations, standards, or guidance issued
thereunder (hereinafter "the Act'').

**Source.** 2011, 264:1. 2012, 231:1, eff. June 18, 2012.

### Section 420-N:2

 **420-N:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Act'' means the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of
2009, Public Law 111-148, as amended by the Health Care and Education
Reconciliation Act of 2010, Public Law 111-152, including any federal
regulations, interpretations, standards, or guidance issued thereunder.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the insurance commissioner.
                                             
 III. "Oversight committee'' means the joint health care reform
oversight committee established in RSA 420-N:3.

**Source.** 2011, 264:1, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 420-N:3

 **420-N:3 Joint Health Care Reform Oversight Committee Established.
–**
                                             
 I. There is established a joint health care reform oversight
committee consisting of 6 members as follows:
                                             
 (a) Three members of the senate, appointed by the senate
president.
                                             
 (b) Three members of the house of representatives, appointed by
the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 II. The terms of the members shall be for the biennium and shall be
coterminous with their membership in the general court. The oversight
committee shall elect a chairperson from its membership. The oversight
committee shall meet at the call of the chairperson who may call a
meeting as often as necessary. The oversight committee shall require 4
members for a quorum.
                                             
 III. The committee shall provide legislative oversight, policy
direction, and recommendations for legislation with respect to the Act
as it determines appropriate. The committee shall also review existing
rules, bulletins, or policies adopted pursuant to 2010, 243 and may
require the repeal of such rules, bulletins, or policies.
                                             
 IV. The committee shall make a report, together with any
recommendations for legislation, to the president of the senate, the
speaker of the house of representatives, the chairpersons of the house
commerce and consumer affairs and the health, human services and elderly
affairs committees and the senate commerce and health and human services
committees by December 1, 2011 and annually thereafter.

**Source.** 2011, 264:1, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 420-N:4

 **420-N:4 Implementation of the Act. –**
                                             
 I. The oversight committee established under RSA 420-N:3 shall
determine all policies within the state of New Hampshire regarding
implementation of the Act, as directed by this chapter and by any future
law enacted by the general court with respect to implementation of the
Act.
                                             
 II. Before establishing any standard for enforcing or implementing
the Act, and before initiating any rulemaking proceeding relating to the
Act, the commissioner shall obtain approval for the standard or rule
from the oversight committee.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall make periodic reports as requested by
the oversight committee on the provisions of the Act that have taken
legal effect in New Hampshire and on the status of the commissioner's
implementation and enforcement efforts under the Act.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner shall not implement or enforce any provision of
the Act that has been ruled unconstitutional or invalid by the United
States Supreme Court.

**Source.** 2011, 264:1, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 420-N:5

 **420-N:5 Authority of the Commissioner. –** Only with such prior
approvals from the oversight committee as are required under RSA
420-N:4, the commissioner shall have authority to:
                                             
 I. Make, adopt, and amend rules and regulations pursuant to RSA
541-A for, or as an aid to, the administration of any provision of the
Act relating to insurance;
                                             
 II. Apply for any public or private grant funds available under the
Act;
                                             
 III. Apply for any waiver available under any specific provision of
the Act;
                                             
 IV. Adopt and apply standards consistent with the Act for form and
rate review of insurance products and any other regulatory oversight
functions performed by the department; and
                                             
 V. Enforce the consumer protections and market reforms set forth in
the Act that relate to insurance. This shall not include the medical
assistance program under RSA 167.

**Source.** 2011, 264:1, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 420-N:5-a


                                             


                                             [RSA 420-N:5-a repealed by 2014, 201:2, effective January 1, 2019.
                                             ]

 **420-N:5-a Public Information Sessions and Comment Period Required.
–**
                                             
 On or before June 15 of each year, and before the commissioner
approves insurance products to be sold on a federally-facilitated
exchange in New Hampshire, the commissioner shall hold at least 2 public
information sessions, in different regions of the state concerning the
proposed provider networks of insurance products proposed to be sold on
the federally-facilitated exchange for the following calendar year.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, information regarding the
proposed network of hospitals and essential community providers as
defined in 45 CFR 156.235 included under any such insurance plan shall
be made available to the public at or before these information sessions.
This information shall be shared orally at the public information
sessions and in writing on the department's Internet website. The
commissioner shall provide public notice of these information sessions
in compliance with RSA 91-A, and shall, to the extent practicable, make
audio and video footage of these information sessions available through
the department's Internet website. The commissioner shall accept public
comments on the proposed networks for at least 2 weeks following the
conclusion of the public information sessions, and shall enable members
of the public to register their comments in writing through the
department's website. If an insurance carrier amends its proposed
network submission on or before August 1 of the year preceding the
plan's inclusion in the federally-facilitated exchange, the commissioner
shall only be required to make any such amendments available to the
public on the insurance department's website. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to prohibit an insurance carrier from making changes
to the proposed network at any time if the insurance carrier meets
network adequacy requirements under RSA 420-J:7.

**Source.** 2014, 201:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2014.

### Section 420-N:6

 **420-N:6 Consistency. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 231:3, I, eff. June 18,
2012.
                                             ]

Health Exchange
---------------

### Section 420-N:7

 **420-N:7 Prohibition on State-Based Health Exchange; Guidelines for
Interaction With Federally-Facilitated Health Exchange. –**
                                             
 I. No New Hampshire state agency, department, or political
subdivision shall plan, create, participate in or enable a state-based
exchange for health insurance under the Act, or contract with any
private entity to do so.
                                             
 II. State agencies or departments may interact with the federal
government with respect to the creation of a federally-facilitated
exchange for New Hampshire.
                                             
 III. Subject to the requirements of this chapter with respect to
oversight committee approval, state agencies or departments may operate
specific functions of a federally-facilitated exchange consistent with
this subdivision to enable the continuation of traditional areas of
state regulation and authority.
                                             
 IV. State agency activities relating to any federally-facilitated
exchange for New Hampshire shall be consistent with the following
objectives:
                                             
 (a) Promoting preservation of the private, commercial delivery of
health coverage through carriers and producers to the greatest degree
possible under the Act and minimizing interference with the operation of
commercial markets.
                                             
 (b) Minimizing overhead and administrative expenses.
                                             
 (c) Promoting competition and consumer choice, for example by
advocating for allowing all health and dental plans that meet the
minimum requirements necessary to be certified as qualified plans under
the Act to be offered in the exchange.
                                             
 (d) Preserving to the greatest extent possible the state's
insurance regulatory authority and the state's flexibility in
determining Medicaid eligibility standards and program design and
operation.

**Source.** 2012, 231:2, eff. June 18, 2012.

### Section 420-N:8

 **420-N:8 Federally-Facilitated Exchange; Authority of the
Commissioner. –**
                                             
 I. In the event a federally-facilitated exchange is established for
New Hampshire, the commissioner shall retain authority with respect to
insurance products sold in New Hampshire on the federally-facilitated
exchange to the maximum extent possible by law as provided in title
XXXVII, including but not limited to producer and insurer licensing,
form and rate approval, reinsurance and other risk-sharing mechanisms,
network adequacy, industry assessments, internal grievance standards,
external review, and unfair trade practices.
                                             
 II. Any person who sells, solicits, or negotiates insurance within
the meaning of RSA 402-J:3 through a federally-facilitated exchange
shall be licensed as a producer under RSA 402-J; provided, that nothing
in this subdivision shall prohibit the sale of health coverage by an
exchange or health carrier directly to the consumer without the use of a
producer. This paragraph shall not be interpreted to require that all
navigators as defined under the Act be licensed as producers, but rather
that any individual who in fact performs a producer function be
licensed, whether or not that person is employed by a navigator.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may establish standards and training
requirements for navigators on a federally-facilitated exchange
consistent with section 1311(i) of the Act and regulations implemented
under the Act, including provisions to ensure that any private or public
entity that is selected as a navigator avoids conflicts of interest and
is appropriately qualified to engage in navigator activities.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner shall, consistent with the requirements of the
Act, allow producers to enroll individuals, employers, or employees in
qualified health plans offered through a federally-facilitated exchange
in this state, including enrollment using Internet websites.
                                             
 V. The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A and in
accordance with RSA 420-N:4, II, as necessary to perform the duties
specified in this section and to protect against adverse selection by
creating a level playing field between a federally-facilitated exchange
and the commercial health insurance market.

**Source.** 2012, 231:2, eff. June 18, 2012.

### Section 420-N:9

 **420-N:9 Federally-Facilitated Exchange; Authority of the Health
and Human Services Commissioner. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of health and human services shall have
authority to establish New Hampshire eligibility standards, enrollment
procedures, and outreach mechanisms for persons who are enrolled through
a federally-facilitated exchange in this state in the Medicaid program
under title XIX of the Social Security Act or the Children's Health
Insurance Program (CHIP) under title XXI of the Social Security Act.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of health and human services may establish
navigator guidelines for New Hampshire consistent with section 1311(i)
of the Act, and regulations implemented under the Act, to ensure that
navigators are qualified to reach and assist the Medicaid-eligible and
other populations served by a federally-facilitated exchange in New
Hampshire.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of health and human services may adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A and subject to oversight committee approval under
RSA 161:11, as necessary to fulfill the purposes of this subdivision.

**Source.** 2012, 231:2, eff. June 18, 2012.

### Section 420-N:10

 **420-N:10 Health Exchange Advisory Board. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby created a health exchange advisory board for the
purpose of advising the commissioner and the commissioner of health and
human services regarding the interests of New Hampshire businesses and
consumers with respect to any federally-facilitated exchange that may be
created for New Hampshire. The board shall consist of 12 members, as
follows:
                                             
 (a) Two persons representing health insurance carriers, appointed
by the commissioner.
                                             
 (b) One person representing dental carriers, appointed by the
commissioner.
                                             
 (c) One person representing producers, appointed by the
commissioner.
                                             
 (d) One person representing Medicaid recipients, appointed by the
commissioner of health and human services.
                                             
 (e) One person representing health care providers and health care
facilities in New Hampshire, appointed by the commissioner of health and
human services.
                                             
 (f) One person who is an advocate for enrolling hard to reach
populations, including individuals with a mental health or substance
abuse disorder, appointed by the commissioner of health and human
services.
                                             
 (g) One person who is a public health expert, appointed by the
commissioner of health and human services.
                                             
 (h) Four public members appointed by the governor, with consent
of the executive council, who are not employed by or affiliated with a
carrier, a producer, or a health care provider, other than incidentally
as a covered person or purchaser of health coverage or health care, as
follows:
                                             
 (1) One person who can reasonably be expected to purchase
individual coverage through the exchange with the assistance of a
premium tax credit and who can reasonably be expected to represent the
interests of consumers purchasing individual coverage through the
exchange;
                                             
 (2) One person representing an employer that can reasonably be
expected to purchase group coverage through an exchange and who can
reasonably be expected to represent the interests of employers;
                                             
 (3) One person representing navigators or entities likely to
be licensed as navigators; and
                                             
 (4) One person employed by an employer who can reasonably be
expected to purchase group coverage through an exchange and who can
reasonably be expected to represent the interests of such employees.
                                             
 II. Members of the board may serve up to 2 3-year terms. Of the
initial members, 4 members shall serve an initial term of one year, 4
members shall serve an initial term of 2 years, and 4 members shall
serve an initial term of 3 years in order to achieve staggered terms.
                                             
 III. The board shall elect a chairperson annually from among its
members. If a vacancy occurs on the board, the vacancy for the unexpired
term shall be filled in accordance with the above procedures with a
person who has the appropriate qualifications to fill that position on
the board.
                                             
 IV. Initial appointments shall be made within 30 days of the
effective date of this subdivision, and subsequent appointments shall be
made within 30 days of any vacancy.
                                             
 V. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the
chairperson or when 5 members so request.
                                             
 VI. The board shall be a public body subject to RSA 91-A, and its
meetings shall be considered public proceedings.

**Source.** 2012, 231:2, eff. June 18, 2012.
