---
title: CHAPTER 334 UNIFORM BILLS OF LADING ACT
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 334
                                             
UNIFORM BILLS OF LADING ACT
---------------------------

### Section 334:1-43.

 **334:1 to 334:43 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1959, 247:2, eff. July 1,
1961.
                                             ]

Criminal Offenses
-----------------

### Section 334:44

 **334:44 Issuing Bill, Goods Not Received. –** Any officer, agent or
servant of a carrier who, with intent to defraud, issues or aids in
issuing a bill knowing that all or any part of the goods for which such
bill is issued have not been received by such carrier, or by an agent of
such carrier or by a connecting carrier, or are not under the carrier's
control at the time of issuing such bill, shall be guilty of a class B
felony.

**Source.** 1917, 81:44. PL 314:44. RL 368:44. RSA 334:44. 1973,
528:219, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 334:45

 **334:45 Issuing Bill, False Statements. –** Any officer, agent or
servant of a carrier who, with intent to defraud, issues or aids in
issuing a bill for goods knowing that it contains any false statement
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1917, 81:45. PL 314:45. RL 368:45. RSA 334:45. 1973,
528:220, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 334:46

 **334:46 Issuing Bill, Duplicates. –** Any officer, agent or servant
of a carrier who, with intent to defraud, issues or aids in issuing a
duplicate or additional negotiable bill for goods in violation of the
provisions of RSA 382-A:7-402, knowing that a former negotiable bill for
the same goods or any part of them is outstanding and uncancelled, shall
be guilty of a class B felony.

**Source.** 1917, 81:46. PL 314:46. RL 368:46. RSA 334:46. 1973,
528:221, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 334:47

 **334:47 Procuring Bill, Mortgaged Goods. –** Any person who ships
goods to which he has not title, or upon which there is a lien or
mortgage, and who takes for such goods a negotiable bill, which he
afterwards negotiates for value with intent to deceive and without
disclosing his want of title or the existence of the lien or mortgage,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a
felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1917, 81:47. PL 314:47. RL 368:47. RSA 334:47. 1973,
528:222, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 334:48

 **334:48 Goods Not Delivered, Negotiating Bill. –** Any person who,
with intent to deceive, negotiates or transfers for value a bill,
knowing that any or all of the goods which by the terms of such bill
appear to have been received for transportation by the carrier which
issued the bill are not in the possession or control of such carrier, or
of a connecting carrier, without disclosing this fact, shall be guilty
of a class B felony if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any
other person.

**Source.** 1917, 81:48. PL 314:48. RL 368:48. RSA 334:48. 1973,
528:223, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 334:49

 **334:49 Goods Not Delivered, Procuring Bill. –** Any person who,
with intent to defraud, secures the issue by a carrier of a bill,
knowing that, at the time of such issue, any or all of the goods
described in such bill as received for transportation have not been
received by such carrier, or an agent of such carrier or a connecting
carrier, or are not under the carrier's control, by inducing an officer,
agent or servant of such carrier falsely to believe that such goods have
been received by such carrier, or are under its control, shall be guilty
of a class B felony if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any
other person.

**Source.** 1917, 81:49. PL 314:49. RL 368:49. RSA 334:49. 1973,
528:224, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 334:50

 **334:50 Fraudulent Issue, Non-negotiable Bill. –** Any person who,
with intent to defraud, issues or aids in issuing a non-negotiable bill
without the words "not negotiable'' placed plainly upon the face thereof
shall be guilty of a class B felony if a natural person, or guilty of a
felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1917, 81:50. PL 314:50. RL 368:50. RSA 334:50. 1973,
528:225, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 334:51-53.

 **334:51 to 334:53 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1959, 247:2, eff. July
1, 1961.
                                             ]
