---
title: CHAPTER 336 INTEREST
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 336
                                             
INTEREST
------------

### Section 336:1

 **336:1 Rate of Interest. –**
                                             
 I. The annual rate of interest in all business transactions in which
interest is paid or secured, unless otherwise agreed upon in writing,
shall equal 10 percent. No consumer credit transaction, as defined in
RSA 358-K:1, V, shall be subject to this paragraph. If agreed upon in
writing, interest on business transactions may include charging other
than simple interest.
                                             
 II. The annual simple rate of interest on judgments, including
prejudgment interest, shall be a rate determined by the state treasurer
as the prevailing discount rate of interest on 26-week United States
Treasury bills at the last auction thereof preceding the last day of
September in each year, plus 2 percentage points, rounded to the nearest
tenth of a percentage point. On or before the first day of December in
each year, the state treasurer shall determine the rate and transmit it
to the director of the administrative office of the courts. As
established, the rate shall be in effect beginning the first day of the
following January through the last day of December in each year.

**Source.** RS 190:2. CS 203:2. GS 213:2. GL 232:2. PS 203:1. 1921,
121:1. PL 313:1. RL 367:1. RSA 336:1. 1981, 348:1. 1995, 242:1. 1997,
193:4. 2001, 160:2, eff. Sept. 1, 2001.

### Section 336:2

 **336:2 Time of Effective Rate. –**
                                             
 I. The rate paid on judgments shall be the rate in effect at the
time the verdict is rendered or a finding for pecuniary damages is made,
as certified by the clerk of court.
                                             
 II. The rate paid in business transactions shall be the rate in
effect at the time the agreement for the business transaction is made.

**Source.** 1981, 348:1, eff. Aug. 16, 1981.
