---
title: 'CHAPTER 337-A PRESERVATION OF PRIVATE BUSINESS RECORDS'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 337-A
                                             
PRESERVATION OF PRIVATE BUSINESS RECORDS
----------------------------------------

### Section 337-A:1

 **337-A:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Business'' includes every kind of private business, profession,
occupation, calling, or operation of private institutions, whether
carried on for profit or not.
                                             
 II. "Person'' means an individual, partnership, corporation, or any
other association.
                                             
 III. "Records'' or "business records'' include books of account,
vouchers, documents, cancelled checks, payrolls, correspondence, records
of sales, personnel, equipment and production, reports relating to any
or all such records, and other business papers.
                                             
 IV. "Reproduction'' means a reproduction or durable medium for
making a reproduction obtained by any photographic, photostatic,
microfilm, microcard, miniature photographic or other process which
accurately reproduces or forms a durable medium for so reproducing the
original.

**Source.** 1955, 192:1 par. 1, eff. June 9, 1955.

### Section 337-A:2

 **337-A:2 Destruction of Records. –** Unless a specific period is
designated by law for their preservation, business records which persons
by the laws of this state are required to keep or preserve may be
destroyed after the expiration of 3 years from the making of such
records without constituting an offense under such laws. This section
does not apply to minute books of corporations nor to records of sales
or other transactions involving weapons, poisons or other dangerous
articles or substances capable of use in the commission of crimes.

**Source.** 1955, 192:1 par. 2, eff. June 9, 1955.

### Section 337-A:3

 **337-A:3 Reproductions. –** If in the regular course of business a
person makes reproductions of original business records, the
preservation of such reproductions constitutes compliance with any laws
of this state requiring that business records be kept or preserved.

**Source.** 1955, 192:1 par. 3, eff. June 9, 1955.

### Section 337-A:4

 **337-A:4 Application. –** Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to diminish the authority of an officer of this state under
existing law to permit the destruction of business records.

**Source.** 1955, 192:1 par. 4, eff. June 9, 1955.

### Section 337-A:5

 **337-A:5 Construction. –** This chapter shall be so interpreted and
construed as to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform the law
of those states which enact it; but it shall not be interpreted and
construed as requiring the preservation of business records for any
longer period than they are now required by law to be preserved.

**Source.** 1955, 192:1 par. 5, eff. June 9, 1955.

### Section 337-A:6

 **337-A:6 Citation. –** This chapter may be cited as the Uniform
Preservation of Private Business Records Act.

**Source.** 1955, 192:1 par. 6, eff. June 9, 1955.
