---
title: 'CHAPTER 339-G MINIMUM ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PRODUCTS'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 339-G
                                             
MINIMUM ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PRODUCTS
--------------------------------------------------------

### Section 339-G:1

 **339-G:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Bottle-type water dispenser'' means a water dispenser that uses
a bottle or reservoir as the source of potable water.
                                             
 II. "Commission'' means the public utilities commission.
                                             
 III. "Commercial hot food holding cabinet'' means a heated,
fully-enclosed compartment with one or more solid or glass doors that
are designed to maintain the temperature of hot food that has been
cooked in a separate appliance. "Commercial hot food holding cabinet''
does not include heated glass merchandizing cabinets, drawer warmers, or
cook-and-hold appliances.
                                             
 IV. "Electricity ratio'' means the ratio of furnace electricity use
to total furnace energy use. Electricity ratio =
(3.412
                                             *E~AE~)/(1000
                                             *E~F~ + 3.412
                                             *E~AE~) where E~AE~ (average annual
auxiliary electrical consumption) and E~F~ (average annual fuel energy
consumption) are defined in Appendix N to subpart B of part 430 of title
10 of the Code of Federal Regulations and E~F~ is expressed in millions
of BTUs per year.
                                             
 V. "Residential furnace'' means a self-contained space heater
designed to supply heated air through ducts of more than 10 inches
length and which utilizes only single-phase electric current, or
single-phase electric current or DC current in conjunction with natural
gas, propane, or home heating oil, and which:
                                             
 (a) Is designed to be the principle heating source for the living
space of one or more residences;
                                             
 (b) Is not contained within the same cabinet with a central air
conditioner whose rated cooling capacity is above 65,000 BTU per hour;
and
                                             
 (c) Has a heat input rate of less than 225,000 BTU per hour.
                                             
 VI. "Water dispenser'' means a factory-made assembly that
mechanically cools and heats potable water and that dispenses the cooled
or heated water by integral or remote means.

**Source.** 2008, 310:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 339-G:2

 **339-G:2 Applicability. –**
                                             
 I. The provisions of this chapter apply to the testing,
certification, and enforcement of efficiency standards for the following
types of new products sold, offered for sale, or installed in the
state:
                                             
 (a) Bottle-type water dispensers;
                                             
 (b) Commercial hot food holding cabinets; and
                                             
 (c) Residential furnaces.
                                             
 II. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
                                             
 (a) New products manufactured in the state and sold outside the
state;
                                             
 (b) New products manufactured outside the state and sold at
wholesale inside the state for final retail sale and installation
outside the state;
                                             
 (c) Products installed in mobile manufactured homes at the time
of construction;
                                             
 (d) Products designed expressly for installation and use in
recreational vehicles; or
                                             
 (e) Residential furnaces that use natural gas or propane and that
are installed as replacements for previously installed furnaces.

**Source.** 2008, 310:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 339-G:3

 **339-G:3 Minimum Energy Efficiency Standards. –**
                                             
 I. Bottle-type water dispensers designed for dispensing both hot and
cold water shall not have standby energy consumption greater than 1.2
kilowatt hours per day, as measured in accordance with the test criteria
contained in Version 1.1 of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency's "ENERGY STAR Program Requirements for Bottled Water Coolers,''
except that units with an integral, automatic timer shall not be tested
using Section D, "Timer Usage,'' of the test criteria.
                                             
 II. Commercial hot food holding cabinets shall have a maximum idle
energy rate of 40 watts per cubic foot of interior volume, as determined
by the "idle energy rate-dry test'' in ASTM F2140-01, "Standard Test
Method for Performance of Hot Food Holding Cabinets'' published by ASTM
International. Interior volume shall be measured in accordance with the
method shown in the United States Environmental Protection Agency's
"ENERGY STAR Program Requirements for Commercial Hot Food Holding
Cabinets'' as in effect on August 15, 2003.
                                             
 III. (a) Residential furnaces shall comply with the following Annual
Fuel Utilization Efficiency (AFUE), and electricity ratio:

     Product Type Minimum Maximum electricity 
     AFUE Ratio 
     
    Natural gas- and propane- 90 percent 2.0 percent 
    fired furnaces 


                                             
 (b) The commission may adopt rules to exempt compliance with the
residential furnace AFUE standards at any building, site or location
where complying with the standards would be in conflict with any local
zoning ordinance, building or plumbing code, or other rule regarding
installation and venting of residential furnaces.

**Source.** 2008, 310:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 339-G:4

 **339-G:4 Sale and Installation of Products. –**
                                             
 I. After December 31, 2008, no new bottle-type water dispenser or
commercial hot food holding cabinet shall be sold or offered for sale in
the state unless the efficiency of the new product meets or exceeds the
efficiency standards in RSA 339-G:3. After December 31, 2009 no new
bottle-type water dispenser or commercial hot food holding cabinet shall
be installed in the state unless the energy efficiency of the new
product meets or exceeds the efficiency standards in RSA 339-G:3.
                                             
 II. Within 6 months after the effective date of this section, the
commission, in consultation with the attorney general, shall determine
if implementation of state standards for residential furnaces requires a
waiver from federal preemption. The commission shall make separate
determinations for each part of the state standards including minimum
Annual Fuel Utilization Efficiency (AFUE), maximum electricity ratio,
and any prescriptive requirements. If the commission determines that a
waiver from federal preemption is not needed for any part, then after
December 31, 2008, or the date which is one year after the date of said
determination, if later, no new residential furnace may be sold or
offered for sale in the state unless the efficiency of the new product
meets or exceeds the applicable non-preempted part of the efficiency
standards in RSA 339-G:3. If the commission determines that a waiver
from federal preemption is required for all or part of the state
standards, then the commission shall apply for such waiver within one
year of such determination and upon approval of such waiver application,
the applicable state standards shall go into effect at the earliest date
permitted by federal law. The commission shall certify any
determinations and approvals under this paragraph to the secretary of
state and the director of the office of legislative services.

**Source.** 2008, 310:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 339-G:5

 **339-G:5 Modified and Additional Standards. –** The commission may
establish more stringent efficiency standards for the products listed in
RSA 339-G:2, I. Every 2 years, the commission shall propose to the
general court new efficiency standards for products not listed in RSA
339-G:2, I. Standards proposed by the commission shall promote energy
conservation in the state and be lifecycle cost-effective for consumers
who purchase and use the products. The commission may apply for a waiver
from preemption in accordance with federal procedures for those products
regulated by the federal government. The commission may adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, necessary to implement the provisions of this
section.

**Source.** 2008, 310:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 339-G:6

 **339-G:6 Testing. –** The manufacturers of products listed in RSA
339-G:2, I shall test samples of their products in accordance with the
test procedures established in this chapter or those specified in the
state building code as defined in RSA 155-A. The commission shall adopt
by rule test procedures for determining the energy efficiency of the
products listed in RSA 339-G:2, I if such procedures are not provided
for in RSA 339-G:3 or in the state building code. The commission shall
adopt United States Department of Energy approved test methods, or in
the absence of such test methods, other appropriate
nationally-recognized test methods. The commission may adopt updated
test methods when new versions of test procedures become available.

**Source.** 2008, 310:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 339-G:7

 **339-G:7 Certification and Identification. –**
                                             
 I. Manufacturers of new products listed in RSA 339-G:2, I shall
certify to the commission that such products are in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Such certifications shall be based on test
results. The commission shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
governing the certification of such products and may coordinate with the
certification programs of other states with similar standards.
                                             
 II. Manufacturers of new products listed in RSA 339-G:2, I shall
identify each product offered for sale or installation in the state as
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter by means of a mark,
label, or tag on the product and packaging at the time of sale or
installation. The commission shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
governing the identification of such products and packaging, which shall
be coordinated to the greatest practical extent with the labeling
programs of other states and federal agencies with equivalent efficiency
standards. The commission shall allow the use of existing marks, labels,
or tags which connote compliance with the efficiency requirements of
this chapter.

**Source.** 2008, 310:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 339-G:8

 **339-G:8 Inspections. –** With prior notice and at reasonable and
convenient hours, the commission may cause periodic inspections to be
made of distributors or retailers of new products listed in RSA 339-G:2,
I in order to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
The commission shall also coordinate with local enforcement agencies
regarding inspections prior to occupancy of newly constructed buildings
containing new products that are also covered by the state building
code.

**Source.** 2008, 310:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 339-G:9

 **339-G:9 Enforcement; Penalties. –** The commission shall cause
investigations to be made of complaints received concerning violations
of this chapter and shall report the results of such investigations to
the attorney general. The attorney general may institute proceedings to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any manufacturer, distributor,
or retailer who violates any provision of this chapter shall be issued a
warning by the commission for any first violation. Repeat violations
shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than 
                                             $250. Each
violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, and each
day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.

**Source.** 2008, 310:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.
