---
title: 'CHAPTER 339-D PETROLEUM INVENTORIES'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 339-D
                                             
PETROLEUM INVENTORIES
---------------------

### Section 339-D:1

 **339-D:1 Definitions. –** For the purposes of this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Person'' means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, trust and any other legal entity.
                                             
 II. "Petroleum product'' means propane, gasoline, unleaded gasoline,
kerosene, 
                                             #2 heating oil, diesel fuel, kerosene base jet fuel and 
                                             #4,
5 and 6 residual oil for utility and non-utility uses.
                                             
 III. "Primary storage facility'' or "facility'' means any facility
or terminal which receives petroleum products for holding within the
state by ship, barge or pipeline.

**Source.** 1979, 432:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 339-D:2

 **339-D:2 Duty of Governor's Council on Energy. –** The director of
the governor's council on energy shall have the authority to collect and
keep on file inventory and product delivery data as delineated by RSA
339-D:3 from persons owning or leasing petroleum product primary storage
facilities.

**Source.** 1979, 432:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 339-D:3

 **339-D:3 Inventory Reporting. –**
                                             
 I. Upon request of the director of the governor's council on energy,
any person owning or leasing petroleum product primary storage
facilities shall file a report on the first and fifteenth calendar days
of each month or on the first working day thereafter with the director
setting forth an inventory of petroleum stored at and expected to be
delivered to the facilities. The director shall provide a form for the
recording of the information, which form shall require the following
information:
                                             
 (a) The total inventory of each petroleum product stored at the
facilities; such inventory shall be made within 3 days prior to the
reporting date;
                                             
 (b) The anticipated quantity of each petroleum product to be
delivered to the facilities within 15 days after the reporting date;
and
                                             
 (c) Any other delivery data the director considers necessary.
                                             
 II. All reports filed pursuant to this section shall be an exempt
record and confidential pursuant to RSA 91-A:5, IV, and shall be
maintained for the sole and confidential use of the director of the
governor's council on energy, except that the reports may be disclosed
to the appropriate energy agency or department of another state with
substantially similar confidentiality statutes or regulations with
respect to such reports.

**Source.** 1979, 432:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 339-D:4

 **339-D:4 Remedies; Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. If any person, in violation of the provisions of this chapter,
knowingly fails to file complete and accurate reports with the director
of the governor's council on energy, the director may petition the
superior court for injunctive relief. The director shall be represented
by the attorney general. Such petition may be filed in the superior
court of the county in which the defendant resides, or if such defendant
is a nonresident, in the superior court of any county in which he does
business.
                                             
 II. Upon a finding by the court that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the court may grant such relief as it deems necessary and, in
addition, may impose a fine of an amount not exceeding 
                                             $5,000 for each
violation.

**Source.** 1979, 432:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.
