---
title: 'CHAPTER 339-F REDUCED CIGARETTE IGNITION PROPENSITY'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 339-F
                                             
REDUCED CIGARETTE IGNITION PROPENSITY
-------------------------------------

### Section 339-F:1

 **339-F:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Agent'' means any person licensed by the department of revenue
administration to purchase and affix adhesive or meter stamps on
packages of cigarettes.
                                             
 II. "Cigarette'' means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part
of tobacco, and wrapped in any material except tobacco.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of safety.
                                             
 IV. "Manufacturer'' means:
                                             
 (a) Any entity which manufactures or otherwise produces
cigarettes or causes cigarettes to be manufactured or produced anywhere
that such manufacturer intends to be sold in the state, including
cigarettes intended to be sold in the United States through an importer;
or
                                             
 (b) The first purchaser anywhere that intends to resell in the
United States cigarettes manufactured anywhere that the original
manufacturer or maker does not intend to be sold in the United States;
or
                                             
 (c) Any entity which becomes a successor of an entity described
in subparagraph (a) or (b).
                                             
 V. "Repeatability'' means the range of values within which the
repeat results of cigarette test trials from a single laboratory will
fall 95 percent of the time.
                                             
 VI. "Retailer'' means any person who sells tobacco products to
consumers, and any vending machine in which tobacco products are sold.
                                             
 VII. "Sale'' or "sell'' means any transfer, whether by bargain,
gift, exchange, barter, or otherwise.
                                             
 VIII. "Quality control and quality assurance program'' means the
laboratory procedures implemented to ensure that operator bias,
systematic and nonsystematic methodological errors, and equipment
related problems do not affect the results of the testing. This program
ensures that the testing repeatability remains within the required
repeatability values stated in RSA 339-F:3, V for all test trials used
to certify cigarettes in accordance with this chapter.
                                             
 IX. "Vending machine operator'' means any person operating one or
more tobacco vending machines on property or premises other than his or
her own.
                                             
 X. "Wholesaler'' means any person doing business in this state who
shall purchase all of his or her unstamped tobacco products directly
from a licensed manufacturer, and who shall sell all of his or her
products to licensed wholesalers, subjobbers, vending machine operators,
retailers, and those persons exempt from the tobacco tax under RSA
78:7-b.

**Source.** 2006, 195:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2007.

### Section 339-F:2

 **339-F:2 General Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. On and after October 1, 2007, no cigarettes shall be sold or
offered for sale in this state unless:
                                             
 (a) The cigarettes have been tested in accordance with the test
method prescribed in RSA 339-F:3.
                                             
 (b) The cigarettes meet the performance standard specified in RSA
339-F:4.
                                             
 (c) A written certification has been filed by the manufacturer
with the commissioner and the New Hampshire department of justice in
accordance with RSA 339-F:6.
                                             
 (d) The cigarettes are marked in accordance with RSA 339-F:8.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit wholesalers or retailers
from selling their inventory of cigarettes existing on October 1, 2007,
provided that such wholesaler or retailer can establish that tax stamps
were affixed to such cigarettes pursuant to RSA 78 prior to October 1,
2007, and provided further that such wholesaler or retailer can
establish that such inventory was purchased prior to October 1, 2007 in
comparable quantity to the inventory purchased during the same 12-month
period of the prior year.
                                             
 III. Consistent with RSA 78:14-a, nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to prohibit any person or entity from selling or offering for
sale cigarettes that have not been certified by the manufacturer in
accordance with RSA 339-F:6 if such cigarettes are or will be stamped
for sale in another state or are packaged for sale outside the United
States.
                                             
 IV. No person shall sell tobacco products through a vending machine
in violation of this chapter.

**Source.** 2006, 195:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2007.

### Section 339-F:3

 **339-F:3 Test Method. –**
                                             
 I. Testing of cigarettes shall be conducted in accordance with the
American Society of Testing and Materials ("ASTM'') standard E2187-04,
"Standard Test Method for Measuring the Ignition Strength of
Cigarettes.'' The commissioner may adopt a subsequent ASTM Standard Test
Method for Measuring the Ignition Strength of Cigarettes upon a finding
that the subsequent method does not result in a change in the percentage
of full-length burns exhibited by any tested cigarette when compared to
the percentage of full-length burns the same cigarette would exhibit
when tested in accordance with ASTM Standard E2187-04 and the
performance standard in RSA 339-F:4.
                                             
 II. Testing shall be conducted on 10 layers of filter paper.
                                             
 III. Forty replicate tests shall comprise a complete test trial for
each cigarette tested.
                                             
 IV. The performance standard required by RSA 339-F:4 shall only be
applied to a complete test trial.
                                             
 V. Laboratories conducting testing in accordance with this section
shall implement a quality control and quality assurance program that
includes a procedure that will determine the repeatability of the
testing results. The repeatability value shall be no greater than 0.19
pursuant to RSA 339-F:4.
                                             
 VI. This section does not require additional testing if cigarettes
are tested consistent with this chapter for any other purpose.

**Source.** 2006, 195:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2007.

### Section 339-F:4

 **339-F:4 Performance Standard. –**
                                             
 I. When tested in accordance with RSA 339-F:3, no more than 25
percent of the cigarettes tested in a test trial shall exhibit full
length burns.
                                             
 II. Each cigarette listed in a certification submitted pursuant to
RSA 339-F:6 that uses lowered permeability bands in the cigarette paper
to achieve compliance with the performance standard set forth in
paragraph I shall have at least 2 nominally identical bands on the paper
surrounding the tobacco column. At least one complete band shall be
located at least 15 millimeters from the lighting end of the cigarette.
For cigarettes on which the bands are positioned by design, there shall
be at least 2 bands fully located at least 15 millimeters from the
lighting end and 10 millimeters from the filter end of the tobacco
column, or 10 millimeters from the labeled end of the tobacco column for
non-filtered cigarettes.
                                             
 III. The manufacturer of a cigarette that the commissioner
determines cannot be tested in accordance with the test method
prescribed in RSA 339-F:3 shall propose a test method and performance
standard for such cigarette to the commissioner. Upon approval of the
proposed test method and a determination by the commissioner that the
performance standard proposed by the manufacturer is equivalent to the
performance standard prescribed in paragraph I, the manufacturer may
employ such test method and performance standard to certify such
cigarette pursuant to RSA 339-F:6. If another state has enacted reduced
cigarette ignition propensity standards, or similar requirements, that
include a test method and performance standard for cigarettes, and if
officials responsible for implementing those requirements have approved
a manufacturer's proposed alternative test method and performance
standard for a particular cigarette under a legal provision comparable
to this paragraph, that manufacturer may employ that alternative test
method and performance standard to certify that cigarette in this state,
provided that the manufacturer obtains the approval of the commissioner,
which shall not be unreasonably withheld. All other applicable
requirements of this chapter shall apply to such manufacturer.
                                             
 IV. This chapter shall be implemented in accordance with the
substance of the New York Fire Safety Standards for Cigarettes, as
amended.

**Source.** 2006, 195:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2007.

### Section 339-F:5

 **339-F:5 Test Data. –** In order to ensure compliance with the
performance standard specified in RSA 339-F:4, data from testing
conducted by manufacturers to comply with this performance standard
shall be kept on file by such manufacturers for a period of 3 years and
shall be sent to the commissioner upon its request and to the department
of justice upon its request.

**Source.** 2006, 195:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2007.

### Section 339-F:6

 **339-F:6 Certification. –**
                                             
 I. Each manufacturer shall submit a written certification attesting
that each cigarette listed in the certification has been tested in
accordance with RSA 339-F:3 and meets the performance standard set forth
in RSA 339-F:4.
                                             
 II. Each cigarette listed in the certification shall be described
with the following information:
                                             
 (a) Brand (i.e., the trade name on the package).
                                             
 (b) Style (i.e., light, ultra light).
                                             
 (c) Length in millimeters.
                                             
 (d) Circumference in millimeters.
                                             
 (e) Flavor (i.e., menthol, chocolate), if applicable.
                                             
 (f) Filter or non-filter.
                                             
 (g) Package description (i.e., soft pack, box).
                                             
 (h) Marking approved in accordance with RSA 339-F:8.
                                             
 III. Each cigarette certified under this section shall be
re-certified every 3 years.
                                             
 IV. If a manufacturer has certified a cigarette pursuant to
paragraph II, and thereafter makes any change to the cigarette that is
likely to alter its compliance with the reduced cigarette ignition
propensity standard under RSA 339-F:3, such cigarette shall not be sold
or offered for sale in this state until the manufacturer retests the
cigarette in accordance with the testing standards in RSA 339-F:3 and
maintains records of the retesting as required by RSA 339:F-5. Any
altered cigarette that does not meet the performance standard in RSA
339-F:4 shall not be sold in this state.
                                             
 V. For each cigarette listed for certification a manufacturer shall
pay a fee of 
                                             $250 to the department of safety for deposit in the fire
standards and training and emergency medical services fund established
in RSA 21-P:12-d for the purpose of providing fire safety education
pursuant to RSA 153:10-c.
                                             
 VI. For each cigarette re-certified under this chapter a
manufacturer shall pay a fee of 
                                             $250 to the department of safety for
deposit in the fire standards and training and emergency medical
services fund established in RSA 21-P:12-d for the purpose of providing
fire safety education pursuant to RSA 153:10-c.
                                             
 VII. The state fire marshal shall submit an annual report by
December 31 relative to certification of reduced ignition propensity
cigarettes to the standing committees in the house of representatives
and the senate with jurisdiction over matters pertaining to health and
human services and ways and means.

**Source.** 2006, 195:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2007. 2009, 122:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2010; 144:176, eff. July 1, 2009.

### Section 339-F:7

 **339-F:7 Notification of Certification. –** Manufacturers
certifying cigarettes in accordance with RSA 339-F:6 shall provide a
copy of such certifications to all wholesalers and agents to which they
sell cigarettes and also shall provide sufficient copies of an
illustration of the cigarette packaging marking utilized by the
manufacturer pursuant to RSA 339-F:8 for each retailer to which the
wholesalers and agents sell cigarettes. Wholesalers and agents shall
provide a copy of these cigarette packaging markings received from
manufacturers to all retailers to which they sell cigarettes.
Wholesalers and agents shall permit the commissioner or the
commissioner's designee to inspect markings of cigarette packaging
marked in accordance with RSA 339-F:8. Retailers shall permit the
commissioner, the commissioner's designee, any law enforcement official,
or any fire chief or fire chief's designee, to inspect markings of
cigarette packaging marked in accordance with RSA 339-F:8.

**Source.** 2006, 195:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2007.

### Section 339-F:8

 **339-F:8 Marking of Cigarette Packaging. –**
                                             
 I. Cigarettes which have been certified by a manufacturer in
accordance with RSA 339-F:6 shall be marked to indicate compliance with
the requirements of this chapter. Such marking shall be in 8 point type
or larger and consist of:
                                             
 (a) Modification of the UPC to include a visible mark printed at
or around the area of the UPC. Such mark may consist of alphanumeric or
symbolic character permanently stamped, engraved, embossed, or printed
in conjunction with the UPC;
                                             
 (b) Any visible combination of alphanumeric or symbolic character
permanently stamped, engraved, or embossed upon the cigarette package or
cellophane wrap; or
                                             
 (c) Printed, stamped, engraved, or embossed text that indicates
that the cigarettes meet the standards of this chapter.
                                             
 II. A manufacturer shall use only one marking, and shall apply this
marking uniformly for all packages, including but not limited to packs,
cartons, and cases, and brands marketed by that manufacturer.
                                             
 III. The manufacturer shall notify the commissioner of the selected
marking.
                                             
 IV. Prior to the certification of any cigarette, a manufacturer
shall present its proposed marking to the commissioner for approval.
Upon receipt of the request, the commissioner shall approve or
disapprove the marking offered. A marking in use and approved for the
sale of cigarettes in the state of New York shall be deemed approved.
Proposed markings shall be deemed approved if the commissioner fails to
act within 10 business days of receiving a request for approval.
                                             
 V. No manufacturer shall modify its approved marking unless the
modification has been approved by the commissioner in accordance with
this section.

**Source.** 2006, 195:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2007.

### Section 339-F:9

 **339-F:9 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any wholesaler, agent, or other person or entity who knowingly
sells cigarettes wholesale in violation of RSA 339-F:2, I(c) shall be
subject to a civil penalty not to exceed 
                                             $10,000 for each sale. Any
retailer who knowingly sells cigarettes in violation of RSA 339-F:2
shall be subject to the following:
                                             
 (a) A civil penalty not to exceed 
                                             $500 for each sale or offer
for sale of such cigarettes if the total number of cigarettes sold or
offered for sale in such sale does not exceed 1,000 cigarettes.
                                             
 (b) A civil penalty not to exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each sale or offer
for sale of such cigarettes if the total number of cigarettes sold or
offered for sale in such sale exceeds 1,000 cigarettes.
                                             
 II. In addition to any penalty prescribed by law, any corporation,
partnership, sole proprietor, limited partnership or association engaged
in the manufacture of cigarettes that knowingly makes a false
certification pursuant to RSA 339-F:6 shall be subject to a civil
penalty not to exceed 
                                             $10,000 for each such false certification.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding RSA 617, any cigarette sold, offered for sale,
or possessed for sale in this state, in violation of RSA 339-F:2 shall
be contraband under RSA 78:16 and shall be subject to seizure and
forfeiture. All cigarettes seized and forfeited shall be destroyed and
not resold.

**Source.** 2006, 195:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2007.

### Section 339-F:10

 **339-F:10 Enforcement. –** To enforce the provisions of this
chapter, the department of justice may bring an action on behalf of the
people of this state to enjoin acts in violation of this chapter and to
recover civil penalties authorized under RSA 339-F:9.

**Source.** 2006, 195:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2007.

### Section 339-F:11

 **339-F:11 Administration. –** The commissioner shall be responsible
for administering the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 2006, 195:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2007.
