---
title: 'CHAPTER 339-B SALE OF LIQUID FUELS'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 339-B
                                             
SALE OF LIQUID FUELS
--------------------

### Section 339-B:1

 **339-B:1 Deception Prohibited. –** No person shall store, sell,
offer or expose for sale any liquid fuels, lubricating oils, greases or
other similar products in any manner whatsoever which may deceive, tend
to deceive or has the effect of deceiving the purchaser of said products
as to the nature, quality or quantity of the products so sold, exposed
or offered for sale.

**Source.** 1971, 404:1, eff. Aug. 28, 1971.

### Section 339-B:2

 **339-B:2 Used Lubricants. –** A person may store, sell, or offer
for sale any lubricating oil composed in whole or in part of previously
used lubricating oil if:
                                             
 I. The containers of the reclaimed, recleaned or reconditioned
previously used lubricating oil, lubricants or mixtures of lubricants be
plainly labeled, showing that the content thereof, is a previously used
product.
                                             
 II. No representation is made that lubricating oil is new or
unused.
                                             
 III. It is disclosed clearly and conspicuously that the lubricating
oil has been previously used, in all advertising, sales promotional
material and on each front or face panel of the container. The front or
face panel means the part of the container on which the brand name is
usually featured and which is customarily exposed to the view of
prospective purchasers when displayed at point of retail sales. The term
"re-refined,'' or any other word or term of similar import, to describe
previously used lubricating oil shall not be used unless the physical
and chemical contaminants acquired through previous use have been
removed by a refining process.

**Source.** 1971, 404:1, eff. Aug. 28, 1971.

### Section 339-B:2-a

 **339-B:2-a Mixture of Used and Virgin Oil. –** To encourage the
recycling of waste oil, a person may store or sell a mixture that
consists of at least 90 percent virgin no. 6 oil and the remainder
complying with the used fuel oil specifications in 40 CFR, section
279.11, table 1.

**Source.** 1995, 192:2, eff. Aug. 11, 1995.

### Section 339-B:3

 **339-B:3 Proper Trade Name Required. –** No person shall keep,
expose or offer for sale, or sell any liquid fuels, lubricating oils,
greases or other similar products from any container, tank, pump, or
other distributing device, other than those manufactured or distributed
by the manufacturer or distributor indicated by the name, trademark,
symbol, sign or other distinguishing mark or device appearing upon said
container, tank, pump, or other distributing device in which such
products are sold, exposed or offered for sale or distributed.

**Source.** 1971, 404:1, eff. Aug. 28, 1971.

### Section 339-B:4

 **339-B:4 Imitating Trade Names. –** It is unlawful for any person
to disguise or camouflage his own equipment by imitating the design,
symbol, trade name, or the equipment under which recognized brands of
liquid fuels, lubricating oils, and similar products are generally
marketed.

**Source.** 1971, 404:1, eff. Aug. 28, 1971.

### Section 339-B:5

 **339-B:5 Using Trademark of Another. –** No person shall expose or
offer for sale or sell under any trademark, trade name, or name or other
distinguishing mark, any liquid fuels, lubricating oils, greases, or
other similar products, other than those manufactured or distributed by
the manufacturer or distributor marketing such products under such trade
name, trademark, or name or other distinguishing mark.

**Source.** 1971, 404:1, eff. Aug. 28, 1971.

### Section 339-B:6

 **339-B:6 Mixing Fuels of Different Manufacturers. –** No person
shall mix, blend or compound the liquid fuels, lubricating oils, greases
or similar products of a manufacturer or distributor with the products
of any other manufacturer or distributor, or adulterate the same, and
expose, offer for sale, or sell such mixed, blended or compounded
products under the trade name, trademark or name or other distinguishing
mark of either of said manufacturer or distributor, or as the
unadulterated products of such manufacturer or distributor; provided,
however, that nothing herein shall prevent the lawful owner thereof from
applying its own trademark, trade name, or symbol to any product or
material.

**Source.** 1971, 404:1, eff. Aug. 28, 1971.

### Section 339-B:7

 **339-B:7 Mixing Fuels of Same Manufacturer. –** It is unlawful for
any person to mix, blend, compound or adulterate the liquid fuel,
lubricating oil, grease, or similar product of a manufacturer or
distributor with a liquid fuel, lubricating oil, grease or similar
product of the same manufacturer or distributor of a character or nature
different from the character or nature of the liquid fuel, lubricating
oil, grease or similar product so mixed, blended, compounded or
adulterated, and expose for sale, offer for sale, or sell the same as
the unadulterated product of such manufacturer or distributor, or as the
unadulterated product of any other manufacturer or distributor. Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the lawful owner of such
products from applying his own trademark, trade name or symbol to any
product or material.

**Source.** 1971, 404:1, eff. Aug. 28, 1971.

### Section 339-B:8

 **339-B:8 Gasoline Sales. –** It shall be unlawful for any person
operating a retail gasoline station to:
                                             
 I. Display, or allow to be displayed on his premises, any sign,
placard, or other advertisement relating to the retail price of gasoline
unless numerals thereon indicating fractions or portions of a whole
number are at least half the size of the largest whole number on such
sign, and no such price of gasoline shall be advertised without the tax
included.
                                             
 II. Post a different price at one pump for the same grade of
gasoline as is dispensed from another pump when both pumps are supplied
from a common storage at the same service station and when the gasoline
dispensed from both is represented to be and is sold as the same quality
of gasoline; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not prohibit
such price differences between a self-service and an attendant-operated
pump supplied from a common storage as described hereinabove.

**Source.** 1971, 404:1, eff. Aug. 28, 1971.

### Section 339-B:9

 **339-B:9 Conspiracy Prohibited. –** No person shall aid or assist
any other person in violating any of the provisions of this chapter, by
depositing or delivering into any tank, pump, receptacle, or other
container, any liquid fuels, lubricating oils, greases or other like
products, other than those intended to be stored therein, as indicated
by the name of the manufacturer or distributor, or the trademark, trade
name, name or other distinguishing mark of the product displayed on the
container itself or on the pump or other distributing device used in
connection therewith, or shall by any other means aid or assist another
in the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1971, 404:1, eff. Aug. 28, 1971.

### Section 339-B:10

 **339-B:10 Rules. –** The department of agriculture, markets, and
food shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. The commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food may adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, as
necessary for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The commissioner
shall issue stop sale orders when any product stored, sold, offered or
exposed for sales is not permanently and conspicuously labeled as
provided in this chapter. Any such illegal product shall be placed under
written stop sale order, directed to the owner or custodian, and held by
the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food or his
representative, at a place to be designated in the stop sale order,
until properly labeled by the owner or custodian and released in writing
by the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food or his
representative.

**Source.** 1971, 404:1. 1985, 300:13. 1987, 406:5. 1995, 130:4, 5, eff.
July 23, 1995.

### Section 339-B:11

 **339-B:11 Effect of Stop Sale Order. –** The attachment of a stop
sale order to any improperly labeled product is notice and warning to
all persons whomsoever, including, but not limited to, the owner or
custodian, to scrupulously refrain from moving, altering, or interfering
in any manner with any such product, or altering, defacing, or in any
way interfering with the stop sale order or permitting the same to be
done by another, except with the consent of the commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food or his representative.

**Source.** 1971, 404:1. 1985, 300:14. 1987, 406:6. 1995, 130:5, eff.
July 23, 1995.

### Section 339-B:12

 **339-B:12 Penalty for Violations. –** Any person who shall violate
any of the provisions of RSA 339-B shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
for a subsequent offense be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person,
or guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1971, 404:1. 1973, 528:239, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

Fuel Oil System Conversion
--------------------------

### Section 339-B:13

 **339-B:13 Duties of Suppliers. –** Any fuel supplier who installs a
fuel heating system, at the request of a property owner, where a fuel
oil heating system already exists, shall be responsible for the
following:
                                             
 I. Securely capping both ends of all fill pipes connected to the
fuel tank or taking such other measures as are reasonably designed to
render the fill pipes inoperable; and
                                             
 II. Providing a written recommendation to the property owner, prior
to the date of conversion, that he notify the fuel oil dealer that a
conversion shall take place for the purpose of terminating deliveries of
fuel oil to the premises.

**Source.** 1992, 263:6, eff. July 17, 1992.

Filling of Liquefied Petroleum Gas Containers
---------------------------------------------

### Section 339-B:14

 **339-B:14 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Liquefied petroleum gas'' means any material that is composed
predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons or mixtures of those
hydrocarbons:
                                             
 (a) Propane.
                                             
 (b) Propylene.
                                             
 (c) Normal Butane.
                                             
 (d) Isobutane.
                                             
 (e) Butylenos.
                                             
 II. "Owner'' means any person who holds title to a liquefied
petroleum gas container.

**Source.** 1992, 263:6, eff. July 17, 1992.

### Section 339-B:15

 **339-B:15 Unlawful Use of Containers. –** No person except the
owner, or a person authorized in writing by the owner, shall fill or
refill a liquefied petroleum gas container with a capacity of or greater
than 100 pounds with a liquefied petroleum gas or any other gas or
substance.

**Source.** 1992, 263:6, eff. July 17, 1992.

### Section 339-B:16

 **339-B:16 Penalties. –** Any person, firm or corporation, or any
officer, agent, servant or employee thereof, who violates the provisions
of RSA 339-B:13-339-B:15 shall be guilty of a violation if a natural
person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other person.

**Source.** 1992, 263:6, eff. July 17, 1992.
