---
title: 'CHAPTER 339-E SALES REPRESENTATIVES AND POST-TERMINATION COMMISSIONS'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 339-E
                                             
SALES REPRESENTATIVES AND POST-TERMINATION COMMISSIONS
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 339-E:1

 **339-E:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commission'' means compensation paid a sales representative by a
principal, the rate of which is expressed as a percentage of the dollar
amount of orders or sales of the principal's product.
                                             
 II. "Principal'' means a person who manufactures, produces, imports
or distributes a product for sale to customers who purchase the product
for resale; uses a sales representative to solicit orders for such
product; and compensates individuals who solicit orders, in whole or in
part, by commission.
                                             
 III. "Sales representative'' means an individual other than an
employee, who contracts with a principal to solicit orders and who is
compensated, in whole or in part, by commission but shall not include
one who places orders or purchases exclusively for his own account for
resale.
                                             
 IV. "Termination'' means the end of services performed by the sales
representative for the principal by discharge, resignation, or death.

**Source.** 1989, 244:1. 1990, 185:1, eff. June 26, 1990.

### Section 339-E:2

 **339-E:2 Contract. –**
                                             
 I. A sales representative and a principal shall enter into a written
contract for services to be performed within this state by a sales
representative. The written contract entered into pursuant to this
section shall contain provisions which establish:
                                             
 (a) The form of payment and the method by which such payment is
to be computed and paid;
                                             
 (b) Reasonable length of notice which either party must provide
to the other for termination of the contract;
                                             
 (c) The number of calendar days, up to a maximum of 45 days,
after the date of termination or notification of death when all
commissions due shall be paid; and
                                             
 (d) Any other terms and conditions which the parties agree to
include in such contract.
                                             
 II. The principal shall provide the sales representative a signed
copy of a written contract entered into pursuant to this section.
                                             
 III. A provision in the contract establishing venue for an action
arising under the contract in a state other than this state is void.

**Source.** 1989, 244:1. 1990, 185:2, eff. June 26, 1990.

### Section 339-E:3

 **339-E:3 Damages. –** The party who fails to comply with a
provision of a contract entered into under RSA 339-E:2 relating to
payment of a commission is liable in a civil action for damages, plus
reasonable attorney's fees and costs. The court may award exemplary
damages of up to 3 times the commission owed in an action brought under
this chapter.

**Source.** 1989, 244:1. 1997, 218:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 339-E:4

 **339-E:4 Jurisdiction. –** A principal who is not a resident of
this state who enters into a contract with a sales representative
subject to this chapter shall be considered to be doing business in this
state for purposes of the exercise of personal jurisdiction over the
principal.

**Source.** 1989, 244:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 339-E:5

 **339-E:5 Other Remedies; Combination of Claims. –** Nothing in this
chapter shall invalidate or restrict any other or additional right or
remedy available to a sales representative, or preclude a sales
representative from seeking to recover in one action on all claims
against a principal.

**Source.** 1989, 244:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 339-E:6

 **339-E:6 No Waivers by Contract. –** A provision in any contract
between a sales representative and a principal purporting to waive any
provision of this chapter, whether by expressed waiver or by a contract
subject to the laws of another state, shall be void.

**Source.** 1989, 244:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.
