---
title: CHAPTER 340 BULKY ARTICLES
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 340
                                             
BULKY ARTICLES
--------------

### Section 340:1,-2.

 **340:1, 340:2 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1959, 247:2, eff. July 1,
1961.
                                             ]

Notice of Sale of Bulky Articles
--------------------------------

### Section 340:3

 **340:3 Memorandum; Record. –** Constructive notice may be given of
a sale of grain, threshed or unthreshed, straw, corn-fodder, hay, flax,
potatoes, leaf tobacco, lumber, bark, wood or other fuel, bricks,
stones, lime, gypsum, ore, manufacturing or other machinery, or hides in
the process of tanning, by written memorandum signed by the vendor and
vendee describing the property, its location and the consideration of
such sale, and containing an affidavit as provided in RSA 340:4, and
causing the same to be filed in the office of the secretary of state or
in the registry of deeds, as the case may be, where filing is required
to perfect a security interest in such goods under RSA 382-A:9-501.

**Source.** 1895, 22:1. PL 216:39. RL 262:45. RSA 340:3. 1959, 247:2.
2001, 102:31, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 340:4

 **340:4 Affidavit. –** Such vendor and vendee shall make and
subscribe an affidavit in substance as follows: We severally swear that
the foregoing memorandum is made for the purpose of witnessing the sale
and the consideration therefor, and for no other purpose whatever; that
the amount therein stated is the true consideration, and has been
actually paid by the vendee to the vendor as specified in said
memorandum; and that said sale was not made for the purpose of enabling
the parties to execute said memorandum, but was an honest transaction
entered into in good faith between said parties.

**Source.** 1895, 22:2. PL 216:40. RL 262:46.
