---
title: CHAPTER 349 TRADE NAMES
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 349
                                             
TRADE NAMES
------------

### Section 349:1

 **349:1 Registration; Generally. –**
                                             
 I. Every sole proprietor doing business in this state under any name
other than the sole proprietor's own name, and every partnership, trust
or association doing business in this state shall register the trade
name of such business, trust or association in the manner provided in
RSA 349:5 and 349:6.
                                             
 II. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to corporations
organized under RSA 292, 293-A, 301 and 301-A, foreign corporations
registered under RSA 292, 293-A, 301 and 301-A, foreign partnerships
registered under RSA 305-A, limited liability companies and foreign
limited liability companies registered under RSA 304-C, registered
limited liability partnerships or foreign registered liability
partnerships registered under RSA 304-A, limited partnerships or foreign
limited partnerships registered under RSA 304-B or New Hampshire
investment trusts registered under RSA 293-B except as such holders of
the registrations as described in this paragraph may be doing business
under trade names other than the names under which they are registered.
                                             
 III. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to rating
organizations or insurers which engage in joint underwriting or joint
reinsurance which are referred to in, and subject to, the provisions of
RSA 413.
                                             
 IV. (a) Except as authorized by subparagraphs (b) and (c), a trade
name, based upon the records of the secretary of state, shall be
distinguishable from, and not the same as:
                                             
 (1) The name of an entity incorporated, authorized, formed, or
registered to do business in this state under RSA 292, RSA 293-A, RSA
293-B, RSA 294-A, RSA 301, RSA 301-A, RSA 304-A, RSA 304-B, RSA 304-C,
RSA 305-A, or RSA 349.
                                             
 (2) A name reserved under RSA 293-A, RSA 293-B, RSA 304-A, RSA
304-B, or RSA 304-C.
                                             
 (3) The fictitious name of another foreign corporation
authorized to transact business in this state.
                                             
 (4) The name of an agency or instrumentality of the United
States or this state or a subdivision thereof.
                                             
 (5) The name of any political party recognized under RSA
652:11, unless written consent is obtained from the authorized
representative of the political organization.
                                             
 (b) An applicant may apply to the secretary of state for
authorization to use a name that is not distinguishable from, or is the
same as, one or more of the names described in subparagraph (a), as
determined from review of the records of the secretary of state. The
secretary of state shall authorize use of the name applied for if:
                                             
 (1) The holder or holders of the name as described in
subparagraph (a) gives written consent to use the name that is not
distinguishable from the name of the applying trade name; or if the name
is the same, one or more words are added to the name to make the new
name distinguishable from the other name; or
                                             
 (2) The other entity consents to the use in writing and
submits an undertaking in a form satisfactory to the secretary of state
to change its name to a name that is distinguishable from, and not the
same as, the name of the applying trade name; or
                                             
 (3) The applicant delivers to the secretary of state a
certified copy of the final judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction establishing the applicant's right to use the name applied
for in this state.
                                             
 (c) An applicant may use the name, including the fictitious name,
of another domestic or foreign entity that is used in this state if the
other entity is incorporated, authorized, formed, or registered to
transact business in this state and the proposed user corporation has
acquired all or substantially all of the assets, including the name, of
the other entity.
                                             
 (d) No person shall use the term "farmers' market'' in a trade
name unless such use conforms to the definition in RSA 21:34-a, V. A
person having a lawfully registered trade name including the term
"farmers' market'' on the effective date of this subparagraph shall be
exempt from the prohibition established in this subparagraph.

**Source.** GS 106:1. GL 117:1. PS 121:1. 1919, 57:1. PL 155:1. RL
186:1. 1949, 119:1. RSA 349:1, 2. 1955, 284:1, par. 1. 1991, 67:6. 1996,
212:12. 2003, 150:12. 2004, 248:60. 2007, 210:1, eff. Aug. 24, 2007.
2015, 188:21, 22, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 349:2

 **349:2 Withdrawal or Addition of Partner; Discontinuance of
Business. –** Whenever any member of such partnership or association
withdraws therefrom, the partnership or association shall, within 10
days, file in the office of the secretary of state a certificate signed
by all members, including the withdrawing member, setting forth the fact
of such withdrawal, together with the date thereof. Whenever a new
member is added to such a partnership or association or joins a sole
proprietorship holding a registered trade name, the new member and
previous member or members shall, within 10 days, file in the office of
the secretary of state a certificate signed by all members, including
the new member, setting forth the facts of such addition, together with
the date thereof. If any person, partnership or association to whom the
provisions of this chapter apply shall cease to do business, a
certificate setting forth such fact and the date of such discontinuance
shall be filed with the secretary of state within 30 days thereafter.
Such certificate shall be signed by the members of such partnership or
association, or by any sole proprietor, or by his or their executors or
administrators.

**Source.** 1919, 57:2, 3. PL 155:2, 4. RL 186:2, 4. RSA 349:3, 5. 1955,
284:1 par. 2. 1985, 339:11. 1987, 393:9, eff. July 25, 1987.

### Section 349:3

 **349:3 Evidence. –** Until a certificate as specified in RSA 349:2
is filed, such failure to file shall be prima facie evidence that
withdrawal or addition of a partner or discontinuance of partnership has
not occurred.

**Source.** 1919, 57:2. PL 155:3. RL 186:3. RSA 349:4. 1955, 284:1 par.
3. 1985, 339:12, eff. June 14, 1985.

### Section 349:4

 **349:4 Nonjoinder as Defendant. –** No action commenced against any
such person, partnership or association or any member thereof, upon any
cause of action growing out of their affairs, transactions or business,
shall be abated, nor shall any attachment made upon the writ in such
action be affected, by reason of the nonjoinder of any member of such
partnership or association or individual, who has not been included in
such certificates.

**Source.** GS 106:2. GL 117:2. PS 121:2. 1919, 57:6. PL 155:9. RL
186:9. RSA 349:10. 1955, 284:1 par. 4, eff. July 1, 1955.

### Section 349:5

 **349:5 Registration; Procedure. –** Every person, proprietorship,
partnership, or association, as defined in RSA 349:1, engaged in the
conduct of any business, enterprise, venture, or activity within the
state of New Hampshire under a trade name, firm, or style shall, subject
to the limitations hereinafter set forth, file in the office of the
secretary of state a certificate signed by such person, proprietorship,
or by the members of such partnership or association stating the name
under which the business is to be conducted, the principal place of said
business, and a brief description of the kind of business to be carried
on with the names and addresses of the principal parties engaged
therein. Said registration shall further state the date of organization
of said business.

**Source.** GS 106:1. GL 117:1. PS 121:1. 1919, 57:1. PL 155:1. RL
186:1. RSA 349:1. 1955, 284:1 par. 5. 1987, 393:10. 2004, 248:61, eff.
July 1, 2004.

### Section 349:6

 **349:6 Effect of Registration. –** Registration in accordance with
the requirements of RSA 349:5 and the reservation of the name, firm or
style thereby accomplished shall be effective upon filing and continue
in force and effect upon payment of the requisite fees as provided in
RSA 349:7 for a period of 5 years after said date of filing in the
absence of earlier withdrawal or discontinuance, notice of which shall
be given in accordance with the provisions of RSA 349:2.

**Source.** 1955, 284:1 par. 6. 1985, 339:13, eff. June 14, 1985.

### Section 349:7

 **349:7 Record; Fees. –** There shall be paid to the secretary of
state for filing of registration and issuance of certificate of
registration a fee of 
                                             $50. Upon payment of said fee, the secretary of
state shall deliver to the person filing and registering such trade name
a certificate of registration under his signature and state seal showing
the name and address of the person or persons claiming ownership of the
trade name, the nature of the business thereby reserved and described
and a receipt for the payment of said fee. The fee for renewal of any
registration shall be 
                                             $50. The fee for notice of discontinuance,
addition, or withdrawal shall be 
                                             $10. The secretary shall keep a
suitable file or record of all such certificates. He shall prepare
blanks for such certificates, and shall, upon request, furnish such
blanks to persons, partnerships, or associations.

**Source.** 1919, 57:4. PL 155:5. RL 186:5. 1949, 265:10. RSA 349:6.
1955, 59:2; 284:1 par. 7. 1969, 289:7. 1977, 563:36. 1985, 339:17. 1989,
408:71, eff. Aug. 4, 1989.

### Section 349:8

 **349:8 Reregistration. –** Every person, proprietorship,
partnership or association registered in accordance with the
requirements of this subdivision shall be required to reregister at the
time of the expiration of the 5-year period set forth in RSA 349:6. The
secretary of state shall, at least 6 months prior to the expiration of
the term of registration, forward notice of the requirement of renewal
together with a proper form for such renewal. A second such notice shall
be mailed at least 30 days prior to expiration. Unless within 30 days
after expiration said registration is renewed, the registration shall be
discontinued and the name thereby abandoned and free. The secretary of
state shall cancel from his register all registrations more than 5 years
old and not renewed in accordance with the provisions of this section.

**Source.** 1955, 59:2; 284:1 par. 8. 1985, 339:14, eff. June 14, 1985.

### Section 349:9

 **349:9 Penalty. –** Any person who fails to comply with the
provisions of the preceding sections of this chapter shall be guilty of
a violation if a natural person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other
person.

**Source.** 1919, 57:6. PL 155:8. RL 186:8. RSA 349:9. 1955, 284:1 par.
9. 1973, 530:51, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 349:10

 **349:10 Fraudulent Registration; Civil Rights. –** Any person who
shall for himself, or on behalf of any other person, procure the filing
and registration of any trade name in the office of the secretary of
state, under the provisions hereof, by making any false or fraudulent
representations or declarations, verbally, or in writing, or by any
fraudulent means, shall be liable to pay all damages sustained in
consequence of any such filing, to be recovered by or on behalf of the
party injured thereby, in any court having jurisdiction, and shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if
any other person. Any person, proprietorship, partnership or association
who has adopted and registered a trade name as aforesaid may proceed by
suit to enjoin the use, display, or interference of any other firm,
person, proprietorship or association making use thereof, and all courts
of competent jurisdiction may grant injunctions to restrain such
interference, use, display, or activity, as may be by the said court
deemed just and reasonable, and may require the defendants to pay to
such person all profits derived from such wrongful interference, use,
display or activity; and such court may also order that any such
counterfeits or imitations in the possession or under the control of any
defendant in such case be delivered to an officer of the court, or to
the complainant, to be destroyed.

**Source.** 1955, 284:1 par. 10. 1973, 528:243, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at
11:59 p.m.

### Section 349:11

 **349:11 Prior Rights. –** Nothing herein shall adversely affect the
rights or the enforcement of rights in trade names acquired in good
faith at any time at common law.

**Source.** 1955, 284:1 par. 10-a, eff. July 1, 1955.

### Section 349:12

 **349:12 Names. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1998, 106:3, eff. August 1, 1998.
                                             ]
