---
title: 'CHAPTER 350-B UNIFORM TRADE SECRETS ACT'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 350-B
                                             
UNIFORM TRADE SECRETS ACT
-------------------------

### Section 350-B:1

 **350-B:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter, unless the
context requires otherwise:
                                             
 I. "Improper means'' includes theft, bribery, misrepresentation,
breach or inducement of a breach of a duty to maintain secrecy, or
espionage through electronic or other means.
                                             
 II. "Misappropriation'' means:
                                             
 (a) Acquisition of a trade secret of another by a person who
knows or has reason to know that the trade secret was acquired by
improper means; or
                                             
 (b) Disclosure or use of a trade secret of another without
express or implied consent by a person who:
                                             
 (1) Used improper means to acquire knowledge of the trade
secret; or
                                             
 (2) At the time of disclosure or use, knew or had reason to
know that his knowledge of the trade secret was derived from or through
a person who had utilized improper means to acquire it; or acquired
under circumstances giving rise to a duty to maintain its secrecy or
limit its use; or derived from or through a person who owed a duty to
the person seeking relief to maintain its secrecy or limit its use; or
                                             
 (3) Before a material change of his position, knew or had
reason to know that it was a trade secret and that knowledge of it had
been acquired by accident or mistake.
                                             
 III. "Person'' means a natural person, corporation, business trust,
estate, trust, partnership, association, joint venture, government,
governmental subdivision or agency, or any other legal or commercial
entity.
                                             
 IV. "Trade secret'' means information, including a formula, pattern,
compilation, program, device, method, technique, or process, that:
                                             
 (a) Derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from
not being generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable by
proper means by, other persons who can obtain economic value from its
disclosure or use; and
                                             
 (b) Is the subject of efforts that are reasonable under the
circumstances to maintain its secrecy.

**Source.** 1989, 220:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 350-B:2

 **350-B:2 Injunctive Relief. –**
                                             
 I. Actual or threatened misappropriation may be enjoined. Upon
application to the court, an injunction shall be terminated when the
trade secret has ceased to exist, but the injunction may be continued
for an additional reasonable period of time in order to eliminate
commercial advantage that otherwise would be derived from the
misappropriation.
                                             
 II. In exceptional circumstances, an injunction may condition future
use upon payment of a reasonable royalty for no longer than the period
of time for which use could have been prohibited. Exceptional
circumstances include, but are not limited to, a material and
prejudicial change of position prior to acquiring knowledge or reason to
know of misappropriation that renders a prohibitive injunction
inequitable.
                                             
 III. In appropriate circumstances, affirmative acts to protect a
trade secret may be compelled by court order.

**Source.** 1989, 220:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 350-B:3

 **350-B:3 Damages. –**
                                             
 I. Except to the extent that a material and prejudicial change of
position prior to acquiring knowledge or reason to know of
misappropriation renders a monetary recovery inequitable, a complainant
is entitled to recover damages for misappropriation. Damages can include
both the actual loss caused by misappropriation and the unjust
enrichment caused by misappropriation that is not taken into account in
computing actual loss. In lieu of damages measured by any other methods,
the damages caused by misappropriation may be measured by imposition of
liability for a reasonable royalty for a misappropriator's unauthorized
disclosure or use of a trade secret.
                                             
 II. If willful and malicious misappropriation exists, the court may
award exemplary damages in an amount not exceeding twice any award made
under paragraph I.

**Source.** 1989, 220:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 350-B:4

 **350-B:4 Attorneys' Fees. –** The court may award reasonable
attorneys' fees to the prevailing party when:
                                             
 I. A claim of misappropriation is made in bad faith;
                                             
 II. A motion to terminate an injunction is made or resisted in bad
faith; or
                                             
 III. Willful and malicious misappropriation exists.

**Source.** 1989, 220:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 350-B:5

 **350-B:5 Preservation of Secrecy. –** In an action under this
chapter, a court shall preserve the secrecy of an alleged trade secret
by reasonable means, which may include granting protective orders in
connection with discovery proceedings, holding in-camera hearings,
sealing the records of the action, and ordering any person involved in
the litigation not to disclose an alleged trade secret without prior
court approval.

**Source.** 1989, 220:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 350-B:6

 **350-B:6 Statute of Limitations. –** An action for misappropriation
shall be brought within 3 years after the misappropriation is discovered
or by the exercise of reasonable diligence should have been discovered.
For the purposes of this section, a continuing misappropriation
constitutes a single claim.

**Source.** 1989, 220:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 350-B:7

 **350-B:7 Effect on Other Law. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph II, this chapter displaces
conflicting tort, restitutionary, and other law of this state providing
civil remedies for misappropriation of a trade secret.
                                             
 II. This chapter shall not affect:
                                             
 (a) Contractual remedies, whether or not based upon
misappropriation of a trade secret;
                                             
 (b) Other civil remedies that are not based upon misappropriation
of a trade secret; or
                                             
 (c) Criminal remedies, whether or not based upon misappropriation
of a trade secret.

**Source.** 1989, 220:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 350-B:8

 **350-B:8 Uniformity of Application and Construction. –** This
chapter shall be applied and construed to effectuate its general purpose
to make uniform the law with respect to the subject of this chapter
among states enacting it.

**Source.** 1989, 220:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 350-B:9

 **350-B:9 Short Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the Uniform
Trade Secrets Act.

**Source.** 1989, 220:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.
