---
title: 'CHAPTER 350-A MODEL STATE TRADEMARK ACT'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 350-A
                                             
MODEL STATE TRADEMARK ACT
-------------------------

### Section 350-A:1

 **350-A:1 Definitions. –**
                                             
 I. The term "trademark'' as used herein means any word, name,
symbol, or device or any combination thereof adopted and used by a
person to identify goods made or sold by him and to distinguish them
from goods made or sold by others.
                                             
 II. The term "service mark'' as used herein means a mark used in the
sale or advertising of services to identify the services of one person
and distinguish them from the services of others.
                                             
 III. The term "mark'' as used herein includes any trademark or
service mark entitled to registration under this chapter whether
registered or not.
                                             
 IV. The term "trade name'' means a word, name, symbol, device or any
combination thereof used by a person to identify his business, vocation
or occupation and distinguish it from the business, vocation or
occupation of others.
                                             
 V. The term "person'' as used herein means any individual, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, union or other organization.
                                             
 VI. The term "applicant'' as used herein embraces the person filing
an application for registration of a trademark under this chapter, his
legal representatives, successors or assigns.
                                             
 VII. The term "registrant'' as used herein embraces the person to
whom the registration of a trademark under this chapter is issued, his
legal representatives, successors or assigns.
                                             
 VIII. For the purposes of this chapter, a trademark shall be deemed
to be "used'' in this state (a) on goods when it is placed in any manner
on the goods or their containers or the displays associated therewith or
on the tags or labels affixed thereto and such goods are sold or
otherwise distributed in the state, and (b) on services when it is used
or displayed in the sale or advertising of services and the services are
rendered in this state.

**Source.** 1969, 448:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 350-A:2

 **350-A:2 Registrability. –** A mark by which the goods or services
of any applicant for registration may be distinguished from the goods or
services of others shall not be registered if it:
                                             
 I. Consists of or comprises immoral, deceptive or scandalous matter;
or
                                             
 II. Consists of or comprises matter which may disparage or falsely
suggest a connection with persons, living or dead, institutions,
beliefs, or national symbols, or bring them into contempt, or disrepute;
or
                                             
 III. Consists of or comprises, the flag or coat of arms or other
insignia of the United States, or of any state or municipality, or of
any foreign nation, or any simulation thereof; or
                                             
 IV. Consists of or comprises the name, signature or portrait of any
living individual, except with his written consent; or
                                             
 V. Consists of a mark which, (a) when applied to the goods or
services of the applicant, is merely descriptive or deceptively
misdescriptive of them, or, (b) when applied to the goods or services of
the applicant, is primarily geographically descriptive or deceptively
misdescriptive of them, or (c) is primarily merely a surname; provided,
however, that nothing in this paragraph shall prevent the registration
of a mark used in this state by the applicant which has become
distinctive of the applicant's goods or services. The secretary of state
may accept as evidence that the mark has become distinctive, as applied
to the applicant's goods or services, proof of continuous use thereof as
a mark by the applicant in this state or elsewhere for the 5 years next
preceding the date of the filing of the application for registration;
or
                                             
 VI. Consists of or comprises a mark which so resembles a mark
registered in this state or a mark or trade name previously used in this
state by another and not abandoned, as to be likely, when applied to the
goods or services of the applicant, to cause confusion or mistake or to
deceive.

**Source.** 1969, 448:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 350-A:3

 **350-A:3 Application for Registration. –** Subject to the
limitations set forth in this chapter, any person who adopts and uses a
mark in this state may file in the office of the secretary of state, on
a form to be furnished by the secretary of state, an application for
registration of that mark setting forth, but not limited to, the
following information:
                                             
 I. The name and business address of the person applying for such
registration; and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation,
                                             
 II. The goods or services in connection with which the mark is used
and the mode or manner in which the mark is used in connection with such
goods or services and the class in which such goods or services fall,
                                             
 III. The date when the mark was first used anywhere and the date
when it was first used in this state by the applicant or his predecessor
in business, and
                                             
 IV. A statement that the applicant is the owner of the mark and that
no other person has the right to use such mark in this state either in
the identical form thereof or in such near resemblance thereto as might
be calculated to deceive or to be mistaken therefor. The application
shall be signed and verified by the applicant or by a member of the firm
or an officer of the corporation or association applying. The
application shall be accompanied by a specimen or facsimile of such mark
in triplicate. The application for registration shall be accompanied by
a filing fee of 
                                             $50 payable to the secretary of state.

**Source.** 1969, 448:1. 1977, 563:37. 1990, 3:27, eff. Feb. 20, 1990.

### Section 350-A:4

 **350-A:4 Certificate of Registration. –**
                                             
 I. Upon compliance by the applicant with the requirements of this
chapter, the secretary of state shall cause a certificate of
registration to be issued and delivered to the applicant. The
certificate of registration shall be issued under the signature of the
secretary of state and the seal of the state, and it shall show the name
and business address and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation,
of the person claiming ownership of the mark, the date claimed for the
first use of the mark anywhere and the date claimed for the first use of
the mark in this state, the class of goods or services and a description
of the goods or services on which the mark is used, a reproduction of
the mark, the registration date and the term of the registration.
                                             
 II. Any certificate of registration issued by the secretary of state
under the provisions hereof or a copy thereof duly certified by the
secretary of state shall be admissible in evidence as competent and
sufficient proof of the registration of such mark in any action or
judicial proceedings in any court of this state.

**Source.** 1969, 448:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 350-A:5

 **350-A:5 Duration and Renewal. –**
                                             
 I. Registration of a mark hereunder shall be effective for a term of
10 years from the date of registration and, upon application filed
within 6 months prior to the expiration of such term, on a form to be
furnished by the secretary of state, the registration may be renewed for
a like term. A renewal fee of 
                                             $50, payable to the secretary of state,
shall accompany the application for renewal of the registration.
                                             
 II. A mark registration may be renewed for successive periods of 10
years in like manner.
                                             
 III. The secretary of state shall notify registrants of marks
hereunder of the necessity of renewal within the year next preceding the
expiration of the 10 years from the date of registration, by writing to
the last known address of the registrants.
                                             
 IV. Any registration in force on September 1, 1969, shall expire 10
years from the date of registration or of the last renewal thereof or
one year after September 1, 1969, whichever is later, and may be renewed
by filing an application with the secretary of state on a form furnished
by him and paying the aforementioned renewal fee therefor within 6
months prior to the expiration of the registration.
                                             
 V. All applications for renewals under this chapter, whether of
registrations made under this chapter or of registrations effected under
any prior act, shall include a statement that the mark is still in use
in this state.
                                             
 VI. The secretary of state shall within 6 months after September 1,
1969, notify all registrants of marks under previous acts of the date of
expiration of such registrations unless renewed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, by writing to the last known address of the
registrants.

**Source.** 1969, 448:1. 1990, 3:28, eff. Feb. 20, 1990.

### Section 350-A:6

 **350-A:6 Assignment. –** Any mark and its registration hereunder
shall be assignable with the good will of the business in which the mark
is used, or with that part of the good will of the business connected
with the use of and symbolized by the mark. Assignment shall be by
instruments in writing duly executed and may be recorded with the
secretary of state upon the payment of a fee of 
                                             $10, payable to the
secretary of state who, upon recording of the assignment, shall issue in
the name of the assignee a new certificate for the remainder of the term
of the registration or of the last renewal thereof. An assignment of any
registration under this chapter shall be void as against any subsequent
purchaser for valuable consideration without notice, unless it is
recorded with the secretary of state within 3 months after the date
thereof or prior to such subsequent purchase.

**Source.** 1969, 448:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 350-A:7

 **350-A:7 Records. –** The secretary of state shall keep for public
examination a record of all marks registered or renewed under this
chapter.

**Source.** 1969, 448:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 350-A:8

 **350-A:8 Cancellation. –** The secretary of state shall cancel from
the register:
                                             
 I. After September 1, 1970, all registrations under prior acts which
are more than 10 years old and not renewed in accordance with this
chapter;
                                             
 II. Any registration concerning which the secretary of state shall
receive a voluntary request for cancellation thereof from the registrant
or the assignee of the record;
                                             
 III. All registrations granted under this chapter and not renewed in
accordance with the provisions hereof;
                                             
 IV. Any registration concerning which a court of competent
jurisdiction shall find
                                             
 (a) that the registered mark has been abandoned,
                                             
 (b) that the registrant is not the owner of the mark,
                                             
 (c) that the registration was granted improperly,
                                             
 (d) that the registration was obtained fraudulently.
                                             
 V. When a court of competent jurisdiction shall order cancellation
of a registration on any ground.

**Source.** 1969, 448:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 350-A:9

 **350-A:9 Classification. –** The following general classes of goods
and services are established for convenience of administration of this
chapter, but not to limit or extend the applicant's or registrant's
rights, and a single application for registration of a mark may include
any or all goods upon which, or services with which, the mark is
actually being used comprised in a single class, but in no event shall a
single application include goods or services upon which the mark is
being used which fall within different classes of goods or services.
                                             
 The said classes are as follows:
                                             
 I. Goods:
                                             
 (1) Raw or partly prepared materials
                                             
 (2) Receptacles
                                             
 (3) Baggage, animal equipments, portfolios, and pocketbooks
                                             
 (4) Abrasives and polishing materials
                                             
 (5) Adhesives
                                             
 (6) Chemicals and chemical compositions
                                             
 (7) Cordage
                                             
 (8) Smokers' articles, not including tobacco products
                                             
 (9) Explosives, firearms, equipments, and projectiles
                                             
 (10) Fertilizers
                                             
 (11) Inks and inking materials
                                             
 (12) Construction materials
                                             
 (13) Hardware and plumbing and steam-fitting supplies
                                             
 (14) Metals and metal castings and forgings
                                             
 (15) Oils and greases
                                             
 (16) Paints and painters' materials
                                             
 (17) Tobacco products
                                             
 (18) Medicines and pharmaceutical preparations
                                             
 (19) Vehicles
                                             
 (20) Linoleum and oiled cloth
                                             
 (21) Electrical apparatus, machines, and supplies
                                             
 (22) Games, toys, and sporting goods
                                             
 (23) Cutlery, machinery, and tools, and parts thereof
                                             
 (24) Laundry appliances and machines
                                             
 (25) Locks and safes
                                             
 (26) Measuring and scientific appliances
                                             
 (27) Horological instruments
                                             
 (28) Jewelry and precious-metal ware
                                             
 (29) Brooms, brushes, and dusters
                                             
 (30) Crockery, earthenware, and porcelain
                                             
 (31) Filters and refrigerators
                                             
 (32) Furniture and upholstery
                                             
 (33) Glassware
                                             
 (34) Heating, lighting, and ventilating apparatus
                                             
 (35) Belting, hose, machinery packing, and non-metallic tires
                                             
 (36) Musical instruments and supplies
                                             
 (37) Paper and stationery
                                             
 (38) Prints and publications
                                             
 (39) Clothing
                                             
 (40) Fancy goods, furnishings, and notions
                                             
 (41) Canes, parasols, and umbrellas
                                             
 (42) Knitted, netted and textile fabrics, and substitutes
therefor
                                             
 (43) Thread and yarn
                                             
 (44) Dental, medical, and surgical appliances
                                             
 (45) Soft drinks and carbonated waters
                                             
 (46) Foods and ingredients of foods
                                             
 (47) Wines
                                             
 (48) Malt beverages and liquors
                                             
 (49) Distilled alcoholic liquors
                                             
 (50) Merchandise not otherwise classified
                                             
 (51) Cosmetics and toilet preparations
                                             
 (52) Detergents and soaps
                                             
 II. Services:
                                             
 (100) Miscellaneous
                                             
 (101) Advertising and business
                                             
 (102) Insurance and financial
                                             
 (103) Construction and repair
                                             
 (104) Communications
                                             
 (105) Transportation and storage
                                             
 (106) Material treatment
                                             
 (107) Education and entertainment

**Source.** 1969, 448:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 350-A:10

 **350-A:10 Fraudulent Registration. –** Any person who shall for
himself, or on behalf of any other person, procure the filing or
registration of any mark in the office of the secretary of state under
the provisions hereof, by knowingly making any false or fraudulent
representation or declaration, verbally or in writing, or by any other
fraudulent means, shall be liable to pay all damages sustained in
consequence of such filing or registration, to be recovered by or on
behalf of the party injured thereby in any court of competent
jurisdiction.

**Source.** 1969, 448:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 350-A:11

 **350-A:11 Infringement. –** Subject to the provisions of RSA
350-A:13, any person who shall:
                                             
 I. Use, without the consent of the registrant, any reproduction,
counterfeit, copy, or colorable imitation of a mark registered under
this chapter in connection with the sale, offering for sale, or
advertising of any goods or services on or in connection with which such
use is likely to cause confusion or mistake or to deceive as to the
source of origin of such goods or services; or
                                             
 II. Reproduce, counterfeit, copy or colorably imitate any such mark
and apply such reproduction, counterfeit, copy or colorable imitation to
labels, signs, prints, packages, wrappers, receptacles, or
advertisements intended to be used upon or in conjunction with the sale
or other distribution in this state of such goods or services;
                                             
shall be liable to a civil action by the owner of such registered mark
for any or all of the remedies provided in RSA 350-A:12, except that
under paragraph II the registrant shall not be entitled to recover
profits or damages unless the acts have been committed with knowledge
that such mark is intended to be used to cause confusion or mistake or
to deceive.

**Source.** 1969, 448:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 350-A:12

 **350-A:12 Injury to Business Reputation; Dilution. –** Likelihood
of injury to business reputation or of dilution of the distinctive
quality of a mark registered under this chapter, or a mark valid at
common law, or a trade name valid at common law, shall be a ground for
injunctive relief notwithstanding the absence of competition between the
parties or the absence of confusion as to the source of goods or
services.

**Source.** 1969, 448:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 350-A:13

 **350-A:13 Remedies. –**
                                             
 I. Any owner of a mark registered under this chapter may proceed by
suit to enjoin the manufacture, use, display or sale of any counterfeits
or imitations thereof and any court of competent jurisdiction may grant
injunctions to restrain such manufacture, use, display or sale as may be
by the said court deemed just and reasonable, and may require the
defendants to pay to such owner all profits derived from and/or all
damages suffered by reason of such wrongful manufacture, use, display or
sale; and such court may also order that any such counterfeits or
imitations in the possession or under the control of any defendant in
such case be delivered to an officer of the court, or to the
complainant, to be destroyed.
                                             
 II. The enumeration of any right or remedy herein shall not affect a
registrant's right to prosecute under any penal law of this state.

**Source.** 1969, 448:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 350-A:14

 **350-A:14 Common Law Rights. –** Nothing herein shall adversely
affect the rights or the enforcement of rights in marks acquired in good
faith at any time at common law.

**Source.** 1969, 448:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 350-A:15

 **350-A:15 Severability. –** If any provision hereof, or the
application of such provision to any person or circumstance is held
invalid, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.

**Source.** 1969, 448:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.
