---
title: 'CHAPTER 351-A VIDEOTAPE RENTAL AND SALES RECORDS'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 351-A
                                             
VIDEOTAPE RENTAL AND SALES RECORDS
----------------------------------

### Section 351-A:1

 **351-A:1 Videotape Rental or Sales Records; Confidentiality. –**
                                             
 I. Videotape rental or sales records which contain the names or
other personal identifying information regarding the renters or
purchasers of videotapes shall be confidential and shall not be
disclosed by any person or other entity renting or selling such
videotapes except as provided in paragraph II.
                                             
 II. Records described in paragraph I may be disclosed to the extent
necessary for the proper operation of such videotape rental and sales
establishments and shall be disclosed:
                                             
 (a) Upon request by or consent of the renter or the renter's or
buyer's parent or guardian in the case of a minor;
                                             
 (b) To law enforcement agencies for the purpose of an ongoing
criminal investigation regarding theft or failure to return videotapes;
                                             
 (c) Pursuant to subpoena or court order;
                                             
 (d) Where otherwise required by statute; or
                                             
 (e) To any person if the disclosure is limited to debt collection
activities, order fulfillment, request processing or the transfer of
ownership.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any
videotape rental or sales establishment from releasing statistical
information and other data regarding the circulation or use of videotape
rental or sales materials, provided, however, that the identity of the
renters or purchasers of such videotape rental or sales materials shall
be considered confidential and shall not be disclosed to the general
public except as provided in paragraph II. In the case of mail order
sales, such statistical information and other data may include the names
and addresses of persons who have purchased videotapes and the subject
matter of such videotapes, as long as no other information about the
videotapes, including title and content, is disclosed.

**Source.** 1990, 134:2, eff. June 18, 1990.
