---
title: CHAPTER 351 BRANDED CONTAINERS
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 351
                                             
BRANDED CONTAINERS
------------------

### Section 351:1

 **351:1 Registration of Markings. –** A person engaged in buying,
selling or dealing in milk or cream in cans, cases, boxes, bottles, jars
or jugs, or bottling or selling beverages in bottles or vessels with his
name and the word "registered'' branded, engraved, blown or otherwise
produced thereon, or on the boxes used by him, may register the same by
filing in the office of the clerk of the city or town in which his
principal place of business is situated, or in the office of the
secretary of state, a description of the name so used by him, and
publishing such description once in each of 2 successive weeks in a
newspaper, if any, published in the city or town in which his principal
place of business is situated; otherwise, in a newspaper published in
the county. The fee for registration with the secretary of state shall
be 
                                             $2 for each brand so registered.

**Source.** 1903, 120:1. PL 170:10. 1931, 37:1. 1935, 85:1. RL 207:10.
1949, 265:14, eff. June 22, 1949.

### Section 351:2

 **351:2 Unauthorized Use. –** Whoever fills with milk, cream or any
manufactured beverage any registered container, or defaces, erases,
covers up or otherwise removes or conceals the name or the word
"registered'' thereon, or sells, uses, buys, gives, takes or otherwise
disposes of or traffics in the same, without the written consent of, or
unless the same has been purchased from, the person who registered the
same shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of
a felony if any other person, for each offense.

**Source.** 1903, 120:2. 1915, 36:1. PL 170:11. RL 207:11. RSA 351:2.
1973, 528:244, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 351:3

 **351:3 Evidence. –** The use by any person, without the written
consent of, or purchase from, the owner thereof, or the possession by
any milk dealer, junk dealer, or dealer in secondhand articles, of any
registered container, without the written consent of, or purchase from,
the owner thereof shall be prima facie evidence of unlawful use,
possession of or traffic in the same.

**Source.** 1903, 120:3. 1915, 36:2. PL 170:12. 1935, 85:2. RL 207:12.

### Section 351:4

 **351:4 Search Warrants. –** Upon complaint of a person who has
complied with the provisions of RSA 351:1, or his agent, to a municipal
court, district or superior court, that he has reason to believe that
any of his registered containers are being unlawfully used, or that a
milk dealer, junk dealer or dealer in secondhand articles, or a vendor
of cans or bottles, has any such cans, cases, boxes, bottles, jars, jugs
or vessels in his possession, or secreted in any place, said justice may
issue a search warrant, may cause the person in whose possession such
property is found to be brought before him, and shall inquire into the
circumstances of such possession, and award possession of the property
taken upon such search warrant to the owner thereof.

**Source.** 1903, 120:4. PL 170:13. 1935, 85:3. RL 207:13.
