---
title: 'CHAPTER 352-A COPYING OF RECORDED DEVICES'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 352-A
                                             
COPYING OF RECORDED DEVICES
---------------------------

### Section 352-A:1

 **352-A:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Owner'' means the person who owns the original fixation of
sounds embodied in the master phonograph record, master disc, master
tape, master film or other device used for reproducing recorded sounds
on phonograph records, discs, tapes, films or other articles on which
sound is recorded and from which the transferred sounds are directly or
indirectly derived.
                                             
 II. "Performer'' means a person or persons appearing in a
performance, whether live before an audience or transmitted by radio,
television or other means.
                                             
 III. "Person'' means any natural person, group, firm, partnership,
corporation, association, or any other legal entity.

**Source.** 1973, 332:1. 1977, 371:1, eff. Aug. 30, 1977.

### Section 352-A:2

 **352-A:2 Acts Prohibited. –** It shall be unlawful for any person
to:
                                             
 I. Knowingly transfer or cause to be transferred to any article on
which sounds are recorded, directly or indirectly by any means, with the
intent to sell such article or cause it to be sold or to be used for
profit:
                                             
 (a) Any sounds recorded on a phonograph record, disc, wire, tape,
film, or other article on which sounds are recorded, without prior
express written consent of the owner; or
                                             
 (b) Any performance, whether live before an audience or
transmitted by radio, television or other means, without the prior
express written consent of the performer.
                                             
 II. Advertise, sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail,
distribute, or possess for such purpose, any article on which sounds are
recorded, if such person knew or should have known that such article:
                                             
 (a) embodies any sounds transferred from a phonograph record,
disc, wire, tape, film or other article, without the prior express
written consent of the owner; or
                                             
 (b) embodies any performance, whether live before an audience or
transmitted by radio or television or other means, without the prior
express written consent of the performer.
                                             
Possession of 5 or more duplicate copies or 20 or more individual copies
of such recorded articles, produced without the consent of the owner or
performer, shall create a rebuttable presumption that such articles are
intended for sale or distribution in violation of this section.
                                             
 III. This section does not apply to:
                                             
 (a) Any motion picture or any sound recording initially fixed on
or after February 15, 1972; or
                                             
 (b) Any person who transfers, or causes to be transferred, any
such sounds intended for or in connection with:
                                             
 (1) broadcast or telecast transmissions or related uses,
provided the transferor is engaged in licensed radio or television
broadcasting;
                                             
 (2) archival purposes; or
                                             
 (3) home or personal use, without involving compensation or
profit.

**Source.** 1973, 332:1. 1977, 371:2. 1995, 175:1, 2, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 352-A:3

 **352-A:3 Identification Required. –** Every recorded device sold or
possessed for the purpose of sale by any manufacturer, distributor,
wholesale or retail merchant shall contain on its packaging the name and
address of the manufacturer and the name of the actual performer, artist
or group; provided, however, that the term "manufacturer'' shall not
include the manufacturer of the cartridge or casing itself, or the
physical medium used on which to make the recording.

**Source.** 1973, 332:1. 1977, 371:3, eff. Aug. 30, 1977.

### Section 352-A:4

 **352-A:4 Civil Remedies. –** This chapter shall neither enlarge nor
diminish the rights of parties in civil litigation.

**Source.** 1973, 332:1. 1977, 371:4, eff. Aug. 30, 1977.

### Section 352-A:5

 **352-A:5 Criminal Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who violates any provision of RSA 352-A:2, I, shall be
guilty of a class B felony. Each individual manufacture of such recorded
article shall constitute a separate offense.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any provision of RSA 352-A:2, II, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                             
 III. (a) Any recorded article produced or offered for sale in
violation of this chapter shall be subject to seizure by law enforcement
authorities pending disposition of the charge, and, upon final
conviction of the accused, shall be subject to forfeiture and
destruction by the appropriate law enforcement agency.
                                             
 (b) Any equipment, devices or components used in the production
of such articles in violation of this chapter shall be subject to
seizure by law enforcement authorities pending disposition of the charge
and, upon final conviction of the accused, shall be subject to
forfeiture and destruction, disposition, or sale at auction by the
appropriate law enforcement agency, in the discretion and upon order of
the trial court.

**Source.** 1977, 371:5, eff. Aug. 30, 1977.
