---
title: 'CHAPTER 354-B CIVIL RIGHTS ACT'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 354-B
                                             
CIVIL RIGHTS ACT
----------------

### Section 354-B:1

 **354-B:1 Civil Rights Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. All persons have the right to engage in lawful activities and to
exercise and enjoy the rights secured by the United States and New
Hampshire Constitutions and the laws of the United States and New
Hampshire without being subject to actual or threatened physical force
or violence against them or any other person or by actual or threatened
damage to or trespass on property when such actual or threatened conduct
is motivated by race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender, or disability. "Threatened physical force'' and
"threatened damage to or trespass on property'' is a communication, by
physical conduct or by declaration, of an intent to inflict harm on a
person or a person's property by some unlawful act with a purpose to
terrorize or coerce.
                                             
 II. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or attempt to
interfere with the rights secured by this chapter.

**Source.** 1999, 325:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 354-B:2

 **354-B:2 Civil Action by Attorney General. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever the attorney general has probable cause to believe that
any person has violated any provision of this chapter, the attorney
general may bring a civil action for injunctive or other appropriate
equitable relief.
                                             
 II. The civil action brought by the attorney general shall be filed
in the superior court or, in the case of a child under the age of 17,
either in superior court or the district court in the county or judicial
district where the alleged violator resides or where the alleged conduct
occurred. In the case of a child under the age of 17, all such
proceedings shall be confidential.
                                             
 III. Testimony given during civil proceedings held under this
chapter by a person alleged to have violated any provision of this
chapter shall not be admissible in a criminal proceeding against that
person when the criminal proceeding is based on the same event.
                                             
 IV. In a civil action brought under this chapter, the attorney
general shall have the burden of proving the violation by clear and
convincing evidence.

**Source.** 1999, 325:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 354-B:3

 **354-B:3 Remedies. –** Each violation of this chapter is a civil
violation for which the court may impose any of the following:
                                             
 I. A civil penalty of not more than 
                                             $5,000 for each violation.
                                             
 II. Such appropriate injunctive relief as the court may deem
necessary to prevent continued violation of this chapter or to protect
lawful exercise of the rights secured by this chapter.
                                             
 III. Other equitable relief, including restitution to any person
damaged by the violation. For the purposes of this paragraph
"restitution'' means out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the person
damaged by the violation to the extent not covered by other sources.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section shall limit the right of the person
damaged by the violation to pursue any other appropriate cause of
action.

**Source.** 1999, 325:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 354-B:4

 **354-B:4 Violation of Civil Injunction, Criminal Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. A person who knowingly violates a temporary restraining order or
preliminary or permanent injunction issued under this chapter shall be
guilty of a class A misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. Each temporary restraining order or preliminary or permanent
injunction issued under this chapter shall include a statement
describing the penalties provided in this chapter for knowing violation
of the order or injunction. Any combination of injunctions issued under
this chapter shall be for a total period of time not to exceed 3 years
but may be extended by order of the court upon motion by the attorney
general.
                                             
 III. The clerk of the appropriate court shall transmit one certified
copy of each order or injunction issued under this chapter to the
appropriate law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the location
where the defendant is alleged to have committed the act giving rise to
the action and to the law enforcement agency where the defendant
resides, if different.
                                             
 IV. All actions brought under this chapter shall have priority in
the court scheduling in the court in which the action is brought.
Superior court rules relative to temporary restraining orders and
injunctions shall apply in actions brought in district courts under this
chapter.

**Source.** 1999, 325:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 354-B:5

 **354-B:5 Applicability to Persons Under the Age of 17. –**
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an action may be brought in
superior court against a person under the age of 17 under this chapter.
All provisions of this chapter shall apply to such actions.

**Source.** 1999, 325:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 354-B:6

 **354-B:6 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or
applications, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.

**Source.** 1999, 325:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.
