---
title: 'CHAPTER 356-C PROTECTION OF TENANTS IN CONVERSION OF RENTAL UNITS'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 356-C
                                             
PROTECTION OF TENANTS IN CONVERSION OF RENTAL UNITS
---------------------------------------------------

### Section 356-C:1

 **356-C:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. "Conversion'' means a change in the character of residential
real property from a rental to an ownership basis. A condominium, stock
cooperative or other similar arrangement shall be deemed ownership in
character.
                                             
 III. "Disabled tenant'' means a tenant who is receiving aid to the
totally and permanently disabled from the New Hampshire division of
human services, disability benefits from the social security
administration or benefits for total disability from the department of
veterans affairs.
                                             
 IV. "Elderly tenant'' means a tenant who is 65 years of age or
older.
                                             
 V. "Tenant'' means a person who has entered into a lease or other
contractual arrangement with the owner.
                                             
 VI. "Tenant household'' means one or more persons, whether related
or not, who occupy a dwelling unit in residential real property on a
rental basis pursuant to a valid lease or oral or written rental
agreement.

**Source.** 1983, 398:1. 1985, 300:29, IV.

### Section 356-C:2

 **356-C:2 Applicability. –**
                                             
 I. This chapter shall apply to the conversion of all residential
real property in the state of New Hampshire except:
                                             
 (a) The conversion of any building, building complex or
manufactured housing park having 10 or fewer than 10 dwelling units;
provided, however, that, if the conversion of a building, building
complex or manufactured housing park having more than 10 dwelling units
is conducted in stages of 10 or fewer than 10 units at any time, this
chapter shall be applicable to any such conversion;
                                             
 (b) The conversion of any nursing home, dormitory, boarding
house, motel, hotel, dwelling unit normally occupied by transient
persons for periods of 3 months or less or dwelling unit occupied on a
seasonal basis for fewer than 6 months of the year;
                                             
 (c) The conversion of any dwelling unit which is individually
owned but has been rented.
                                             
 II. This chapter shall not apply to a conversion which has been
registered under RSA 356-A or 356-B prior to June 22, 1983, or, if
registration was not required, if either condominium instruments had
been recorded in the registry of deeds in accordance with RSA 356-B:7
prior to June 22, 1983, or if a formal offering of sale to prospective
buyers had been made prior to June 22, 1983. This chapter shall apply to
a conversion with respect to which an application for registration had
been filed in proper form under RSA 356-A or 356-B, but for which
registration had not been granted, prior to June 22, 1983, to the extent
provided in RSA 356-C:3, II; 356-C:5; 356-C:8 and 356-C:9.
                                             
 III. A conversion subject to this chapter shall be registered under
RSA 356-A or 356-B, as appropriate, notwithstanding any exemption to the
contrary contained in those chapters, unless the conversion is exempted
by action of the attorney general pursuant to RSA 356-A or 356-B.

**Source.** 1983, 398:1. 1985, 300:7, I(b).

### Section 356-C:3

 **356-C:3 Provision of Rights; Contents of Notice. –**
                                             
 I. No conversion subject to this chapter shall be effected until:
                                             
 (a) The owner or his agent has mailed to each tenant by
registered mail, return receipt requested, a notice of intent to convert
no earlier than 120 days before the date of filing an application for
registration under RSA 356-A or 356-B, as appropriate, which notice
shall contain the following information:
                                             
 (1) That the owner intends to convert the tenant's dwelling
unit into a condominium, stock cooperative or other ownership
arrangement;
                                             
 (2) The name of the owner or owners of the real property and
the number of dwelling units in the building or buildings to be
converted;
                                             
 (3) That the conversion must be registered with the attorney
general before the owner may offer or sell dwelling units in the
building or buildings to be converted;
                                             
 (4) That the owner has submitted, or intends to submit within
120 days, an application for registration of the conversion with the
attorney general under RSA 356-A or 356-B, as appropriate, and that the
attorney general may take up to 60 days to act upon the application;
                                             
 (5) That, if the conversion is not yet registered with the
attorney general, the owner shall notify each tenant of the registration
or of the withdrawal of the application at such time as it occurs;
                                             
 (6) That, if the dwelling unit is to be retained without
substantial alteration in its physical layout, the tenant has the
exclusive right to contract for the purchase of the unit that the tenant
occupies for a period of 60 days from the time of receipt of the sale
documents;
                                             
 (7) That any tenant residing in the building at the time of
the receipt of this notice shall have no less than 270 days from the
receipt of the notice or until the expiration of the 60 day period in
which the tenant has an exclusive right to purchase his or her dwelling
unit, whichever is later, before being required to vacate. If the tenant
has valid leasehold rights which provide for a longer term of occupancy
than provided by this section, such tenant shall not be required to
vacate the unit until the longer term has expired;
                                             
 (8) That a tenant who is elderly or disabled at the time
notice is given shall have at least 18 months from the receipt of this
notice before the tenant shall be required to vacate the unit; provided,
however, any such tenant shall be required to show that he qualifies as
an elderly or disabled tenant within the meaning of this chapter;
                                             
 (9) That, notwithstanding any of the foregoing, the tenant may
be evicted pursuant to the provisions of RSA 356-C:6, which provisions
shall be set forth in full or summary form in the notice;
                                             
 (10) That, notwithstanding any obligation contained in a lease
or other contractual arrangement to the contrary, except for an
obligation contained in a lease or other contractual arrangement entered
into before June 22, 1983, the tenant may terminate his tenancy without
penalty or liability upon giving notice to the owner or his agent at
least 30 days prior to termination; and
                                             
 (11) Such other information as the attorney general deems
necessary or advisable to effectuate the purposes of this chapter;
                                             
 (12) That, notwithstanding any provision of this notice, if
there is a rent increase, except for those increases under RSA 356-C:6,
I(a), application for condominium conversion shall not be made until 3
months after such increase; and
                                             
 (b) The owner or his agent has mailed to each tenant by
registered mail, return receipt requested, a registration notice after
the conversion has been registered under RSA 356-A or 356-B, as
appropriate, which notice shall contain the following information:
                                             
 (1) That the owner or his agent has registered the conversion
with the attorney general;
                                             
 (2) That the time periods described in subparagraphs I(a)(6),
(7), (8) and (12) shall expire on specified dates; and
                                             
 (3) Such other information as the attorney general deems
necessary or advisable to effectuate the purposes of this chapter; and
                                             
 (c) The owner or his agent may consolidate the notices described
herein into one notice if registration of the conversion has occurred
prior to notice of intent to convert being sent to the tenants.
                                             
 II. No residential property for which an application for
registration has been filed in proper form under RSA 356-A or 356-B, but
not registered, prior to June 22, 1983, shall be converted until, no
earlier than the date upon which the conversion is registered, the owner
or his agent has mailed to each tenant by registered mail, return
receipt requested, a notice containing the following information:
                                             
 (a) The information required by subparagraphs I(a)(1), (2), and
(6); and
                                             
 (b) That the owner or his agent has registered the conversion
with the attorney general; and
                                             
 (c) That any tenant residing in the building at the time of the
receipt of this notice shall have 90 days from the receipt of the notice
or until the expiration of the 60 day period in which the tenant has an
exclusive right to purchase his unit, whichever is later, before being
required to vacate. If the tenant has valid leasehold rights which
provide for a longer term of occupancy than provided in this section,
such tenant shall not be required to vacate the unit until the longer
term has expired.
                                             
 III. The notice described in subparagraph I(a) shall be void if the
owner or his agent fails to make application for registration under RSA
356-A or 356-B, as appropriate, within 120 days after mailing the notice
to tenants.
                                             
 IV. Any person whose tenancy begins after service of the notices
required under this section shall not be provided with the protections
of this chapter if he or she was given written notice of the impending
conversion before entering into the lease for other contractual
arrangement.

**Source.** 1983, 398:1. 1985, 300:7, I(b). 1987, 320:5, 6, eff. May 25,
1987.

### Section 356-C:4

 **356-C:4 Filing Notices With Attorney General. –** The notices
required under RSA 356-C:3, I, shall be filed with the attorney general
at least 10 days prior to their being mailed to any tenant.

**Source.** 1983, 398:1. 1985, 300:7, I(b).

### Section 356-C:5

 **356-C:5 Exclusive Right to Purchase. –**
                                             
 I. Any tenant entitled to notice under RSA 356-C:3, I and II, shall
have an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of the unit that he
occupies, provided that the unit is to be retained without substantial
alteration in its physical layout. Such tenant shall be given all
documents provided to the general public or to any other tenant as a
part of the offering for sale. Each tenant shall have 60 days from the
time of receipt of the sales documents to exercise his exclusive right
to purchase. The exclusive right to purchase shall expire prior to the
expiration of the 60 day period upon the tenant's voluntarily giving
notice of termination of his lease or rental agreement or vacating his
unit, whichever is earlier.
                                             
 II. Failure to comply with this section shall render a sale to any
person or entity other than the tenant voidable at the option of the
tenant if the tenant exercises this option before giving notice of
termination or vacating the premises.

**Source.** 1983, 398:1, eff. June 22, 1983.

### Section 356-C:6

 **356-C:6 Eviction Protection. –** Once notice has been served on
the tenant in accordance with RSA 356-C:3, I or II, the tenant shall not
be evicted from his dwelling unit except upon the following grounds:
                                             
 I. Nonpayment of rent or other reasonable charges due under the
lease or rental agreement, provided that:
                                             
 (a) No owner or his agent shall charge, and no tenant shall be
liable for, any rent increase other than increases which are based on
the unit's pro rata share of increases in insurance, fuel oil, gas,
electricity, water or sewer costs, real property taxes and maintenance
and operational expenses, which directly or indirectly benefit the
tenant. Rental increases are prohibited if based on:
                                             
 (1) Assessments against the unit for improvements to the
converted property; and
                                             
 (2) Increased tax assessments due to conversion of the
residential property of which the unit is a part;
                                             
 (b) In any action for nonpayment based on the tenant's failure to
pay an increase, the court shall determine how much of the proposed
increase is permissible and allow the tenant 30 days to pay such sum. If
the tenant pays the amount of the increase ordered by the court within
the 30 day period, any eviction action shall be dismissed.
                                             
 II. Failure of the tenant to comply with material terms of the lease
or rental agreement if the tenant is first given written notice of the
failure to comply and a reasonable opportunity to comply;
                                             
 III. Damage by the tenant to the dwelling unit, reasonable wear and
tear excepted, and failure by the tenant to repair the damage within a
reasonable time;
                                             
 IV. Repeated conduct of the tenant which disturbs the peace and
quiet of other tenants;
                                             
 V. Expiration of the notice period under RSA 356-C:3, I or II; or
                                             
 VI. If applicable, there is no longer in residence in the dwelling
unit an elderly or disabled tenant of the tenant household who occupied
the unit at the time the notice was given under RSA 356-C:3, I or II.

**Source.** 1983, 398:1, eff. June 22, 1983.

### Section 356-C:7

 **356-C:7 Waiver Prohibited. –** No lease or rental agreement, oral
or written, shall contain any provision by which the tenant
prospectively waives any of his rights under this chapter; and any such
waiver shall be deemed contrary to public policy and shall be
unenforceable and void.

**Source.** 1983, 398:1, eff. June 22, 1983.

### Section 356-C:8

 **356-C:8 Circumvention of This Chapter. –** No owner or his agent
acting alone or with other persons shall attempt to circumvent or
circumvent the protections given tenants under RSA 356-C:6; nor shall
any such person willfully cause a tenant to vacate the dwelling unit or
to be evicted from the unit without good cause in contemplation of
conversion before the issuance of the notices required by RSA 356-C:3, I
or II. Nothing in this chapter shall make it unlawful for a landlord to
evict a tenant at any time for one of the grounds set forth in RSA
356-C:6.

**Source.** 1983, 398:1, eff. June 22, 1983.

### Section 356-C:9

 **356-C:9 Damages; Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. An owner or his agent who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be liable in a court of competent jurisdiction to any tenant
injured by such violation in an amount equal to double the actual
damages suffered; provided, however, if RSA 356-C:8 is violated, the
owner or his agent shall be liable to such tenant in an amount equal to
actual damages or 
                                             $1,000, whichever is greater. A tenant which prevails
in any action brought under this section shall be entitled to recover
reasonable attorney's fees and costs.
                                             
 II. An action commenced under paragraph I by any member of the
tenant household shall bar any other action under said paragraph by any
other member of the household. Any damages awarded to the tenant
household shall be distributed to the members thereof in equal
proportions or as the court, in its sole discretion, may otherwise
determine.
                                             
 III. A payment in good faith in settlement of any claim or action
arising under paragraph I to any member of the tenant household shall
bar any other claim or action thereunder by any other member of the
household.

**Source.** 1983, 398:1, eff. June 22, 1983.

### Section 356-C:10

 **356-C:10 Reimbursement of Owner's Costs. –** If a tenant refuses
to pay a permissible rent increase under RSA 356-C:6, I(a), or brings an
action under RSA 356-C:9, I, on grounds found by a court in either case
to be frivolous or solely for the purposes of harassment, the tenant
shall be liable to the owner for any costs incurred by the owner in
connection with any such proceedings, including reasonable attorney's
fees.

**Source.** 1983, 398:1, eff. June 22, 1983.

### Section 356-C:11

 **356-C:11 Rulemaking Authority. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 300:30, eff.
July 1, 1987.
                                             ]
