---
title: CHAPTER 356 COMBINATIONS AND MONOPOLIES
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 356
                                             
COMBINATIONS AND MONOPOLIES
---------------------------

### Section 356:1

 **356:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter the following terms
shall have the following meaning:
                                             
 I. "Commodity'' shall include tangible or intangible property, real,
personal, or mixed.
                                             
 II. "Government entity'' shall include the state of New Hampshire
and its political subdivisions.
                                             
 III. "Person'' shall include, where applicable, natural persons,
trusts, government entities, corporations, partnerships, limited
partnerships, proprietorships, incorporated or unincorporated
associations, and any other legal entity.
                                             
 IV. "Service'' shall include any activity which is performed in
whole or in part for financial gain.
                                             
 V. "Trade or commerce'' shall include any economic activity
involving or relating to any commodity or service, and any other
business activity.

**Source.** 1917, 177:2. 1919, Ex., 2:1. PL 168:1. RL 202:1. RSA 356:1.
1979, 385:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 356:2

 **356:2 Restraints Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. Every contract, combination, or conspiracy in restraint of trade
is unlawful.
                                             
 II. Every contract, combination, or conspiracy is unlawful which has
the purpose or the effect of:
                                             
 (a) Fixing, controlling or maintaining prices, rates, quotations
or fees in any part of trade or commerce; or
                                             
 (b) Fixing, controlling, maintaining, limiting or discontinuing
the production, manufacture, mining, sale or distribution of any
commodity or service; or
                                             
 (c) Allocating or dividing customers or markets in any part of
trade or commerce; or
                                             
 (d) Refusing to deal, or coercing, persuading or inducing any
person to refuse to deal, with another person; or
                                             
 (e) Fixing or controlling the price quotation of any bid for a
public or private contract, submitting sham or complementary bids, or
controlling the submission of bids including refusals to bid.

**Source.** 1917, 177:2. 1919, Ex., 2:1. PL 168:2. RL 202:2. RSA 356:2.
1979, 385:3, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 356:3

 **356:3 Monopolies Prohibited. –** The establishment, maintenance or
use of monopoly power, or any attempt to establish, maintain or use
monopoly power over trade or commerce for the purpose of affecting
competition or controlling, fixing or maintaining prices is unlawful.

**Source.** 1917, 177:3. PL 168:3. RL 202:3. RSA 356:3. 1979, 385:3,
eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 356:4

 **356:4 Penalties. –** A person who knowingly and willfully engages
in conduct prohibited by this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other person. When the
offense consists of a combination to control the price or supply, or to
prevent competition in the sale, of foodstuffs or fuel, the person thus
engaged shall be guilty of a class B felony if a natural person, or
guilty of a felony if any other person. Each day's violation of any
provision of RSA 356 shall constitute a separate offense.

**Source.** 1917, 177:4. PL 168:4. RL 202:4. RSA 356:4. 1973, 528:248.
1979, 385:4, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 356:4-a

 **356:4-a Civil Remedies and Enforcement. –** Notwithstanding the
provisions of RSA 356:4:
                                             
 I. The attorney general may bring an action in the name of the state
for injunctive relief and civil penalties for violations of any
provision of this chapter. The action may be brought in the superior
court of the county in which the defendant resides or has his principal
place of business, or, with the consent of the parties or if the
defendant is a nonresident and has no place of business within the
state, in the superior court of Merrimack county.
                                             
 II. The attorney general is authorized to bring an action for
violations of this chapter as parens patriae on behalf of natural
persons residing in the state. Whether the injured persons dealt
directly or indirectly with the defendant shall not bar this action or
otherwise limit recovery.

**Source.** 1973, 434:1. 2007, 336:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 356:4-b

 **356:4-b State Remedies. –** In any action brought pursuant to RSA
356:4-a the superior court may assess, for the benefit of the state, a
civil penalty of not more than 
                                             $25,000 for each violation of any
provision of this chapter. The superior court may also grant mandatory
injunctions reasonably necessary to eliminate restrictions in trade or
commerce declared unlawful by this chapter. In any such action, the
state shall be entitled to recover the costs of the action. In any
action brought pursuant to RSA 356:4-a, II, the state shall recover
actual damages sustained, and as determined by the court, the costs of
the suit and reasonable attorney's fees. If the trier of facts finds
that the violation is willful or flagrant, the court shall award as much
as 3 times, but not less than 2 times the actual damages.

**Source.** 1973, 434:1. 1979, 385:5. 2007, 336:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 356:4-c

 **356:4-c Actual Damages. –** The state, a political subdivision
thereof, or any public agency injured in its business or property by
reason of a violation of this chapter may recover the actual damages
sustained and the costs of the suit including reasonable attorney's
fees. The state, political subdivision, or public agency shall recover
regardless of whether it dealt directly or indirectly with the
defendant.

**Source.** 1973, 434:1. 2007, 336:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 356:4-d

 **356:4-d Election of Remedies. –**
                                             
 I. Institution of an action under RSA 356:4-a to assess a civil
penalty against a person shall preclude the institution of criminal
proceedings under RSA 356:4 against that person for the conduct alleged
in the civil action.
                                             
 II. Institution of criminal prosecution against a person under RSA
356:4 shall preclude the institution of civil proceedings under RSA
356:4-a against that person for the conduct specified in the information
or indictment.

**Source.** 1979, 385:6, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 356:4-e

 **356:4-e Prima Facie Evidence. –**
                                             
 I. A final judgment or decree rendered in any civil or criminal
proceeding under this chapter brought by the state, to the effect that a
defendant has violated RSA 356:2 or 3 shall be prima facie evidence
against such defendant in any action or proceeding brought by any other
party against such defendant under RSA 356:11 as to all matters
respecting which the judgment obtained by the state would be an estoppel
as between the parties thereto.
                                             
 II. This section does not apply to consent judgments or decrees
entered before any testimony has been given in a hearing on the merits.

**Source.** 1979, 385:6, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 356:5

 **356:5 Procedure. –** A complaint or indictment under this chapter
shall proceed to judgment according to the regular course of criminal
proceedings. It shall be otherwise disposed of only upon motion in
writing stating specifically the reasons therefor and verified by
affidavit if facts are relied on. If the court or magistrate certifies
in writing that he is satisfied that the cause relied on exists, and
that the interests of public justice require the allowance thereof, such
motion shall be allowed and said certificate filed in the case.

**Source.** 1917, 177:5. PL 168:5. RL 202:5.

### Section 356:6

 **356:6 Testimonial Privilege. –** No person called as a witness to
testify at any proceedings under this chapter shall be excused from
testifying, or from producing any books, papers or documents which are
material, on the ground that his testimony will tend to incriminate him;
but no person shall be prosecuted or subjected to any penalty or
forfeiture for or on account of any transaction, matter or thing
concerning which he may testify or produce evidence, documentary or
otherwise, in any such proceeding.

**Source.** 1917, 177:6. PL 168:6. RL 202:6.

### Section 356:7

 **356:7 Exemption of Labor Organizations, Etc. –** Nothing contained
in this chapter shall forbid the existence and operation of labor,
agricultural or horticultural organizations, instituted for the purposes
of mutual help and not having capital stock or conducted for profit, or
to forbid or restrain individual members of such organizations from
lawfully carrying out the legitimate objects thereof.

**Source.** 1917, 177:7. PL 168:7. RL 202:7. RSA 356:7. 1979, 385:7,
eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 356:8

 **356:8 Exemption of Agricultural Producers. –** An organization
enumerated in RSA 356:7, or the members thereof, if they have a capital
stock, shall be exempt from this chapter, if they are operating in
conformity with chapter 57 of the Laws of the Second Session of the
Sixty-seventh Congress, entitled, "An Act to authorize association of
producers of agricultural products''.

**Source.** 1917, 177:8. 1923, 120:1. PL 168:8. RL 202:8. RSA 356:8.
1979, 385:8, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 356:8-a

 **356:8-a Exemption for Authorized Activity. –** Activities of and
arrangements between persons shall be exempt from this chapter if such
are permitted, authorized, approved, required, or regulated by a
regulatory body acting under a federal or state statutory scheme or
otherwise actively supervised by a regulatory agency.

**Source.** 1979, 385:9. 1999, 289:10, eff. July 1, 1999.

### Section 356:9

 **356:9 Enforcement. –** This chapter shall be enforced by the
department of justice.

**Source.** 1919 Sp., 2:2. PL 168:9. RL 202:9. RSA 356:9. 1979, 385:10.
1985, 300:7, I(a).

### Section 356:10

 **356:10 Official Investigation. –**
                                             
 I. The attorney general shall have the power to examine witnesses
and documents for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter.
                                             
 II. If the attorney general believes a person under investigation
for violation of the provisions of this chapter may have information or
be in possession, custody or control of any document or other tangible
object relevant to the investigation, before the institution of any
court proceedings, the attorney general may serve upon the person a
written demand in the form of a subpoena or subpoena duces tecum to
appear and be examined under oath and to produce the documents or
objects for inspection and copying. A subpoena or subpoena duces tecum
of the attorney general may be served by the person designated therein
to serve it. The attorney general may administer an oath or affirmation
to any person and conduct hearings in aid of any investigation under
this chapter. Any testimony given by any person so sworn shall be
subject to the pains and penalties of perjury.
                                             
 III. Any subpoena issued pursuant to this chapter shall:
                                             
 (a) Describe the nature of the conduct constituting the violation
under investigation;
                                             
 (b) Describe the documents or objects with sufficient
definiteness to permit them to be fairly identified;
                                             
 (c) Prescribe a reasonable time at which the person shall appear
to testify or within which the documents or objects shall be produced,
and advise the person that objections to or reasons for not complying
with the subpoena may be filed with the attorney general on or before
that date;
                                             
 (d) Specify a place for the taking of testimony or for production
and designate a person who shall be custodian of the documents or
objects.
                                             
 IV. If a person objects to or otherwise fails to comply with the
subpoena or subpoena duces tecum served upon him under this chapter, the
attorney general may file in the superior court of the county in which
the person resides or maintains his principal place of business or if
the person is a nonresident and has no principal place of business
within this state, in Merrimack county superior court, a petition for an
order of the court to enforce the subpoena. Notice of hearing and a copy
of the petition shall be served upon the person, who may appear in
opposition to the petition. If the court finds reasonable cause to
believe that there may have been a violation of any provision of this
chapter and that the testimony, documents or objects subpoenaed are
relevant to the investigation, it shall order the person to appear for
testimony or to produce the document or object for inspection and
copying as demanded, subject to any modification of the subpoena the
court prescribes.
                                             
 V. Any procedure, testimony taken or document or object produced
under this chapter shall be kept confidential by the attorney general
before the institution against the person of an action brought under
this chapter for the violation under investigation unless
confidentiality is waived by the person or disclosure is authorized by
the superior court.
                                             
 VI. In any investigation authorized under this section, the attorney
general shall have the authority to engage the services of consultants,
experts, accountants, economists, analysts, and other assistants. When
the investigation constitutes the review of a proposed merger of 2 or
more entities and is conducted prior to the merger, the reasonable
expenses related to these assistants shall be a direct charge to the
parties proposing the merger. In any action to enforce this chapter
pursuant to RSA 356:4-a, the expenses related to these assistants shall
be added to the reasonable costs of the enforcement action and shall be
recoverable as set out in RSA 356:4-b.

**Source.** 1973, 434:2, eff. Aug. 29, 1973. 2014, 64:1, eff. July 26,
2014.

### Section 356:11

 **356:11 Private Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. Any person threatened with injury or damage to his business or
property by reason of a violation of this chapter may institute an
action or proceeding for injunctive relief when and under the same
conditions and principles as injunctive relief is granted in other
cases.
                                             
 II. Any person injured in his business or property by reason of a
violation of this chapter may recover the actual damages sustained, and
as determined by the court, the costs of the suit and reasonable
attorney's fees regardless of whether that person dealt directly or
indirectly with the defendant. If the trier of facts finds that the
violation is willful or flagrant, they may increase damages to an amount
not in excess of 3 times the actual damages sustained.

**Source.** 1973, 434:2. 2007, 336:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 356:12

 **356:12 Limitation of Actions. –**
                                             
 I. A civil action commenced pursuant to RSA 356:4-a to recover a
civil penalty is barred if not commenced within 4 years after the cause
of action accrues.
                                             
 II. An action commenced pursuant to RSA 356:4-c and RSA 356:11 to
recover damages is barred if it is not commenced within 4 years after
the cause of action accrues, or within one year after the conclusion of
any action or proceeding commenced pursuant to RSA 356:4-a.

**Source.** 1973, 434:2, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 356:13

 **356:13 Definition. –** For the purposes of this chapter, "person''
shall mean an individual, corporation, trust, estate, partnership,
association, or any other legal entity.

**Source.** 1973, 434:2, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 356:14

 **356:14 Interpretation of Statute. –** In any action or prosecution
under this chapter, the courts may be guided by interpretations of the
United States' antitrust laws.

**Source.** 1973, 434:2, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.
