---
title: 'CHAPTER 357-F DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION RELATING TO MUSICAL PERFORMANCES'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 357-F
                                             
DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION RELATING TO MUSICAL PERFORMANCES
----------------------------------------------------------

### Section 357-F:1

 **357-F:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Musical performance'' means a musical performance, show, concert
or other cultural event which includes vocal performances.
                                             
 II. "Person'' means any corporation, company, association, firm,
partnership, and joint stock company as well as any individual.
                                             
 III. "Place of musical entertainment'' means any privately or
publicly owned and operated entertainment facility within the state,
such as a theater, stadium, arena or other place where musical
performances are held and for which an entry fee is charged.
                                             
 IV. "Promoter'' means any person who produces, arranges, or stages a
musical performance.
                                             
 V. "Ticket'' means any piece of paper which indicates that the
bearer has paid for entry or other evidence which permits entry to a
place of musical entertainment.
                                             
 VI. "Ticket agent'' means any person who is involved in the business
of selling or reselling tickets or admission to a musical performance
who charges a premium in excess of the price, plus taxes, printed on the
ticket.

**Source.** 1992, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 357-F:2

 **357-F:2 Disclosure Required. –** When the promoter knows, prior to
the sale of any tickets for a musical performance which includes, either
in whole or in part, vocal performances, the promoter shall disclose
whether all the lead vocals consist of played recordings rather than the
actual singing of those vocalists during that performance. The
disclosure required under this section shall consist of the following:
                                             
 I. Notice, in writing, to the place of musical entertainment where
the musical performance is to be held; and
                                             
 II. Notice, in writing, to every ticket agent receiving tickets for
the musical performance in which all the lead vocals consist of played
recordings rather than the actual singing of those vocalists.

**Source.** 1992, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 357-F:3

 **357-F:3 Duties of Place of Musical Entertainment. –**
                                             
 I. A place of musical entertainment shall, upon receipt of a
promoter's disclosure that all the lead vocals consist of played
recordings rather than the actual singing of those vocalists, print on
the face of each ticket, in a prominent and conspicuous manner,
substantially the following: "(Insert name of lead vocalist or musical
group) VOCALS PRE-RECORDED.''
                                             
 II. In addition to the requirements under paragraph I, the place of
musical entertainment shall, in each advertisement for that musical
performance, provide the following:
                                             
 (a) In each printed advertisement in a prominent and conspicuous
manner, a disclosure that either all the lead vocals consist of played
recordings rather than the actual singing of the lead vocalists. The
disclosure shall consist of substantially the following: "(Insert name
of lead vocalist or musical group) VOCALS ARE PRE-RECORDED.''
                                             
 (b) In each radio or telecommunication advertisement in a clear
and prominent manner, a statement consisting of substantially the
following statement: "THE LEAD VOCALS IN THIS MUSICAL PERFORMANCE ARE
PRE-RECORDED AND WILL NOT ACTUALLY BE SUNG BY (Insert name of lead
vocalist or musical group) DURING THIS SHOW.''

**Source.** 1992, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 357-F:4

 **357-F:4 Duties of Ticket Agent. –** Every ticket agent receiving
tickets for sale or resale to a musical performance in which all the
lead vocals consist of played recordings rather than the actual singing
of the lead vocalists, shall:
                                             
 I. Display, in a location immediately adjacent to the booth,
counter, or window where the tickets are sold, a prominent and
conspicuous notice consisting of substantially the following: "THE LEAD
VOCALS IN (Insert name of musical performance) ARE PRE-RECORDED AND WILL
NOT ACTUALLY BE SUNG BY (Insert name of lead vocalist or musical group)
DURING THIS SHOW.''
                                             
 II. State, prior to the completion of any telephone sales
transaction involving tickets to a musical performance in which all the
lead vocals consist of played recordings rather than the actual singing
of the lead vocalists, substantially the following: "THE LEAD VOCALS IN
(Insert name of musical performance) ARE PRE-RECORDED AND WILL NOT
ACTUALLY BE SUNG BY (Insert name of lead vocalist or musical group)
DURING THIS SHOW.''

**Source.** 1992, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 357-F:5

 **357-F:5 Penalties. –** Notwithstanding title LXII:
                                             
 I. Any ticket agent who violates the provisions of RSA 357-F:4 shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. Any promoter or place of musical entertainment violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1992, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 357-F:6

 **357-F:6 Enforcement. –** The attorney general shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter and shall adopt such rules, pursuant to RSA
541-A, as he deems reasonable and necessary in order to properly carry
out his duties under this chapter.

**Source.** 1992, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.
