---
title: 'CHAPTER 357-G EVENT DATA RECORDING DEVICES IN MOTOR VEHICLES'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 357-G
                                             
EVENT DATA RECORDING DEVICES IN MOTOR VEHICLES
----------------------------------------------

### Section 357-G:1

 **357-G:1 Event Data Recorders. –**
                                             
 I. As used in this section, "owner'' means a person having all the
incidents of ownership, including legal title of a vehicle, whether or
not such persons lends, rents, or creates a security interest in the
vehicle; a person entitled to the possession of a vehicle as the
purchaser under a security agreement; or the person entitled to
possession of the vehicle as lessee pursuant to a written lease
agreement, provided such agreement at its inception is for a period in
excess of 3 months.
                                             
 II. As used in the section, "event data recorder'' means a device
that is installed by the manufacturer of the vehicle and does one or
more of the following, for the purposes of capturing data for retrieval
after a crash:
                                             
 (a) Records vehicle speed or direction.
                                             
 (b) Records vehicle location data.
                                             
 (c) Records vehicle steering performance.
                                             
 (d) Records vehicle brake performance, including but not limited
to, whether brakes were applied before a crash.
                                             
 (e) Records the driver's seatbelt status.
                                             
 (f) Has the ability to transmit information concerning a crash in
which the motor vehicle has been involved to a central communications
system or other external device when a crash occurs.
                                             
 III. A manufacturer of a new motor vehicle sold or leased in this
state, which is equipped with one or more event data recorders,
including "sensing and diagnostic modules,'' shall disclose that fact in
the owner's manual for the vehicle.
                                             
 IV. If a vehicle is registered in this state, any event data
recorder in the vehicle and any data recorded on any event data recorder
in the vehicle is the property of the owner of the vehicle. Data
described in paragraph II that is recorded on any event data recorder
may not be downloaded or otherwise retrieved by a person other than the
owner of the motor vehicle at the time of the event, except under one of
the following circumstances:
                                             
 (a) The owner of the motor vehicle or the owner's agent or legal
representative consents to the retrieval of the information.
                                             
 (b) In response to an order of a court.
                                             
 (c) The data is retrieved by a motor vehicle dealer, or by an
automotive technician for the purpose of diagnosing, servicing, or
repairing the motor vehicle.
                                             
 (d) The data is retrieved for the purpose of determining the need
for or facilitating emergency medical response in the event of a motor
vehicle crash.
                                             
 V. (a) If a motor vehicle is equipped with an event data recorder
device that is capable of recording or transmitting information as
described in subparagraphs II(b) or II(f) and that capability is part of
a subscription service, the fact that the information may be recorded or
transmitted shall be disclosed in the terms and conditions of the
subscription service agreement.
                                             
 (b) Paragraph IV shall not apply to subscription services meeting
the requirements of V(a).
                                             
 VI. Violations of this section shall constitute an unfair or
deceptive act or practice under RSA 358-A:2.
                                             
 VII. This section applies to all motor vehicles manufactured on or
after July 1, 2006.

**Source.** 2006, 95:1, eff. July 1, 2006.
