---
title: |
    CHAPTER 357-E REGULATION OF MANUFACTURERS, DISTRIBUTORS AND DEALERS OF
    NEW TRUCKS
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 357-E
                                             
REGULATION OF MANUFACTURERS, DISTRIBUTORS AND DEALERS OF NEW TRUCKS
-------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 357-E:1

 **357-E:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Motor vehicle'' means any motor vehicle as defined by RSA
357-C:1.
                                             
 II. "Truck'' means any motor vehicle with not more than 6 wheels
which is intended, designed or constructed to carry not more than 2,000
pounds of freight or merchandise.
                                             
 III. "New truck'' means any truck which has been sold only to a
truck dealer by a manufacturer or distributor for the sale of that make
of truck, which is in fact new, and on which the original title has not
been issued from such dealer.
                                             
 IV. "Truck dealer'' means any person who:
                                             
 (a) Is in the business of selling, offering to sell, soliciting
or advertising the sale of new trucks, either as his primary business or
incidental thereto; and
                                             
 (b) Holds a valid sales and service agreement, franchise or
contract, granted by the manufacturer or distributor for the sale of its
new trucks.
                                             
 V. "Manufacturer'' means any person who manufactures or assembles
new trucks or any partnership, firm, association, joint venture,
corporation or trust, which is controlled by the manufacturer.
                                             
 VI. "Distributor'' means any person who sells or distributes new
trucks to truck dealers.

**Source.** 1983, 430:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1984.

### Section 357-E:2

 **357-E:2 Label Required. –** Every manufacturer or distributor of
new trucks shall, before the delivery of any new truck to any truck
dealer, securely affix a label to the rear window on the passenger's
side of such truck and shall clearly, distinctly and legibly endorse on
such label correct entries disclosing the following information
concerning such truck:
                                             
 I. The make, model, and serial or identification number or numbers;
                                             
 II. The final assembly point;
                                             
 III. The name and the location of the place of business of the
dealer to whom it is to be delivered;
                                             
 IV. The name of the city or town at which it is to be delivered to
such dealer;
                                             
 V. The method of transportation used in making delivery of such
truck if it is driven or towed from final assembly point to place of
delivery;
                                             
 VI. The retail price of such truck suggested by the manufacturer;
                                             
 VII. The retail delivered price suggested by the manufacturer for
each accessory or item of optional equipment, physically attached to
such truck at the time of its delivery to such dealer, which is not
included within the price of such truck as stated pursuant to paragraph
VI;
                                             
 VIII. The amount charged, if any, to such dealer for the
transportation of such truck to the location at which it is delivered to
such dealer; and
                                             
 IX. The total of the amounts specified pursuant to paragraphs VI,
VII, and VIII.

**Source.** 1983, 430:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1984.

### Section 357-E:3

 **357-E:3 Exclusions. –** In the event that a motor vehicle dealer
purchases a new truck from an out-of-state party other than the
manufacturer or distributor of such truck, the provisions of RSA 357-E:2
shall not apply.

**Source.** 1983, 430:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1984.

### Section 357-E:4

 **357-E:4 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any manufacturer or distributor who willfully fails to affix to
any new truck the label required by RSA 357-E:2 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than 
                                             $1,000. Such failure with
respect to each truck shall constitute a separate offense.
                                             
 II. Any manufacturer or dealer who willfully fails to endorse
clearly, distinctly and legibly and label as required by RSA 357-E:2 or
who makes a false endorsement of any such label shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than 
                                             $1,000. Such failure or
false endorsement with respect to each truck shall constitute a separate
offense.
                                             
 III. Any person who willfully removes, alters or renders illegible
any label affixed to a new truck pursuant to RSA 357-E:2, or any
endorsement on such label, prior to the time that such truck is
delivered to the actual custody and possession of the ultimate purchaser
of such new truck, except in the event such truck is rerouted,
repurchased or reacquired by the manufacturer of such truck, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Such removal, alteration, or rendering
illegible with respect to each truck shall constitute a separate
offense.

**Source.** 1983, 430:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1984.
