---
title: 'CHAPTER 357-D NEW MOTOR VEHICLE ARBITRATION'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 357-D
                                             
NEW MOTOR VEHICLE ARBITRATION
-----------------------------

### Section 357-D:1

 **357-D:1 Intent. –** The legislature finds and declares that
manufacturers, distributors and importers of new motor vehicles should
be obligated to provide speedy and less costly resolution of automobile
warranty problems. Manufacturers should be required to provide in as
expeditious a manner as possible a refund of the consumer's purchase
price, payments to a lessor and lessee, or a replacement vehicle that is
acceptable to the consumer whenever the manufacturer is unable to make
the vehicle conform with its applicable warranty. New motor vehicle
dealers and used motor vehicle dealers cannot be sued under this
chapter.

**Source.** 1991, 222:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 357-D:2

 **357-D:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means the New Hampshire new motor vehicle arbitration
board.
                                             
 II. "Business day'' means any day during which the service
departments of authorized dealers of the manufacturer of the motor
vehicle are normally open for business.
                                             
 III. "Consumer'' means the purchaser, other than for purposes of
resale of a new motor vehicle; the lessee of a new motor vehicle, other
than for the purpose of sublease; any person to whom such motor vehicle
is transferred during the duration of an express warranty applicable to
the motor vehicle; or any other person entitled by the terms of the
warranty to enforce the obligations of the warranty. "Consumer'' shall
not include any governmental entity.
                                             
 IV. "Distributor'' means any person who sells or distributes new or
used motor vehicles to motor vehicle dealers or who maintains
distributor representatives within this state.
                                             
 V. "Early termination costs'' means expenses and obligations
incurred by a motor vehicle lessee as a result of an early termination
of a written lease agreement and surrender of a motor vehicle to a
manufacturer, including penalties for prepayment of finance
arrangements.
                                             
 VI. "Factory branch'' means any branch office maintained by a
manufacturer for the purpose of selling, leasing, or offering for sale
or lease, vehicles to a distributor or new motor vehicle dealer or for
directing or supervising, in whole or in part, factory distributor
representatives.
                                             
 VII. "Lease'' or "leased'' means a written agreement with a lessee
which shall be for the use of a motor vehicle for consideration for a
term of 2 or more years.
                                             
 VIII. "Lessee'' means any consumer who leases a motor vehicle
pursuant to a written lease agreement for a term of 2 or more years.
                                             
 IX. "Manufacturer'' means any person, resident or nonresident, who
manufactures or assembles new motor vehicles, or imports for
distribution through distributors of motor vehicles or any partnership,
firm, association, joint venture, corporation or trust, resident or
nonresident, which is controlled by a manufacturer. The term
"manufacturer'' includes distributors and factory branches.
                                             
 X. "Motor vehicle'' means:
                                             
 (a) A motor vehicle, as defined in RSA 259:60, of the private
passenger or station wagon type with a gross weight not exceeding 11,000
pounds that is purchased or leased by a consumer; or
                                             
 (b) Any other 4-wheel motor vehicle with a gross weight not
exceeding 11,000 pounds, except tractors, and mopeds; or
                                             
 (c) Motorcycles; or
                                             
 (d) Any off highway recreational vehicle as defined in RSA
215-A:1, VI.
                                             
 (e) Any snowmobile as defined in RSA 215-C:1, XV and RSA 357-C:1,
XXVI.
                                             
 XI. "Motor vehicle dealer'' means any person engaged in the business
of selling, offering to sell, leasing, soliciting or advertising the
sale of new or used motor vehicles or possessing motor vehicles for the
purpose of resale either on his own account or on behalf of another,
either as his primary business or incidental thereto. However, "motor
vehicle dealer'' shall not include:
                                             
 (a) Receivers, trustees, administrators, executors, guardians, or
other persons appointed by or acting under judgment, decree or order of
any court; or
                                             
 (b) Public officers while performing their duties as such
officers.
                                             
 XII. "Motor vehicle lessor'' means a person who holds title to a
motor vehicle leased to a lessee under written lease agreement for a
term of 2 or more years, or who holds the lessor's rights under such an
agreement.
                                             
 XIII. "New motor vehicle'' means a passenger motor vehicle which is
still under the manufacturer's express warranty.
                                             
 XIV. "Nonconformity'' means a defect or condition that substantially
impairs the use, value or safety of a motor vehicle, but does not
include a defect or condition that results from an accident, abuse,
neglect, modification, or alteration of the motor vehicle by persons
other than the manufacturer or its authorized service agent.
                                             
 XV. "Warranty'' includes express warranties as defined in the
Uniform Commercial Code, RSA 382-A, plus any written warranty of the
manufacturer.

**Source.** 1991, 222:1. 1994, 220:1, 2. 2002, 215:1. 2005, 210:58.
2007, 372:4. 2008, 282:10, eff. Aug. 26, 2008.

### Section 357-D:3

 **357-D:3 Enforcement of Warranties. –**
                                             
 I. Every new motor vehicle sold in this state shall conform to all
applicable warranties.
                                             
 II. It shall be the manufacturer's obligation under this chapter to
insure that all new motor vehicles sold or leased in this state conform
with the manufacturer's express warranties. The manufacturer may
delegate responsibility to its agents or authorized dealers provided,
however, in the event the manufacturer delegates its responsibility
under this chapter to its agents or authorized dealers, it shall
compensate the dealer for all work performed by the dealer in
satisfaction of the manufacturer's responsibility under this chapter.
                                             
 III. If a new motor vehicle does not conform to all applicable
express warranties and the consumer reports the nonconformity to the
manufacturer, its agent or authorized dealer during the term of the
warranty, the manufacturer shall cause whatever repairs are necessary to
conform the vehicle to the warranties, notwithstanding the fact that the
repairs are made after the expiration of a warranty term.
                                             
 IV. A manufacturer, its agent or authorized dealer shall not refuse
to provide a consumer with a written repair order and shall provide to
the consumer, each time the consumer's vehicle is brought in for
examination or repair of a defect, a written summary of the complaint
and a fully itemized statement indicating all work performed on the
vehicle including, but not limited to, examination of the vehicle,
parts, and labor.
                                             
 V. If, after a reasonable number of attempts, the manufacturer, its
agent or authorized dealer or its delegate is unable to conform the
motor vehicle to any express warranty by repairing or correcting any
defect or condition covered by the warranty which substantially impairs
the use, market value, or safety of the motor vehicle to the consumer,
the manufacturer shall, at the option of the consumer within 30 days of
the effective date of the board's order, replace the motor vehicle with
a new motor vehicle from the same manufacturer, if available, of
comparable worth to the same make and model with all options and
accessories with appropriate adjustments being allowed for any model
year differences or shall accept return of the vehicle from the consumer
and refund to the consumer the full purchase price or to the lessee, in
the case of leased vehicles, as provided in paragraph IX. In those
instances in which a refund is tendered, the manufacturer shall refund
to the consumer the full purchase price as indicated in the purchase
contract and all credits and allowances for any trade-in or down
payment, license fees, finance charges, credit charges, registration
fees, and any similar charges and incidental and consequential damages
or, in the case of leased vehicles, as provided in paragraph IX. Refunds
shall be made to the consumer and lienholder, if any, as their interests
may appear, or to the motor vehicle lessor and lessee as provided in
paragraph IX. A reasonable allowance for use shall be that amount
directly attributable to use by the consumer prior to the first repair
attempt and shall be calculated by multiplying the full purchase price
of the vehicle by a fraction having as its denominator 100,000, or for a
motorcycle, snowmobile, or OHRV with an engine size of 250 cubic
centimeters or smaller 20,000, or for a motorcycle, snowmobile, or OHRV
with an engine size greater than 250 cubic centimeters 40,000, and
having as its numerator the number of miles that the vehicle traveled
prior to the first attempt at repairing the vehicle.
                                             
 VI. It shall be an affirmative defense to any claim under this
chapter that an alleged nonconformity does not substantially impair the
use, market value, or safety or that the nonconformity is the result of
abuse, neglect, or unauthorized modifications or alterations of a motor
vehicle by a consumer.
                                             
 VII. It shall be presumed that a reasonable number of attempts have
been undertaken to conform a motor vehicle to the applicable warranties
if:
                                             
 (a) The same nonconformity as identified in any written
examination or repair order has been subject to repair at least 3 times
by the manufacturer, it agent, or authorized dealer within the express
warranty term and the same nonconformity continues to exist; or
                                             
 (b) The vehicle is out of service by reason of repair of one or
more nonconformities, defects, or conditions for a cumulative total of
30 or more business days during the term of the express warranty. The
term of any warranty and the 30-day period shall be extended by any
period of time during which repair services were not available to the
consumer because of war, invasion, strike, fire, flood, or other natural
disaster. If an extension of time is necessitated due to these
conditions, the manufacturer shall provide for the free use of a vehicle
to the consumer whose vehicle is out of service. A vehicle shall not be
deemed out of service if it is available to the consumer for a major
part of the day.
                                             
 VIII. In order for an attempt at repair to qualify for the
presumptions of this section, the attempt at repair shall be evidenced
by a written examination or repair order issued by the manufacturer, its
agent, or its authorized dealer. The presumptions of this section shall
only apply to 3 attempts at repair evidenced by written examination or
repair orders undertaken by the same agent or authorized dealer, unless
the consumer shows good cause for taking the vehicle to a different
agent or authorized dealer.
                                             
 IX. In cases in which a refund is tendered by a manufacturer for a
leased motor vehicle under paragraph V, the refund and rights of the
motor vehicle lessor, lessee, and manufacturer shall be in accordance
with the following:
                                             
 (a) The manufacturer shall provide to the lessee the aggregate
deposit and rental payments previously paid to the motor vehicle lessor
by the lessee, and incidental and consequential damages, if applicable,
minus a reasonable allowance for use. The aggregate deposit shall
include, but not be limited to, all cash payments and trade-in
allowances tendered by the lessee to the motor vehicle lessor under the
lease agreement. The reasonable allowance for use shall be calculated by
multiplying the aggregate deposit and rental payments made by the lessee
on the motor vehicle by a fraction having as its denominator 100,000 or
for a motorcycle, snowmobile, or OHRV 20,000, and having as its
numerator the number of miles that the vehicle traveled prior to the
first attempt to repair the vehicle.
                                             
 (b) The manufacturer shall provide to the motor vehicle lessor
the aggregate of the following:
                                             
 (1) The lessor's actual purchase cost, less payments made by
the lessee;
                                             
 (2) The freight cost, if applicable;
                                             
 (3) The cost for dealer or manufacturer-installed accessories,
if applicable;
                                             
 (4) Any fee paid to another to obtain the lease;
                                             
 (5) An amount equal to 5 percent of the lessor's actual
purchase cost as prescribed in subparagraph IX(b)(1). The amount in this
subparagraph shall be instead of any early termination costs.
                                             
 (c) The lessee's lease agreement with the motor vehicle lessor
and all contractual obligations shall be terminated upon a decision of
the board in favor of the lessee. The lessee shall not be liable for any
further costs or charges to the manufacturer or motor vehicle lessor
under the lease agreement.
                                             
 (d) The motor vehicle lessor shall release the motor vehicle
title to the manufacturer upon the payment by the manufacturer under the
provisions of this section.
                                             
 (e) The board shall give notice to the motor vehicle lessor of
the lessee's filing of a request for arbitration under this chapter and
shall notify the motor vehicle lessor of the date, time and place
scheduled for a hearing before the board. The motor vehicle lessor shall
provide testimony and evidence necessary to the arbitration proceedings.
Any decision of the board shall be binding upon the motor vehicle
lessor.

**Source.** 1991, 222:1. 1992, 282:15. 2002, 215:2, 3. 2005, 210:59, 60,
eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 357-D:4

 **357-D:4 Procedure to Obtain Refund or Replacement. –**
                                             
 I. After the third attempt at repair or correction of the
nonconformity, defect or condition, or after the vehicle is out of
service by reason of repair of one or more nonconformities, defects or
conditions for a cumulative total of 30 or more business days as
provided in this chapter, if the consumer shall notify the manufacturer
and lessor in writing, on forms to be provided by the manufacturer along
with a clear and conspicuous disclosure notice of the rights of the
consumer under this chapter at the time the new motor vehicle is
delivered, of the nonconformity, defect or condition and the consumer's
election to proceed under this chapter. The forms shall be made
available by the manufacturer to the New Hampshire new motor vehicle
arbitration board, and any other public or nonprofit agencies that shall
request them. Forms and notices shall be in a form prescribed by rule of
the department of justice and shall not include window stickers. The
consumer shall, in the notice, elect whether to use the dispute
settlement mechanism or the arbitration provisions established by the
manufacturer or to proceed under the New Hampshire new motor vehicle
arbitration board as established under this chapter. The consumer's
election of whether to proceed before the board or the manufacturer's
dispute settlement mechanism shall preclude his recourse to the method
not selected.
                                             
 II. A consumer shall not pursue a remedy under this chapter if he
has discontinued financing or lease payments, if the payments have been
discontinued due to the manufacturer's breach of obligation under this
chapter or due to a breach of the manufacturer's warranties.
                                             
 III. A consumer who elects to proceed before the board shall pay a
filing fee of 
                                             $50 and the manufacturer shall pay a filing fee of 
                                             $250.
Such fees shall be retained by the department of safety and used to
defray costs associated with the work of the board, including per diem
costs of board members and any other administrative expenses.
                                             
 IV. Arbitration of the consumer's complaint, either through the
manufacturer's dispute settlement mechanism or the board, shall be held
within 40 days of receipt by the manufacturer or the board and the
manufacturer of the consumer's notice electing the remedy of arbitration
unless the consumer or the manufacturer has good cause for an extension
of time, not to exceed an additional 30-day period. If the extension of
time is requested by the manufacturer, the manufacturer shall provide
free use of a vehicle to the consumer if the consumer's vehicle is out
of service. In the event the consumer elects to proceed in accordance
with the manufacturer's dispute settlement mechanism and the arbitration
of the dispute is not held within 40 days of the manufacturer's receipt
of the consumer's notice and the manufacturer is not able to establish
good cause for the delay, the consumer shall be entitled to receive the
relief requested under this chapter.
                                             
 V. Within the 40-day period set forth in paragraph IV, the
manufacturer shall have one final opportunity to correct and repair the
defect which the consumer claims entitles him to a refund or replacement
vehicle. If the consumer is satisfied with the corrective work done by
the manufacturer or his delegate, the arbitration proceedings shall be
terminated without prejudice to the consumer's right to request that
arbitration be recommended as provided in RSA 357-D:11, I(b) if the
repair proves unsatisfactory.
                                             
 VI. The manufacturer shall refund the reasonable allowance provided
for in RSA 357-D:3, V or IX, or make the replacement required by the
board within 30 days of a decision of the board or within 15 days of
final adjudication.

**Source.** 1991, 222:1. 1994, 220:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 357-D:5

 **357-D:5 New Motor Vehicle Arbitration Board Established;
Administrative Attachment; Rulemaking; Decisions. –**
                                             
 I. There is created a New Hampshire new motor vehicle arbitration
board consisting of 5 members and 3 alternate members to be appointed by
the governor and council. Terms of members shall be for 3 years. One
member and one alternate of the board shall be new car dealers in New
Hampshire, one member and one alternate shall be persons knowledgeable
in automobile mechanics, and 3 members and one alternate shall be
persons who represent consumers and have no direct involvement in the
design, manufacture, distributions, sales or service of motor vehicles
or their parts. Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum.
Members shall be paid 
                                             $50 per diem plus mileage.
                                             
 II. The board shall be administratively attached to the department
of safety under RSA 21-G:10.
                                             
 III. The board shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, to
implement the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 IV. The board shall hold a hearing within 40 days of receipt of a
complaint, unless an extension of time has been granted by the board
under RSA 357-D:4, IV, and shall render a decision within 30 days of the
conclusion of a hearing. The board shall have the authority to issue
only damages as are provided by this chapter.

**Source.** 1991, 222:1. 1994, 220:4, 5. 2008, 282:7, eff. Aug. 26,
2008.

### Section 357-D:6

 **357-D:6 Appeal From Board's Decision. –**
                                             
 I. The decision of the board shall be final and shall not be
modified or vacated unless, on appeal to the superior court, a party to
the arbitration proceeding proves, by clear and convincing evidence,
that:
                                             
 (a) The award was procured by corruption, fraud or other undue
means.
                                             
 (b) There was evident partiality by the board or corruption or
misconduct by the board prejudicing the rights of any party.
                                             
 (c) The board exceeded its powers.
                                             
 (d) The board refused to postpone a hearing after being shown
sufficient cause to do so, refused to hear evidence material to the
controversy, or otherwise conducted the hearing contrary to the rules
adopted by the board so as to prejudice substantially the rights of a
party.
                                             
 II. A party to the arbitration proceeding shall not pursue an appeal
until a final decision has been rendered by the board. Any appeal shall
be filed with the superior court within 30 days of the date of the
written board decision.

**Source.** 1991, 222:1. 1994, 220:6, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 357-D:7

 **357-D:7 Unfair and Deceptive Acts and Practices. –** Failure of
the manufacturer or distributor to comply with a decision of the board
shall constitute an unfair or deceptive act or practice under RSA
358-A:2.

**Source.** 1991, 222:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 357-D:8

 **357-D:8 Dealer's Liability. –** Nothing in this chapter imposes
any liability on a franchised motor vehicle dealer or creates a cause of
action by a consumer against a dealer, except for written express
warranties made by the dealer apart from the manufacturer's warranties.
A dealer shall not be made a party defendant in any action involving or
relating to this chapter, except as provided in this section. The
manufacturer shall not charge back or require reimbursement by the
dealer for any costs, including, but not limited to, any refunds or
vehicle replacements, incurred by the manufacturer arising from this
chapter.

**Source.** 1991, 222:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 357-D:9

 **357-D:9 Notification to Consumers; Rulemaking by Department of
Justice. –** Beginning with the model year following July 1, 1992, the
manufacturer of every motor vehicle sold in this state shall provide a
clear and conspicuous written notice of the consumer's rights under this
chapter as provided under RSA 357-D:4 at the time of the delivery of
every such new motor vehicle in this state. The manufacturer shall
provide the consumer with a self-addressed notice in a form developed in
accordance with rules adopted by the department of justice under RSA
541-A and sufficient to notify the manufacturer of the consumer's
election to proceed under this chapter. The manufacturer shall not
delegate this responsibility to its authorized dealers. The manufacturer
of every new motor vehicle sold in this state shall also provide a clear
and conspicuous notice that informs consumers of their rights under this
chapter.

**Source.** 1991, 222:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 357-D:10

 **357-D:10 Costs and Attorney's Fees. –** In any action by a
consumer against the manufacturer or distributor of a motor vehicle
based upon the alleged breach of an express warranty made in connection
with the sale or lease of such motor vehicle, the court, in its
discretion, may award to the plaintiff costs and reasonable attorney's
fees. If the court determines that the action was brought with no
substantial justification, it may award costs and reasonable attorney's
fees to the defendant.

**Source.** 1991, 222:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 357-D:11

 **357-D:11 Limitations on Actions. –**
                                             
 I. Any proceeding initiated under the provisions of this chapter
shall be commenced within one year following the later of:
                                             
 (a) The expiration of the express warranty term; or
                                             
 (b) The manufacturer's final repair attempt of the nonconformity,
as provided in RSA 357-D:4, V which gave rise to the consumer's request
that the vehicle be replaced or the money refunded.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall in any way limit the rights or
remedies which are otherwise available to a consumer under any other
provision of law.

**Source.** 1994, 220:7, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 357-D:12

 **357-D:12 Sale of Defective Motor Vehicles. –**
                                             
 I. For purposes of this section "a serious safety defect'' means a
life-threatening malfunction or nonconformity that impedes the
consumer's ability to control or operate the motor vehicle for ordinary
use or reasonable intended purposes or creates a risk of fire or
explosion.
                                             
 II. Any manufacturer or its agent or authorized dealer is prohibited
from reselling in New Hampshire any vehicle determined or adjudicated by
the board as having a serious safety defect.

**Source.** 1994, 395:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.
