---
title: 'CHAPTER 358-C UNFAIR, DECEPTIVE OR UNREASONABLE COLLECTION PRACTICES'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 358-C
                                             
UNFAIR, DECEPTIVE OR UNREASONABLE COLLECTION PRACTICES
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 358-C:1

 **358-C:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Consumer'' means a natural person who seeks or acquires, or is
offered property, services or credit for personal, family or household
purposes.
                                             
 II. "Consumer credit transaction'' means a transaction between a
creditor and a consumer in which real or personal property, services,
money or a form of money is acquired on credit and the consumer's
obligation is payable in 4 or more installments or for which credit a
finance charge is or may be imposed. The term includes consumer credit
sales, consumer loans, consumer leases of personal property and
transactions pursuant to a seller or lender credit card, but shall not
include leases of real property.
                                             
 III. "Consumer transaction'' means a transaction between a consumer
and a person who sells, leases or provides property, services or credit
to consumers. The term shall not include leases of real property.
                                             
 IV. "Creditor'' means a person who in the ordinary course of
business engages in consumer credit transactions with consumers.
                                             
 V. "Credit'' means the right granted by a person to a consumer to
defer payment of a debt, to incur debt and defer its payment, or
purchase property or services and defer payment therefor.
                                             
 VI. "Debt'' means any obligation or alleged obligation arising out
of a consumer transaction.
                                             
 VII. "Debtor'' means a person who owes or allegedly owes an
obligation arising out of a consumer transaction.
                                             
 VIII. "Debt collector'' means:
                                             
 (a) Any person who by any direct or indirect action, conduct or
practice enforces or attempts to enforce an obligation that is owed or
due, or alleged to be owed or due, by a consumer as a result of a
consumer credit transaction; or
                                             
 (b) Any person who, for any fee, commission or charge other than
wages or salary, engages in any direct or indirect action, conduct or
practice to enforce or attempt to enforce an obligation that is owed or
due, or alleged to be owed or due, by a consumer as a result of a
consumer transaction; or
                                             
 (c) Any person who, pursuant to an assignment, sale or transfer
of a claim against a consumer, engages in any direct or indirect action,
conduct or practice to enforce an obligation that is owed or due, or
alleged to be owed or due, by a consumer as a result of a consumer
transaction.
                                             
 IX. "Finance charge'' means a charge such as interest, fees, service
charges, discounts and other charges associated with the extension of
credit.
                                             
 X. "Person'' means an individual, corporation, trust, partnership,
incorporated or unincorporated association or any other legal entity.

**Source.** 1975, 437:1, eff. Aug. 18, 1975.

### Section 358-C:2

 **358-C:2 General Prohibition. –** No debt collector shall collect
or attempt to collect a debt in an unfair, deceptive or unreasonable
manner as defined in this chapter.

**Source.** 1975, 437:1, eff. Aug. 18, 1975.

### Section 358-C:3

 **358-C:3 Prohibited Acts. –** For the purposes of this chapter, any
debt collection or attempt to collect a debt shall be deemed unfair,
deceptive or unreasonable if the debt collector:
                                             
 I. Communicates or attempts to communicate with the debtor, orally
or in writing:
                                             
 (a) By causing a telephone to ring or engaging any person in
telephone conversation repeatedly or continuously or at unusual times or
at times known to be inconvenient with the intent to abuse, oppress or
harass any person at the called number; or
                                             
 (b) By use of profane, obscene or vulgar language that is
intended to abuse the hearer or reader; or
                                             
 (c) At the debtor's place of employment if said place is other
than the debtor's residence, provided that:
                                             
 (1) a debt collector may send a single letter to the debtor at
his place of employment if he has otherwise been unable to locate the
debtor; and
                                             
 (2) a debt collector may phone the debtor at his place of
employment if he is unable to contact the debtor at his residence,
provided that:
                                             
 A. the debtor does not inform the debt collector that he
does not wish the debt collector to communicate or attempt to
communicate with him at his place of employment; and
                                             
 B. the debt collector shall not inform the employer of the
nature of the call unless asked by the employer; and
                                             
 C. in no event shall the debt collector make more than one
phone call per month to the debtor at his place of employment unless the
debtor affirmatively indicates in writing that he desires the debt
collector to call him at his place of employment. (For the purposes of
this subparagraph, any language in any instrument creating the debt
which purports to authorize phone calls at the debtor's place of
employment shall not be considered an affirmative indication that the
debtor desires the debt collector to call him at his place of
employment.); or
                                             
 (d) Using any written communication which fails to clearly
identify the name of the debt collector, the name of the person (as
defined in RSA 358-C:1, X) for whom the debt collector is attempting to
collect the debt, and the debt collector's business address (the
foregoing shall not require the name or address of the debt collector or
the person for whom the debt collector is attempting to collect the debt
to be printed on any envelope containing a communication); or
                                             
 (e) By placement of phone calls without disclosure of the name of
the individual making the call and the name of the person (as defined in
RSA 358-C:1, X) for whom the debt collector is attempting to collect the
debt, or by using a fictitious name while engaging in the collection of
debts; or
                                             
 (f) By causing any expense to the debtor in the form of long
distance telephone calls, telegram fees or other charges incurred by a
medium of communication, by concealment of the true purpose of the
communication; or
                                             
 II. Uses or threatens the use of force or violence; or
                                             
 III. Threatens to take any unlawful action or action which the debt
collector in the regular course of business does not take; or
                                             
 IV. Communicates or threatens to communicate, except by proper
judicial process, the fact of such debt to a person other than the
person who might reasonably be expected to be liable therefor; provided
that the provisions of this paragraph shall not prohibit a debt
collector from:
                                             
 (a) Communicating information relating to a debt to a person
residing with the debtor and reasonably believed to be a relative or
family member over the age of 18, or to an attorney, financial
counseling organization or other person who has notified the debt
collector that he is representing the debtor; or
                                             
 (b) From leaving a message at the residence of the debtor
containing no information other than a request that the debtor contact
the debt collector about the debt; or
                                             
 (c) Communicating information relating to the debt to the
debtor's spouse or, if the debtor is a minor, to the parents or
guardians of the debtor where the purpose of the communication is solely
to locate the debtor; provided that:
                                             
 (1) the debt collector has been unable to locate the debtor by
other means for a period of 30 days; and
                                             
 (2) the debt collector, having once communicated with any of
said persons, shall not again attempt to locate the debtor by
communicating with said person; or
                                             
 (d) Reporting, or notifying a debtor that the debt collector may
report a debt to:
                                             
 (1) a consumer reporting agency defined in RSA 359-B:3, VI, or
any lending institution, provided that if the debt collector knows the
debt to be disputed he shall notify the consumer reporting agency or
lending institution that the debt is disputed; or
                                             
 (2) to an agent or attorney engaged for the purpose of
collecting the debt. (For the purposes of RSA 358-C:3, IV, the use of
language on envelopes other than the debt collector's name, address or
telephone number, indicating that the communication relates to the
collection of a debt shall be deemed a communication of the debt.); or
                                             
 V. Communicates directly with the debtor, except through proper
legal action, after notification from an attorney, financial counseling
organization or other person representing the debtor that all further
communication relative to the debt should be addressed to the attorney,
organization or other person unless the attorney, organization or other
person fails to answer correspondence, return phone calls or discuss the
debt within 10 days or prior approval is obtained from the attorney,
organization or other person or the communication is a response in the
ordinary course of business to the debtor's inquiry; or
                                             
 VI. Communicates with the debtor through the use of forms or
instruments which simulate the form and appearance of judicial process
or which give the appearance of being authorized, issued or approved by
a government, governmental agency or attorney-at-law when they are not;
or
                                             
 VII. Makes any material false representation or implication of the
character, extent or amount of the debt, or of its status in any legal
proceeding; or
                                             
 VIII. Makes any representation that an existing obligation may be
increased by the addition of attorney's fees, investigation fees,
service fees or any other fees or charges when in fact such fees or
charges may not be legally added to the existing obligation; or
                                             
 IX. Makes any representation that an existing obligation will
definitely be increased by the addition of attorney's fees,
investigation fees, service fees or any other fees or charges when the
award of such fee or charge is discretionary by a court of law; or
                                             
 X. Collects or attempts to collect any interest or other charge, fee
or expense incidental to the principal obligation unless such interest
or incidental fee, charge or expense is expressly authorized by the
agreement creating the obligation and legally chargeable to the debtor;
provided that the foregoing shall not prohibit a debt collector from
attempting to collect court costs in a judicial proceeding; or
                                             
 XI. Threatens that nonpayment of a debt will result in the arrest of
any person or the seizure, garnishment, attachment or sale of any
property or wages without indicating, when a court order is a legal
prerequisite to any such action; that
                                             
 (a) There must be a court order in effect permitting such action;
and, where applicable,
                                             
 (b) That the debtor will have an opportunity to appear in court
to contest such action prior to any such court order being effective;
or
                                             
 XII. Threatens to assign or sell to another the account of or claim
against the debtor with an attending representation or implication that
the result of any such sale or assignment would be that the debtor would
lose any defense to the debt or would be subjected to harsh, vindictive
or abusive collection attempts.

**Source.** 1975, 437:1, eff. Aug. 18, 1975.

### Section 358-C:4

 **358-C:4 Remedies. –**
                                             
 I. Any debt collector who violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be liable in any court of competent jurisdiction to the debtor for
one of the following, whichever is greater:
                                             
 (a) In an action brought by and on behalf of an individual debtor
only, the sum of 
                                             $200 plus costs and reasonable attorney's fees for
each violation, or
                                             
 (b) For all damages proximately caused by the violation.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a debt collector shall not be
held liable in any action brought under this chapter for a violation if
the debt collector shows by a preponderance of the evidence that:
                                             
 (a) The violation was a result of a computation error in billing
and within 15 days of notification or discovery of said error the debt
collector notified the debtor of such error and corrected such error;
or
                                             
 (b) The violation was not intentional and resulted from a bona
fide error or mistake notwithstanding the maintenance of procedures
reasonably adapted to avoid any such error or mistake.
                                             
 III. In any suit to collect a debt, the debtor may raise, by way of
counterclaim, set-off or recoupment, a violation of this chapter, and
upon proof of a violation by a preponderance of the evidence, the court
shall award damages to the defendant pursuant to this section and shall
set such damages off against any recovery by the plaintiff.
                                             
 IV. Any debtor aggrieved by a debt collector's practices in
violation of this chapter may bring an action individually and/or on
behalf of others similarly situated in the superior court of the county
in which he resides to restrain such practices by temporary or permanent
injunction. If the debtor prevails in an action authorized by this
paragraph, he shall be entitled to his costs and reasonable attorney's
fees.
                                             
 V. If the court finds that an action initiated under this chapter
was frivolous and brought to harass the debt collector, the debtor shall
pay to the debt collector the costs of said action plus reasonable
attorney fees.
                                             
 VI. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall also
constitute an unfair and deceptive act or practice within the meaning of
RSA 358-A:2 and may be enforced by the attorney general pursuant to RSA
358-A.

**Source.** 1975, 437:1. 1977, 308:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1977.

Check Collection Charges
------------------------

### Section 358-C:5

 **358-C:5 Check Collection Charges. –**
                                             
 I. A creditor involved in a consumer credit transaction or a debt
collector designated to collect on a check, negotiable order of
withdrawal, share draft, or other negotiable instrument may charge and
receive a check collection charge of not more than 
                                             $25, unless
otherwise expressly authorized by written agreement with the consumer.
                                             
 II. In the case of a consumer credit transaction, disclosure of a
check collection charge made pursuant to paragraph I of this section
shall be made in the promissory note or sales finance contract. In the
case of debt collectors, notification of imposition of a check
collection charge pursuant to paragraph I of this section shall be done
by telephone or written notice sent by regular mail to the debtor at the
debtor's last known telephone number or address or at the address shown
on the check or other instrument. The notice shall state the amount of
the check collection charge that has been or will be imposed, and shall
state that the debtor is responsible for paying the check collection
charge as well as the value of the check or other instrument.

**Source.** 1997, 161:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998; 322:27, eff. Jan. 1, 1998 at
12:01 a.m.
