---
title: 'CHAPTER 358-Q SALE OF CERTAIN ITEMS'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 358-Q
                                             
SALE OF CERTAIN ITEMS
---------------------

### Section 358-Q:1

 **358-Q:1 Restriction on Sale of Certain Items. –**
                                             
 I. In this section "flea market'' means any location other than a
permanent retail store at which space is rented or otherwise made
available to others for the conduct of business as transient or limited
vendors. This term shall not include those persons who sell by sample,
catalog, or brochure for future delivery, or those persons who make
sales presentations pursuant to a prior invitation issued by the owner
or the legal occupant of the premises.
                                             
 II. No person shall sell, offer for sale, or permit the sale at any
flea market of the following products:
                                             
 (a) Infant formula.
                                             
 (b) Food manufactured and packaged for sale and consumption by a
child under 2 years of age, for which the expiration date has passed.
                                             
 (c) Drugs, as defined in RSA 146:2, II(1) and (2); provided that
this subparagraph shall not include durable medical equipment.
                                             
 III. Any other product being offered for sale at a flea market
beyond the expiration date shall be clearly marked indicating that the
sale expiration date has passed and should be noted by the buyer.
                                             
 IV. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of up to 
                                             $100 for each violation.

**Source.** 1997, 224:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 358-Q:2

 **358-Q:2 Enforcement. –** In addition to the penalty under RSA
358-Q:1, IV, any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute an unfair or deceptive act or practice within the meaning of
RSA 358-A:2. Any right, remedy or power set forth in RSA 358-A may be
used to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The department of
justice shall maintain and make available for inspection a record of the
violations of this chapter.

**Source.** 1997, 224:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.
