---
title: 'CHAPTER 358-H REGULATION OF RENTAL REFERRAL AGENCIES'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 358-H
                                             
REGULATION OF RENTAL REFERRAL AGENCIES
--------------------------------------

### Section 358-H:1

 **358-H:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
                                             
 I. "Person'' means a natural person, corporation, trust,
partnership, incorporated or unincorporated association, or any other
legal entity.
                                             
 II. "Prospective tenant'' means any person who pays a fee or other
consideration to a rental referral agency for assistance in obtaining
information about specific rental properties.
                                             
 III. "Rental property'' means any house or building or portion of a
house or building which is rented, leased or hired out to be occupied as
a home or residence by one or more persons.
                                             
 IV. "Rental referral agency'' means any person who collects rental
information for the purpose of assisting prospective tenants in locating
specific rental properties in exchange for a fee or other consideration.
It shall include, but not be limited to, businesses referred to by such
terms as rental information service, apartment locator service, or
apartment listing service. It shall not include businesses in which all
agency employees and representatives who assist prospective tenants are
licensed real estate salesmen or brokers, or are under the direct
supervision of such salesmen or brokers, to the extent that such
salesmen or brokers are actually engaging in or conducting the business,
or acting in the capacity, of a real estate broker or salesman as
defined and regulated by RSA 331-A.

**Source.** 1983, 438:1. 1985, 174:1, eff. July 26, 1985.

### Section 358-H:2

 **358-H:2 Fees and Deposits. –** No rental referral agency shall
charge or attempt to collect any fee or other consideration from any
prospective tenant in excess of 
                                             $10 except where rental property is in
fact obtained by such prospective tenant through the assistance of that
agency. For the purposes of this section, such rental property is
obtained when the prospective tenant has contracted to rent the
property.

**Source.** 1983, 438:1, eff. June 24, 1983.

### Section 358-H:3

 **358-H:3 Contract Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. No rental referral agency shall charge or attempt to collect any
fee or other consideration from any prospective tenant except pursuant
to a written contract which shall be delivered to the prospective tenant
at the time the contract is signed. Every contract must constitute the
entire agreement between the parties, shall be dated, and shall be
signed by the prospective tenant.
                                             
 II. Every written contract between a rental referral agency and a
prospective tenant shall further include provisions stating:
                                             
 (a) The specifications of rental property sought by the
prospective tenant, including maximum rent, desired lease period,
geographic area, number of bedrooms required, number of occupants to be
housed, and number and type of pets.
                                             
 (b) That any deposit in excess of 
                                             $10 shall be repaid or
refunded to the prospective tenant, upon demand, should the specified
rental property not be obtained through the agency's assistance within
30 days of the contract.
                                             
 (c) That the full deposit or fee shall be repaid or refunded to
the prospective tenant if the information concerning rental properties
is not accurate or current as required by RSA 358-H:4, I.
                                             
 (d) That the rental referral agency will maintain a surety bond
in compliance with RSA 358-H:8 and identifying the bonding company.
                                             
 (e) The manner in which the rental property information has been
collected and the form in which it will be furnished to the prospective
tenant.
                                             
 (f) The name, address, and telephone number of the person to whom
complaints and requests for refunds should be directed.

**Source.** 1983, 438:1, eff. June 24, 1983.

### Section 358-H:4

 **358-H:4 Representations of Availability and Consent of Lessor.
–**
                                             
 I. A rental referral agency shall not make any representation that
any rental property is available for rent unless availability has been
verified by the agency through contact with the lessor within 48 hours
prior to the representation. The availability of rental property
described in media advertisements shall be verified within 48 hours
prior to the appearance of the advertisement and written evidence of
such action shall be made available to prospective tenants upon
request.
                                             
 II. Notations of the time and date of verification and the
verifier's identity shall be recorded by the agency and made available
for inspection by a person from whom the agency has received a deposit
or a fee.
                                             
 III. A rental referral agency shall not refer a prospective tenant
to any rental property without the consent of the lessor.

**Source.** 1983, 438:1, eff. June 24, 1983.

### Section 358-H:5

 **358-H:5 Remedies. –**
                                             
 I. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is an unfair or
deceptive act or practice within the meaning of RSA 358-A:2. Any right,
remedy, or power set forth in RSA 358-A, including those set forth in
RSA 358-A:4, II, may be used to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 II. The rights, obligations, and remedies provided in this chapter
shall be in addition to any other rights, obligations, or remedies
provided for by law or in equity.

**Source.** 1983, 438:1, eff. June 24, 1983.

### Section 358-H:6

 **358-H:6 Waiver of Provisions. –** Any waiver of the prospective
tenant of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed contrary to
public policy and shall be void and unenforceable.

**Source.** 1983, 438:1, eff. June 24, 1983.

### Section 358-H:7

 **358-H:7 Applicability. –** The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all rental referral agencies doing business in this state and
to all contracts entered into on or after June 24, 1983.

**Source.** 1983, 438:1, eff. June 24, 1983.

### Section 358-H:8

 **358-H:8 Surety Bond. –** A rental referral agency shall post a
surety bond of not less than 
                                             $20,000 with the attorney general,
department of justice. The type of surety bond shall be designated by
the attorney general. No bond shall be accepted for filing unless it is
with a surety company authorized to do business in this state. The
surety may cancel the bond at any time upon giving 30 days' written
notice to the attorney general. Any person who is damaged by any
violation of this chapter, or by the rental referral agency's breach of
the contract subject thereto, may bring an action against the bond to
recover damages suffered and any other amounts allowable by law. The
attorney general, in an action brought under this chapter or any other
applicable provision of law, may likewise proceed against the bond. In
no event shall the aggregate liability of the surety for all claims
exceed the bond amount.

**Source.** 1983, 438:1. 1985, 300:7, I(a), (b).
