---
title: 'CHAPTER 358-N PROHIBITED CREDIT CARD PRACTICES IN TRAVEL SERVICES'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 358-N
                                             
PROHIBITED CREDIT CARD PRACTICES IN TRAVEL SERVICES
---------------------------------------------------

### Section 358-N:1

 **358-N:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Credit card'' means any instrument, whether known as a credit
card, credit plate, charge plate, or by any other name, which purports
to evidence an undertaking to pay for service rendered or furnished to
or upon the order of a designated person or bearer.
                                             
 II. "Provider of travel services'' means a person, firm or
corporation engaged in the business of furnishing travel, transportation
or vacation services. This term shall not include a travel agent as
defined in paragraph III.
                                             
 III. "Travel agent'' means a person, firm, corporation, partnership
or association, other than a common carrier, or employee of a common
carrier, that:
                                             
 (a) Is an officially appointed agent of a common carrier or is a
member of a cruise line association who operates exclusively as an agent
for cruise lines in the sale of cruise travel products or services; and
                                             
 (b) As a legal agent for a provider of travel services sells, or
offers for sale, travel, transportation or vacation arrangements.

**Source.** 1992, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 358-N:2

 **358-N:2 Prohibited Practices. –** A provider of travel services
for which a travel agent is an agent shall not impose a surcharge on or
reduce the commission paid to such travel agent if the consumer uses a
credit card to obtain credit in the transaction.

**Source.** 1992, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 358-N:3

 **358-N:3 Unfair Trade Practice. –** Any violation of RSA 358-N:2
shall constitute an unfair or deceptive trade practice within the
meaning of RSA 358-A, and shall subject the defendant in such case to a
cause of action under RSA 358-A:10.

**Source.** 1992, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 358-N:4

 **358-N:4 Exemption. –** This chapter shall not apply to scheduled
airlines.

**Source.** 1992, 233:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.
