---
title: 'CHAPTER 358-P RENT-TO-OWN AGREEMENT ACT'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 358-P
                                             
RENT-TO-OWN AGREEMENT ACT
-------------------------

### Section 358-P:1

 **358-P:1 Short Title. –** This chapter is to be known as the "New
Hampshire Rent-to-Own Agreement Act.''

**Source.** 1994, 406:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 358-P:2

 **358-P:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Advertisement'' means a commercial message in any medium that
solicits a consumer to enter a rent-to-own agreement.
                                             
 II. "Cash price'' means the price at which the lessor would have
sold the property to the consumer for cash on the date of the
rent-to-own agreement.
                                             
 III. "Consumer'' means a natural person who rents personal property
under a rent-to-own agreement to be used primarily for personal, family
or household purposes.
                                             
 IV. "Consummation'' means the date on which a consumer enters into a
rent-to-own agreement.
                                             
 V. "Rent-to-own agreement'' means an agreement for the use of
personal property by a natural person primarily for personal, family or
household purposes, for an initial period of 4 months or less that is
automatically renewable with each payment after the initial period, but
does not obligate or require the consumer to continue renting or using
the property beyond the initial period, and that permits the consumer to
become the owner of the property.
                                             
 VI. "Rent-to-own dealer'' means a person who regularly provides the
use of property through rent-to-own agreements and to whom rent payments
are initially payable on the face of the rent-to-own agreement.

**Source.** 1994, 406:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 358-P:3

 **358-P:3 General Requirements of Disclosure. –**
                                             
 I. The rent-to-own dealer shall disclose to the consumer the
information required by RSA 358-P:4. In a transaction involving more
than one rent-to-own dealer, only one such dealer need make the
disclosures, but all rent-to-own dealers shall be bound by such
disclosures.
                                             
 II. The disclosures shall be made at or before consummation of the
rent-to-own agreement.
                                             
 III. The disclosures shall be made clearly and conspicuously in
writing and a copy of the rent-to-own agreement provided to the
consumer. The disclosures required under RSA 358-P:4 shall be made on
the face of the contract above the line for the consumer's signature.
                                             
 IV. If a disclosure becomes inaccurate as the result of any act,
occurrence or agreement by the consumer after delivery of the required
disclosures, the resulting inaccuracy shall not be a violation of this
chapter.

**Source.** 1994, 406:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 358-P:4

 **358-P:4 Disclosures. –** For each rent-to-own agreement, the
rent-to-own dealer shall disclose in the agreement the following items,
as applicable:
                                             
 I. Whether the periodic payment is weekly, monthly or otherwise, the
dollar amount of each payment, and the total number and total dollar
amount of all periodic payments necessary to acquire ownership of the
property.
                                             
 II. A statement that the consumer will not own the property until
the consumer has made the total payment necessary to acquire ownership.
                                             
 III. A statement advising the consumer whether the consumer is
liable for loss or damage to the property, and, if so, a statement that
such liability will not exceed the fair market value of the property as
of the time it is lost or damaged.
                                             
 IV. A brief description of the rented property, sufficient to
identify the property to the consumer and the rent-to-own dealer,
including an identification number, if applicable, and a statement
indicating whether the property is new or used, but a statement that
indicates new property is used is not a violation of this chapter.
                                             
 V. A statement of the cash price of the property; however, where one
agreement involves the rent of 2 or more items as a set, a statement of
the aggregate cash price of all items shall satisfy this requirement.
The statement shall also include the following disclosure:
                                             
 "If you want to purchase this or similar property now, you should
consider cash or credit terms that might be available to you.''
                                             
 VI. The total of initial payments paid or required at or before
consummation of the agreement or delivery of the property, whichever is
later.
                                             
 VII. A statement that the total of payments does not include other
charges, such as late payment, default, pickup and reinstatement fees,
which fees shall be separately disclosed in the contract.
                                             
 VIII. A statement clearly summarizing the terms of the consumer's
option to purchase, including a statement that the consumer has the
right to exercise an early purchase option and the price, formula or
method for determining the price at which the property may be so
purchased.
                                             
 IX. A statement identifying the party responsible for maintaining or
servicing the property while it is being rented, together with a
description of that responsibility, and a statement that if any part of
a manufacturer's express warranty covers the rental property at the time
the consumer acquires ownership of the property, it shall be transferred
to the consumer, if allowed by the terms of the warranty.
                                             
 X. The date of the transaction and the identities of the rent-to-own
dealer and consumer.
                                             
 XI. A statement that the consumer may terminate the agreement
without penalty by voluntarily surrendering or returning the property in
good repair, reasonable wear and tear excepted, upon expiration of any
rental term along with any past due rental payments.
                                             
 XII. Notice of the right to reinstate an agreement as provided in
RSA 358-P:8.

**Source.** 1994, 406:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 358-P:5

 **358-P:5 Advertising. –**
                                             
 I. If an advertisement for a rent-to-own agreement refers to or
states the dollar amount of an initial, periodic, or final payment or
offers a free initial, periodic, or final payment for any item and
refers to or states the right to acquire ownership of the item, then for
such item the advertisement shall also clearly and conspicuously state
the following:
                                             
 (a) That the transaction advertised is a rent-to-own agreement.
                                             
 (b) The total number and total amount of periodic payments
necessary to acquire ownership of the item or a representative sample of
the total number and total amount of periodic payments for each category
of items in the advertisement.
                                             
 (c) That the consumer acquires no ownership rights unless the
total amount necessary to acquire ownership is paid.
                                             
 II. Any owner or personnel of any medium in which an advertisement
appears or through which it is disseminated shall not be liable under
this section.
                                             
 III. The provisions of paragraph I of this section shall not apply
to an advertisement which does not refer to or state the amount of any
payment, or which is published in the yellow pages of a telephone
directory or in any similar directory of business.
                                             
 IV. Every item displayed or offered under a rent-to-own agreement
shall bear a tag or card that clearly and conspicuously indicates in
Arabic numerals each of the following:
                                             
 (a) The cash price of the item.
                                             
 (b) The amount of the periodic payment.
                                             
 (c) The total number and total dollar amount of periodic payments
necessary to acquire ownership.

**Source.** 1994, 406:1. 2000, 8:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 358-P:6

 **358-P:6 Inapplicability of Other Laws; Exempted Transactions. –**
                                             
 I. Rent-to-own agreements which comply with this chapter are not
governed by the laws relating to:
                                             
 (a) A "security interest'' as defined in RSA 382-A:1-201(37).
                                             
 (b) A "consumer credit transaction'' as defined in RSA 358-C:1,
II and RSA 358-K:1, V.
                                             
 (c) "Credit'' as defined in RSA 358-K:1, VII and RSA 399-B:1, I.
                                             
 (d) A "home solicitation sale'' as defined in RSA 361-B:1.
                                             
 II. Rent-to-own agreements are governed by laws relating to:
                                             
 (a) "Trade'' as defined in RSA 358-A:1, II; and
                                             
 (b) A "consumer transaction'' as defined in RSA 358-C:1, III.
                                             
 III. This chapter shall not apply to the following:
                                             
 (a) Rent-to-own agreements primarily for business, commercial or
agricultural purposes, or those made with governmental agencies or
instrumentalities or with organizations;
                                             
 (b) Rental of a safe deposit box;
                                             
 (c) Rental or bailment of personal property which is incidental
to the rental of real property, and which provides that the consumer has
no option to purchase the rented property; or
                                             
 (d) The rental of an automobile.

**Source.** 1994, 406:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 358-P:7

 **358-P:7 Prohibited Practices. –**
                                             
 I. A rent-to-own agreement shall not contain:
                                             
 (a) A confession of judgment.
                                             
 (b) A negotiable instrument.
                                             
 (c) A security interest or any other claim of a property interest
in any property of the consumer.
                                             
 (d) A wage assignment.
                                             
 (e) A waiver by the consumer of claims or defenses.
                                             
 (f) A provision authorizing the rent-to-own dealer or a person
acting on the rent-to-own dealer's behalf to enter upon the consumer's
premises without permission or to commit any breach of the peace in the
repossession of property.
                                             
 (g) A provision requiring the purchase of insurance or liability
damage waiver for the property that is the subject of the rent-to-own
agreement from the rent-to-own dealer or requiring such purchase from a
particular vendor. The rent-to-own dealer may, however, require that the
consumer purchase insurance or a liability damage waiver for the rental
property from a vendor of the consumer's choosing.
                                             
 (h) A provision requiring the consumer to make a payment in
addition to regular rental payments in order to acquire ownership of the
rental property, or a provision requiring the consumer to make rental
payments totaling more than the dollar amount necessary to acquire
ownership as disclosed pursuant to RSA 358-P:4.
                                             
 (i) A provision requiring a late charge or reinstatement fee
unless a periodic payment is late more than 5 days on a monthly
agreement or more than 2 days on an agreement with periodic payments
made more frequently than monthly.
                                             
 (j) A provision for a late charge or reinstatement fee in excess
of 
                                             $5.
                                             
 (k) A provision for more than one late charge or reinstatement
fee on any one periodic payment regardless of the period of time during
which it remains unpaid.
                                             
 II. No rent-to-own dealer shall collect or attempt to collect a debt
in an unfair, deceptive or unreasonable manner as defined in RSA 358-C.

**Source.** 1994, 406:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 358-P:8

 **358-P:8 Reinstatement. –**
                                             
 I. A consumer who fails to make a timely rental payment may
reinstate the agreement, without losing any rights or options which
exist under the agreement, by the payment of:
                                             
 (a) All past due rental charges;
                                             
 (b) If the property has been picked up, the reasonable costs of
pick-up and redelivery; and
                                             
 (c) Any applicable late fee, within 5 days of the renewal date if
the consumer pays monthly, or within 2 days of the renewal date if the
consumer pays more frequently than monthly.
                                             
 II. In the case of a consumer who has paid less than 2/3 of the
total of payments necessary to acquire ownership and where the consumer
has returned or voluntarily surrendered the property, other than through
judicial process, during the applicable reinstatement period set forth
in paragraph I of this section, the consumer may reinstate the agreement
during a period of not less than 21 days after the date of the return of
the property.
                                             
 III. In the case of a consumer who has paid 2/3 or more of the total
of payments necessary to acquire ownership, and where the consumer has
returned or voluntarily surrendered the property, other than through
judicial process, during the applicable period set forth in paragraph I
of this section, the consumer may reinstate the agreement during a
period of not less than 30 days after the date of the return of the
property.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section shall prevent the rent-to-own dealer
from attempting to repossess property during the reinstatement period,
but such a repossession shall not affect the consumer's right to
reinstate. Upon reinstatement, the rent-to-own dealer shall provide the
consumer with the same property or substitute property of comparable
quality and condition.

**Source.** 1994, 406:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 358-P:9

 **358-P:9 Receipts. –** Upon request by the consumer, a rent-to-own
dealer shall provide the consumer with a written receipt for each
payment.

**Source.** 1994, 406:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 358-P:10

 **358-P:10 Renegotiations and Extensions. –**
                                             
 I. A renegotiation shall occur when an existing rent-to-own
agreement is satisfied and replaced by a new agreement undertaken by the
same rent-to-own dealer and consumer. A renegotiation shall be
considered a new agreement requiring new disclosures. A renegotiation
shall not include:
                                             
 (a) The addition or return of property in a multiple-item
agreement or the substitution of the rental property, if in either case
the average payment allocable to a payment period is not changed by more
than 10 percent.
                                             
 (b) A deferral or extension of a portion of a periodic payment or
of one or more periodic payments.
                                             
 (c) A reduction in charges in the rent or agreement.
                                             
 (d) A modification to a rent-to-own agreement as a result of a
court proceeding.
                                             
 II. No disclosures are required for any extension of a rent-to-own
agreement.

**Source.** 1994, 406:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 358-P:11

 **358-P:11 Enforcement; Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. (a) A rent-to-own dealer who fails to comply with the
requirements of this chapter is liable to the consumer damaged thereby
in an amount equal to the greater of:
                                             
 (1) The actual damages sustained by the consumer as a result
of the rent-to-own dealer's failure to comply with this chapter; or
                                             
 (2) 25 percent of the total of payments necessary to acquire
ownership, but not less than 
                                             $100 nor more than 
                                             $1,000.
                                             
 (b) A rent-to-own dealer who fails to comply with this chapter is
also liable to the consumer for the costs of the action and reasonable
attorney's fees as determined by the court.
                                             
 II. A consumer may not take any action to offset the amount for
which a rent-to-own dealer is potentially liable under paragraph I
against any amount owed by the consumer, unless the amount of the
dealer's liability has been determined by judgment of a court of
competent jurisdiction in an action in which the rent-to-own dealer was
a party. This section shall not bar a consumer then in default on an
obligation from asserting a violation of this chapter as an original
action, or as a defense or counterclaim, to an action brought by a
rent-to-own dealer against the consumer.
                                             
 III. The provisions of this section are in addition to any other
rights or remedies available in this state.
                                             
 IV. No action under this section shall be brought in any court of
competent jurisdiction more than one year after the date the consumer
made the last rental payment or more than one year after the date of the
occurrence of the violation that is the subject of the suit, whichever
is later.

**Source.** 1994, 406:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 358-P:12

 **358-P:12 Rent-to-Own Dealer's Defenses. –**
                                             
 I. If a rent-to-own dealer establishes by a preponderance of
evidence that a violation of this chapter was unintentional or the
result of a bona fide error notwithstanding the maintenance of
procedures reasonably adapted to avoid such errors, no penalty as
specified in RSA 358-P:11 may be imposed and validity of the transaction
is not affected. Examples of bona fide errors are clerical errors,
calculation errors, errors due to unintentionally improper computer
programming or data entry, and printing errors, but do not include an
error of legal judgment with respect to a rent-to-own dealer's
obligations under this chapter.
                                             
 II. A rent-to-own dealer shall not be liable under this section for
any failure to comply with any requirement imposed under this chapter if
within 60 days after discovering an error, and prior to the institution
of an action under this chapter or the receipt of written notice of the
error from the consumer, the rent-to-own dealer notifies the consumer of
the error and makes whatever adjustments in the appropriate account as
are necessary to assure that the consumer is not required to pay an
amount in excess of the lowest charge actually disclosed.
                                             
 III. No provision of this chapter imposing any penalty applies to
any act done or omitted in good faith in conformity with some provision
of this chapter, notwithstanding that after the act or omission has
occurred the provision is amended, rescinded, or determined by judicial
or other competent authority to be invalid for any reason.

**Source.** 1994, 406:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.
