---
title: 'CHAPTER 358-E DISTRIBUTORSHIP DISCLOSURE ACT'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 358-E
                                             
DISTRIBUTORSHIP DISCLOSURE ACT
------------------------------

### Section 358-E:1

 **358-E:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. "Distributorship'' means a contract or agreement, either express
or implied, whether oral or written, by which the grantor, in exchange
for the payment of a distributorship fee:
                                             
 (a) Grants the distributor the right to:
                                             
 (1) Offer, sell or distribute goods manufactured or supplied
by the grantor through vending machines, racks, display cases, or other
similar devices; or
                                             
 (2) Purchase from the grantor or an affiliate of the grantor
an inventory of products for sale or distribution in or on such vending
machines, racks, display cases, or other similar devices; or
                                             
 (3) Purchase or lease from the grantor or an affiliate of the
grantor vending machines, racks, display cases, or other similar devices
to be used for the sale or distribution of merchandise; and
                                             
 (b) Represents that it will provide locations or assist the
distributor in finding locations for the use or operation of such
vending machines, racks, display cases, or other similar devices on
property owned, leased or controlled by a third party.
                                             
 III. "Person'' means any person defined by RSA 358-A:1, I.
                                             
 IV. "Grantor'' is a person who grants a distributorship or any agent
or representative thereof.
                                             
 V. "Distributor'' means a person to whom a distributorship is
granted.
                                             
 VI. "Prospective distributor'' means any person who approaches, or
is approached by, a grantor for the purpose of investigating the
prospect of establishing a distributorship between such person and such
grantor.
                                             
 VII. "Distributorship fee'' means a fee or charge that a distributor
is required to pay or agrees to pay for the right to enter into a
business under a distributorship agreement, including but not limited to
payments for goods and services. "Distributorship fee'' shall not
include payments for the purchase of sales demonstration equipment and
materials furnished on a nonprofit basis for use in making sales and not
for resale.

**Source.** 1977, 307:1. 1979, 171:1. 1985, 300:29, IV.

### Section 358-E:2

 **358-E:2 Prohibitions on the Advertising or Sale of
Distributorships. –** No person may advertise, offer, contract, sell, or
promote any distributorship in this state unless the person has
registered with the attorney general, as provided in RSA 358-E:3.

**Source.** 1977, 307:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1977.

### Section 358-E:3

 **358-E:3 Registration. –**
                                             
 I. Unless exempted by paragraph V, any person who advertises,
offers, contracts, sells or promotes any distributorship in the state
must register with the attorney general and file, in a form prescribed
by the attorney general, an application which shall contain the
following documents and information:
                                             
 (a) An irrevocable appointment of the attorney general to receive
service of any lawful process in any noncriminal proceeding arising
under this chapter against the grantor or his personal representatives;
                                             
 (b) The official name and address and principal place of business
of the grantor and the parent firm or holding company of the grantor, if
any;
                                             
 (c) The business experience stated individually of each of the
grantor's directors and officers including the biographical data
concerning all such persons;
                                             
 (d) The business experience of the grantor, including the length
of time the grantor has conducted a business of the type to be operated
by the distributor, has granted distributorships for such business, and
has granted distributorships in other lines of business;
                                             
 (e) Where such is the case, a statement that the grantor or any
of its current directors or officers:
                                             
 (1) Has been held liable in a civil action by final judgment,
convicted of a felony or pled nolo contendere to a felony charge if such
felony or civil action involved fraud, embezzlement, fraudulent
conversion or misappropriation of property for the most recent 7 year
period;
                                             
 (2) Is subject to any currently effective state or federal
agency injunctive or restrictive order relating to or affecting
distributorship activities or the grantor/distributor relationship;
                                             
 (3) Has filed in bankruptcy or has been associated as a
director or officer of any company that has filed bankruptcy or
reorganization proceedings for the most recent 7 year period;
                                             
 (4) Has been a party to any cause of action brought by
distributors against the grantor for the most recent 7 year period which
resulted either in an out-of-court settlement or a judgment against the
grantor; and
                                             
 (5) Is presently a party to any cause of action brought by a
distributor against the grantor;
                                             
such statement shall set forth the identity and location of the court,
date of conviction or judgment, and penalty imposed or damages assessed,
and the date, nature, and issuer of each such order or ruling;
                                             
 (f) A copy of any contracts, agreements, brochures or other
documents relating to the distributorship;
                                             
 (g) A factual description of the distributorship offered to be
sold and of the services, training and assistance which will be provided
by the grantor to the distributor;
                                             
 (h) A statement describing the total funds which must be paid by
the distributor to the grantor in order to obtain or commence the
distributorship operation, such as deposits, down payments and fees;
and, if all or part of these fees or deposits are returnable under
certain conditions, these conditions should be set forth; and, if not
returnable, such fact shall be disclosed;
                                             
 (i) A statement describing the recurring fees required to be
paid, in connection with carrying on the distributorship business, by
the distributor to the grantor;
                                             
 (j) If the grantor proposes to use estimated or projected
distributorship sales or earnings, a statement of such estimates or
projections together with an explanation of the bases and assumptions
underlying such estimates or projections and any supportive data;
                                             
 (k) A statement disclosing:
                                             
 (1) The number of distributorships operating at the end of the
last calendar year; and
                                             
 (2) The names and addresses of all distributorships located in
this state;
                                             
 (l) A statement describing any services, supplies, products,
signs, fixtures, or equipment relating to the establishment or the
operating of the distributorship which the distributor is required to
purchase, lease or rent directly or indirectly from the grantor;
                                             
 (m) A statement of whether the grantor will receive any income or
other consideration from suppliers of goods or services required or
suggested to be purchased by the distributor;
                                             
 (n) A statement of the terms and conditions of any financing
arrangement offered directly or indirectly by the grantor; and a
statement of whether the grantor will receive any payments from any
person for the placement of financing with such person;
                                             
 (o) A statement whether, by the terms of the distributorship
agreement or other device or practice, the distributor is limited in the
goods or services he may offer for sale, or limited in the customers to
whom he may sell such goods or services or is promised an exclusive or
protected territory in which he may sell such goods or services;
                                             
 (p) A statement disclosing the conditions and terms under which
the grantor allows the distributor to sell, lease, assign, or otherwise
transfer his distributorship, or any interest therein and the amount of
consideration which must be paid to the grantor for such sale, lease,
assignment or transfer, if any;
                                             
 (q) A statement disclosing:
                                             
 (1) The conditions under which the distributorship agreement
may be terminated by the grantor, renewal may be refused, or the
distributorship may be repurchased by the grantor at its option;
                                             
 (2) The number, stated for each category, of distributorships
which were terminated, renewal refused or repurchased during the
preceding calendar year and a complete explanation thereof; and
                                             
 (3) The conditions under which the distributorship agreement
may be terminated by the distributor and the number of distributorships
voluntarily terminated by distributors during the preceding calendar
year;
                                             
 (r) The disclosure statement required by RSA 358-E:4, if in
different form than the application; and
                                             
 (s) Any other information required by rule adopted by the
attorney general, pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 II. The grantor shall file with the attorney general a financial
statement of the grantor, audited by an independent certified public
accountant, as of the close of the most recent fiscal year of the
grantor. If any material changes in the financial condition of the
grantor occur after such statement is prepared, the grantor must
disclose such changes and explain their significance to the operation of
a distributorship. The attorney general may, in his discretion, waive
the requirement for audited statements for grantors who have not
previously had such certified audits, provided the unaudited financial
statement is prepared by an independent certified public accountant. If
the grantor is controlled by any person who absolutely and
unconditionally guarantees to assume the duties and obligations of the
grantor under the distributorship agreement should the grantor become
unable to perform, the attorney general may, in his discretion, accept a
consolidated financial statement from the grantor and such person. If
the attorney general finds that a grantor has failed to demonstrate that
adequate financial arrangements have been made to fulfill the
obligations set forth in the distributorship agreement, the attorney
general may require the escrow or impoundment of fees and other funds
paid by the distributor or distributors until such obligations have been
fulfilled, or, at the option of the grantor, the furnishing of a surety
bond as provided by rule or order of the attorney general, if he finds
that such requirement is necessary and appropriate to protect
distributors.
                                             
 III. Upon satisfactory submission of the information and documents
required by paragraphs I and II and the payment of a registration fee of

                                             $50, the attorney general shall issue a certificate stating that the
distributorship has been registered.
                                             
 IV. The attorney general may accept any registration filed with
agencies of the United States or any other state, in lieu of the filing
required by this chapter, if he determines the acceptance of such
registration will adequately protect the public.
                                             
 V. The attorney general may from time to time by order exempt from
the provisions of this chapter any distributorship if he finds that the
enforcement of all the provisions of this chapter with respect to such
distributorship is not necessary in the public interest and for the
protection of distributors due to the limited character of the
distributorship, or the small amount of money involved or because such
distributorship is, in the judgment of the attorney general, otherwise
adequately regulated by federal or state law or because such
distributorship has been registered and approved pursuant to the laws of
the United States or any other state.
                                             
 VI. The grantor shall immediately notify the attorney general of any
material change in information contained in the application for
registration and shall make appropriate amendment of the disclosure
statement.
                                             
 VII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1977, 307:1. 1985, 300:7, I(b), 24, 25, 26; 300:30, eff.
July 1, 1987.

### Section 358-E:4

 **358-E:4 Disclosure Statement. –** A grantor shall provide to each
prospective distributor a disclosure statement which contains the
documents and information required to be filed with the attorney general
at least 7 days prior to entering into any distributorship contract or
agreement with such prospective distributor, or at least 7 days prior to
the receipt by the grantor of any consideration from the prospective
distributor, whichever occurs first.
                                             
 Any distributorship contract or agreement shall state in immediate
proximity to the space reserved for the distributor's signature, in
boldface type of a minimum size of 10 points, a statement in
substantially the following form:
                                             
 **"THE NEW HAMPSHIRE DISTRIBUTORSHIP DISCLOSURE ACT MAKES IT
UNLAWFUL TO SELL ANY DISTRIBUTORSHIP IN THIS STATE WHICH IS SUBJECT TO
THAT ACT WITHOUT FIRST PROVIDING TO THE PROSPECTIVE DISTRIBUTOR AT LEAST
7 DAYS PRIOR TO THE EXECUTION BY SUCH DISTRIBUTOR OF ANY BINDING
DISTRIBUTORSHIP AGREEMENT, OR AT LEAST 7 DAYS PRIOR TO THE PAYMENT OF
ANY CONSIDERATION, WHICHEVER OCCURS FIRST, A COPY OF THIS DISCLOSURE
STATEMENT, TOGETHER WITH A COPY OF ALL PROPOSED AGREEMENTS RELATING TO
THE SALE OF THE DISTRIBUTORSHIP. IF THESE DOCUMENTS HAVE NOT BEEN
PRESENTED TO YOU IN ACCORDANCE WITH THESE REQUIREMENTS, YOU MAY VOID THE
AGREEMENT WITHIN 90 DAYS BY SENDING NOTICE OF YOUR INTENTION TO THE
GRANTOR BY UNITED STATES MAIL, RETURN RECEIPT REQUESTED. UPON RECEIPT OF
THE NOTICE, THE GRANTOR MUST REFUND ALL MONIES YOU HAVE PAID FOR THE
DISTRIBUTORSHIP PLUS INTEREST. THE DISCLOSURE STATEMENT CONTAINS A
SUMMARY ONLY OF CERTAIN MATERIAL PROVISIONS OF THE DISTRIBUTORSHIP
AGREEMENT. THE AGREEMENT SHOULD BE CAREFULLY READ FOR AN UNDERSTANDING
OF ALL RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF BOTH GRANTOR AND DISTRIBUTOR.''**

**Source.** 1977, 307:1. 1985, 300:7, I(b).

### Section 358-E:5

 **358-E:5 Acts Unlawful. –** It shall be unlawful for any person, in
connection with the advertising, offering, contracting, sale or
promoting of any distributorship in this state:
                                             
 I. To fail to comply with any provision of this chapter;
                                             
 II. To employ any device, scheme or artifice to defraud a
distributor;
                                             
 III. To make any untrue statement of a material fact, or to omit to
state a material fact in connection with the documents and information
required to be furnished to the attorney general or prospective
distributor; and
                                             
 IV. To make any claim or representation in advertising or
promotional material, or in any oral sales presentation, solicitation,
or discussion between the grantor and a prospective distributor, which
is inconsistent with the information required to be disclosed by this
chapter.

**Source.** 1977, 307:1. 1985, 300:7, I(b).

### Section 358-E:6

 **358-E:6 Remedies. –**
                                             
 I. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is an unfair or
deceptive act or practice within the meaning of RSA 358-A:2. Any right
or remedy set forth in RSA 358-A may be used to enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
                                             
 II. Any distributor may bring an action under RSA 358-A for
violation of this chapter to recover damages sustained by reason of such
violation against the grantor or any other person who has materially
participated or aided in making such sale. Said distributor may proceed
against any escrowed or impounded funds or surety bond to recover
damages.
                                             
 III. (a) If the grantor has failed to register the distributorship
or has failed to provide to a distributor a disclosure statement as
required by this chapter, the distributor may elect to void the
distributorship agreement. Notice of any such election shall be given by
the distributor within 90 days after the distributor has knowledge of
the failure of the grantor to comply with the requirements of this
chapter to each person from whom recovery will be sought, by United
States mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service.
                                             
 (b) Upon receipt of such notice, the grantor or any other person
who has materially participated or aided in making such sale may offer
to return any consideration paid or to repurchase the distributorship
for a price equal to the full amount paid, together with 6 percent
interest on said amount from the date of payment, less any income
received from the distributorship. Every offer shall be in writing,
shall be delivered to the distributor or sent by United States mail,
return receipt requested, addressed to the distributor, shall offer to
return any consideration paid or to repurchase the distributorship for a
price equal to the full amount paid together with 6 percent interest on
said amount from the date of payment, less any income received by the
distributor, and may require the distributor to return to the person
making such offer all unsold goods, equipment, fixtures, leases and
similar items received. Such offer shall continue in force for 15 days
from the date on which it was received by the distributor, shall advise
the distributor of such rights and the period of time limited for
acceptance thereof, and shall contain such further information, if any,
as the division may prescribe. If the offer is accepted, the grantor
must pay all sums due within 10 days of its receipt of the acceptance.
                                             
 (c) A distributor shall waive any right to proceed against the
grantor for its failure to register or provide a disclosure statement if
said distributor fails to accept an offer tendered pursuant to the
provisions of paragraph III(a) and (b).

**Source.** 1977, 307:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1977.
