---
title: 'CHAPTER 358-B CHAIN DISTRIBUTOR SCHEMES'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 358-B
                                             
CHAIN DISTRIBUTOR SCHEMES
-------------------------

### Section 358-B:1

 **358-B:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Chain distributor scheme'' means a sales device whereby a
person, upon condition that he make an investment, is granted a license
or right to solicit or recruit for profit or economic gain one or more
additional persons who are also granted such license or right upon
condition of making an investment and may further perpetuate the chain
of persons who are granted such license or right upon such condition. A
limitation as to the number of persons who may participate, or the
presence of additional conditions affecting eligibility for such license
or right to recruit or solicit or the receipt of profits therefrom, does
not change the identity of the scheme as a chain distributor scheme.
                                             
 II. "Investment'' means any acquisition, for a consideration other
than personal services, of property, tangible or intangible, and
includes, without limitation, franchises, business opportunities and
services. It does not include sales demonstration equipment and
materials furnished at cost for use in making sales and not for resale.

**Source.** 1975, 157:1, eff. July 25, 1975.

### Section 358-B:2

 **358-B:2 Chain Distributor Schemes Prohibited. –** It shall be
unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation, trust or association,
or any agent or employee thereof, to promote, offer or grant
participation in a chain distributor scheme.

**Source.** 1975, 157:1, eff. July 25, 1975.

### Section 358-B:3

 **358-B:3 Penalty. –** Any person who violates the provisions of
this chapter or an injunction issued under RSA 358-B:4 shall be guilty
of a class B felony.

**Source.** 1975, 157:1, eff. July 25, 1975.

### Section 358-B:4

 **358-B:4 Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever the attorney general has reason to believe that a chain
distributor scheme is being or is about to be conducted by any person,
he may bring an action in the name of the state against such person, and
in connection with such action may request the court to issue a
temporary restraining order and a temporary or permanent injunction
against such scheme. If the court finds that a chain distribution scheme
is being operated in violation of this chapter, the court shall award to
the state civil penalties up to 
                                             $10,000 for each such violation.
                                             
 II. In connection with any action brought under this section, the
attorney general may also petition the court to appoint a receiver to
take charge of the business of any person during the course of
litigation for the purpose of preventing such person from continuing to
engage in any act or practice declared to be unlawful by this chapter
and of preserving the assets of said person to restore to any other
person any money or property, real or personal, acquired by any unlawful
act or practice. The receiver shall have the authority to sue for,
collect, receive and take into his possession all the goods and
chattels, rights and credits, moneys and effects, lands and tenements,
books, records, documents, papers, choses in action, bills, notes and
property of every description, including property with which such
property has been mingled if it cannot be identified in kind because of
such commingling derived by means of any unlawful act or practice, and
to sell, convey and assign the same and hold, dispose and distribute the
proceeds thereof under the direction of the court.
                                             
 III. An action under this section may be brought in the superior
court of the county in which the person who is alleged to be conducting
or about to conduct a chain distributor scheme resides or has his
principal place of business, or, with the consent of the parties, or if
the person is a nonresident and has no permanent place of business
within the state, in the superior court of Merrimack county.

**Source.** 1975, 157:1, eff. July 25, 1975.

### Section 358-B:5

 **358-B:5 Unfair Trade Practice. –** Any violation of RSA 358-B:2
shall also constitute an unfair method of competition or any unfair or
deceptive act or practice within the meaning of RSA 358-A, and shall
subject the defendant in such case to a cause of action under RSA
358-A:10.

**Source.** 1975, 157:1, eff. July 25, 1975.
