---
title: 'CHAPTER 358-D REGULATION OF MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR FACILITIES'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 358-D
                                             
REGULATION OF MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR FACILITIES
---------------------------------------------

### Section 358-D:1

 **358-D:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Motor vehicle repair facility'' means any person who performs
services or repair work on any motor vehicle.
                                             
 II. "Motor vehicle'' means any vehicle defined by RSA 259:60, I
except "motor trucks,'' "motorcycles'' and "motor-driven cycles'' as
defined by RSA 259.
                                             
 III. "Person'' means any person defined by RSA 358-A:1, I.
                                             
 IV. "Customer'' means any person, or representative thereof, who is
seeking to have performed, is having performed, or has had performed,
any service or repair work on a motor vehicle.

**Source.** 1977, 295:1. 1981, 146:5, eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

### Section 358-D:2

 **358-D:2 When Written Estimate Required. –** Upon the request of
any customer, a motor vehicle repair facility shall provide a written
estimate to the customer in advance of performing any service or repair
work. The written estimate shall contain:
                                             
 I. An itemization of the service or repair work to be performed;
                                             
 II. An estimated price for labor and parts necessary to complete the
work; and
                                             
 III. An estimated completion date.

**Source.** 1977, 295:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1977.

### Section 358-D:3

 **358-D:3 Authorization to Proceed. –** A motor vehicle repair
facility shall not perform any service or repair work set forth in the
written estimate unless it receives the written permission of the
customer to proceed; provided, however, that if it is impracticable to
give the customer a written estimate or obtain his written permission to
proceed, the motor vehicle repair facility may orally advise the
customer of the items contained in the written estimate and obtain his
oral permission to proceed.

**Source.** 1977, 295:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1977.

### Section 358-D:4

 **358-D:4 Additional Service or Repair Work. –** If additional
service or repair work of an unrelated and different nature from the
work originally itemized in the written estimate becomes necessary, a
motor vehicle repair facility shall notify the customer of the estimated
cost of such additional work and receive his written or oral permission
to proceed before performing the work.

**Source.** 1977, 295:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1977.

### Section 358-D:5

 **358-D:5 Effect of Exceeding the Estimate. –** Upon the completion
of any service or repair work for which an estimate has been given, a
motor vehicle repair facility shall not charge the customer any amount
which exceeds the estimate by 10 percent without his written consent.

**Source.** 1977, 295:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1977.

### Section 358-D:6

 **358-D:6 Service or Repair Delay. –** A motor vehicle repair
facility is not liable for breach of the written estimated completion
date for service or repair work if the delay is caused by:
                                             
 I. An act of God;
                                             
 II. Strike;
                                             
 III. Unexpected illness;
                                             
 IV. Unexpected shortage of labor or parts; or
                                             
 V. Unavailability of customer to give permission to perform
additional service or repair work.

**Source.** 1977, 295:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1977.

### Section 358-D:7

 **358-D:7 When Written Estimate Not Required. –** A motor vehicle
repair facility shall not be required to provide a written estimate to a
customer if the facility does not agree to perform the service or repair
work; provided, however, that no such facility shall engage in any act
or practice which causes, or has the effect of causing, any customer to
waive his right to an estimate as a condition to performing any service
or repair work.

**Source.** 1977, 295:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1977.

### Section 358-D:8

 **358-D:8 Service or Repair Work Where Estimate Not Requested. –**
Notwithstanding RSA 358-D:2-7, if a customer does not request that an
estimate be provided, a motor vehicle repair facility shall not perform
any service or repair work on any motor vehicle for the customer unless
such work has been authorized by the customer.

**Source.** 1977, 295:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1977.

### Section 358-D:9

 **358-D:9 Return of Replaced Parts. –** With the exception of parts
required to be returned to the manufacturer or distributor under a
warranty or exchange agreement, all parts which have been replaced on a
motor vehicle by a motor vehicle repair facility shall be returned to
the customer if the customer has requested, in advance of the work being
performed, that the parts be returned to him.

**Source.** 1977, 295:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1977.

### Section 358-D:10

 **358-D:10 Required Work Invoice. –**
                                             
 I. Upon completion of any service or repair work for which a charge
is made, a motor vehicle repair facility shall prepare an invoice which
itemizes:
                                             
 (a) All work that the motor vehicle repair facility has
performed;
                                             
 (b) All work that any subcontractor has performed;
                                             
 (c) All parts supplied having a value in excess of 
                                             $.50 and the
retail cost of each such part; and
                                             
 (d) The number of hours, or portion thereof, of labor charged in
performing the work and the retail cost of such labor.
                                             
 II. The invoice shall state clearly whether or not the motor vehicle
repair facility will guarantee the work and, if so, the terms of the
guarantee and the period for which it will be in effect.
                                             
 III. The invoice shall state clearly if any used, rebuilt, or
reconditioned parts have been supplied or if a part of a component
system supplied is composed of used, rebuilt, or reconditioned parts.
                                             
 IV. A motor vehicle repair facility shall be responsible for any
service or repair work performed by a subcontractor in the same manner
as if the work had been performed by the facility.
                                             
 V. The motor vehicle repair facility shall give the customer a copy
of the invoice and shall retain a copy as a business record for one
year.

**Source.** 1977, 295:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1977

### Section 358-D:11

 **358-D:11 Notice Requirements. –** Each motor vehicle repair
facility shall conspicuously post a notice of no fewer than 6 square
feet on the premises of the facility for the purpose of advising any
customer of his rights under this chapter. The notice shall contain the
following information:
                                             
 I. The motor vehicle repair facility must provide to any customer
upon request a written estimate for service or repair work to be
performed and cannot proceed to perform such work unless written or oral
authorization is obtained;
                                             
 II. If additional repair or service work of an unrelated and
different nature from the work originally itemized in the written
estimate becomes necessary, it must notify the customer of the estimated
cost of such additional repairs and obtain his written or oral
permission to proceed;
                                             
 III. The customer cannot be charged any amount which exceeds the
estimate for the original or additional work by 10 percent without his
written consent;
                                             
 IV. The motor vehicle repair facility is not required to give a
written estimate if it does not agree to perform the service or repair
work. However, the facility is prohibited from engaging in any conduct
which will cause a customer to waive his right to an estimate as a
condition to performing any service or repair work;
                                             
 V. Even where a customer has not requested an estimate, the motor
vehicle repair facility is not permitted to perform any service or
repair work without his authorization;
                                             
 VI. The customer has a right to a return of all replaced parts,
except those parts required to be returned to the manufacturer or
distributor under a warranty or exchange agreement, if he requests that
they be returned to him prior to the service or repair work being
performed;
                                             
 VII. The customer must be provided with an invoice for any service
or repair work performed which itemizes all work performed, all parts
supplied having a value in excess of 
                                             $.50 and all labor charged and
states whether or not any guarantee exists, and if so, its terms and the
period for which it will be in effect;
                                             
 VIII. A motor vehicle repair facility which fails to comply with any
of these requirements is not entitled to any payment whatsoever for any
service or repair work performed which was not authorized by the
customer; and
                                             
 IX. Any complaint concerning a failure of a motor vehicle repair
facility to comply with these requirements should be filed with the
Attorney General, Department of Justice, State House Annex, Concord, New
Hampshire 03301. The attorney general may, in his discretion, approve
any notice which substantially complies with the requirements of this
paragraph.

**Source.** 1977, 295:1. 1979, 171:1. 1985, 300:7, I(a), (b).

### Section 358-D:11-a

 **358-D:11-a Sale, Purchase, and Installation of Airbags; Criminal
Penalty Established. –** Any person who knowingly sells, purchases,
installs, or reinstalls any object which is not a properly operating
airbag that was designed in accordance with federal safety regulations
for the make, model, and year of the vehicle, as part of a vehicle
inflatable restraint system, shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2003, 297:1, eff. Sept. 16, 2003.

### Section 358-D:11-b

 **358-D:11-b Installation of Recycled Airbag. –** Nothing in RSA
358-D:11-a shall prohibit the installation or reinstallation of a
recycled airbag that was designed in accordance with federal safety
regulations for the make, model, and year of the vehicle, as part of a
vehicle inflatable restraint system.

**Source.** 2003, 297:1, eff. Sept. 16, 2003.

### Section 358-D:12

 **358-D:12 Remedies. –**
                                             
 I. Any violation of any provision of this chapter is an unfair or
deceptive act or practice within the meaning of RSA 358-A:2. Any right
or remedy set forth in RSA 358-A may be used to enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
                                             
 II. Except as provided in paragraph III of this section, any motor
vehicle repair facility which violates any provision of this chapter
with respect to any service or repair work performed on a motor vehicle
for any customer shall not be entitled to any payment whatsoever for
such work.
                                             
 III. A motor vehicle repair facility shall be entitled to payment
for service or repair work performed on a motor vehicle to the extent
such work was authorized by the customer pursuant to this chapter. The
burden of proving such work was so authorized shall rest on the motor
vehicle repair facility.
                                             
 IV. Payment, by any customer, of charges presented by a motor
vehicle repair facility for service or repair work performed shall not
be construed as a waiver of any right set forth in this chapter.
                                             
 V. The remedies provided in this section shall be in addition to any
other right, remedy, or penalty provided by law, including RSA
358-D:11-a and RSA 358-D:11-b.

**Source.** 1977, 295:1. 2003, 297:2, eff. Sept. 16, 2003.
