---
title: 'CHAPTER 358-G REGULATION OF AUCTIONS'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 358-G
                                             
REGULATION OF AUCTIONS
----------------------

### Section 358-G:1

 **358-G:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Auction''means the sale of real or personal property, or both,
in which the sale price of the property offered is increased by
competitive bids until the highest accepted bidder becomes the
purchaser, pursuant to RSA 311-B.
                                             
 II. "Collusive bidding'' means a practice whereby the auctioneer,
the seller, or anyone acting on behalf of the auctioneer or seller,
causes, employs any person to engage in, or knowingly allows, fictitious
bidding during an auction for the purpose of bidding up the price of any
goods in competition with bona fide bidders, or for the purpose of
encouraging or enticing bona fide bidders to purchase, or for the
purpose of stimulating competitive bidding to purchase. Collusive
bidding shall include any use of false bidders, cappers, shills, or
by-bidders.
                                             
 III. "Person'' means any person defined by RSA 358-A:1, I.

**Source.** 1979, 447:1. 1998, 17:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1999. 2010, 291:13,
eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 358-G:2

 **358-G:2 General Prohibitions. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall advertise as an auction the sale of property
unless such advertised sale is conducted pursuant to RSA 311-B.
                                             
 II. No person shall enter into and participate in collusive bidding
practices.

**Source.** 1979, 447:1, eff. Aug. 24, 1979.

### Section 358-G:2-a

 **358-G:2-a Disclosure Required. –** If a buyer's premium is to be
charged at any auction held in this state, any advertisement for such
auction shall state clearly that a buyer's premium will be charged. In
addition, a notice disclosing that a buyer's premium will be charged
shall also be posted conspicuously at the site of the auction.

**Source.** 1994, 141:1, eff. July 22, 1994.

### Section 358-G:3

 **358-G:3 Remedy; Penalties. –** Any violation of this chapter is an
unfair or deceptive act or practice within the meaning of RSA 358-A:2,
provided that, notwithstanding RSA 358-A:6, any person who violates RSA
358-G:2, II shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor if a natural person
or a felony if any other person. Any right or remedy set forth in RSA
358-A may be used to enforce this chapter.

**Source.** 1979, 447:1. 1998, 17:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.
