---
title: 'CHAPTER 359-H COMPUTER SPYWARE'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 359-H
                                             
COMPUTER SPYWARE
----------------

### Section 359-H:1

 **359-H:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Advertisement'' means a communication, the primary purpose of
which is the commercial promotion of a commercial product or service,
including content on an Internet website operated for a commercial
purpose.
                                             
 II. "Authorized user'' means a consumer who owns or is permitted to
use a computer.
                                             
 III. "Computer program'' means a set of statements or instructions
to be used directly or indirectly in a computer in order to bring about
a certain result.
                                             
 IV. (a) "Spyware'' means software residing on a computer that:
                                             
 (1) Employs a user's Internet connection in the background,
via a backchannel, without his or her knowledge or explicit permission.
                                             
 (2) Sends information about the computer's usage to a remote
computer or server; or displays or causes to be displayed an
advertisement in response to the computer's usage.
                                             
 (3) Sends or causes to be sent personal information residing
on the computer to a remote computer or server.
                                             
 (b) Notwithstanding subparagraph (a), "spyware'' does not include
any of the following:
                                             
 (1) Software designed and installed primarily to prevent,
diagnose, or resolve technical difficulties, to protect the security of
the user's computer, or to detect or prevent fraudulent activities.
                                             
 (2) Software or data that solely report to an Internet website
information stored by the Internet website on the user's computer,
including cookies, HTML code, or Java Scripts.
                                             
 (3) Software that provides the user with the capability to
search the Internet.
                                             
 (4) Software installed with the consent of an authorized user
whose primary purpose is to prevent access to Internet content that is
inappropriate for minors.
                                             
 (5) An operating system.
                                             
 V. "Usage''means:
                                             
 (a) The Internet websites accessed by a user.
                                             
 (b) The contents or characteristics of the Internet websites
accessed by a user.
                                             
 (c) A user's personal information, including:
                                             
 (1) A first and last name of a user, whether given at birth or
adoption, assumed, or legally changed.
                                             
 (2) Any of the following with respect to a user's home or
other physical address: the street name, the name of the city or town,
or the zip code.
                                             
 (3) An electronic mail address.
                                             
 (4) A telephone number.
                                             
 (5) A Social Security number.
                                             
 (6) Any personal identification number.
                                             
 (7) A credit or debit card number.
                                             
 (8) Any access code associated with a credit or debit card.
                                             
 (9) A date of birth, birth certificate number, or place of
birth.
                                             
 (10) A password or access code.
                                             
 (11) A bank account number.

**Source.** 2005, 238:1, eff. July 14, 2005.

### Section 359-H:2

 **359-H:2 Prohibited Conduct. –** A person or entity conducting
business in this state, who is not an authorized user, shall not
knowingly cause a computer program or spyware to be copied onto the
computer of a consumer and use the program or spyware to do any of the
following:
                                             
 I. Take control, through intentionally deceptive means, of the
consumer's computer by doing any of the following:
                                             
 (a) Transmitting or relaying commercial electronic mail or a
computer virus from the consumer's computer, where the transmission or
relaying is initiated by a person other than an authorized user and
without the authorization of an authorized user.
                                             
 (b) Accessing or using the consumer's modem or Internet service
for the purpose of causing damage to the consumer's computer or causing
an authorized user to incur unauthorized financial charges.
                                             
 (c) Using the consumer's computer as part of an activity
performed by a group of computers for the purpose of causing damage to
another computer, including launching a denial of service attack.
                                             
 (d) Opening multiple, sequential, stand-alone advertisements in
the consumer's Internet browser with knowledge that a reasonable
computer user cannot close the advertisements without turning off the
computer or closing the consumer's Internet browser.
                                             
 II. Modifying, through intentionally deceptive means, any of the
following settings related to the computer's access to, or use of, the
Internet:
                                             
 (a) The page that appears when an authorized user launches an
Internet browser or similar program used to access and navigate the
Internet.
                                             
 (b) The default provider the authorized user uses to access or
search the Internet.
                                             
 (c) The authorized user's list of bookmarks used to access Web
pages.
                                             
 (d) An authorized user's security or other settings that protect
information about the authorized user, for the purpose of stealing
personal information of, or causing harm to, an authorized user.
                                             
 (e) The security settings of the computer for the purpose of
causing damage to one or more computers.
                                             
 III. Collecting personal information through intentionally deceptive
means, such as through the use of a keystroke logging function, and
transferring that information from the computer to another person.
                                             
 IV. Preventing, through intentionally deceptive means, an authorized
user's reasonable efforts to block the installation of, or to disable,
software by doing any of the following:
                                             
 (a) Presenting an authorized user with an option to decline
installation of software such that, when the option is selected, the
installation nevertheless proceeds.
                                             
 (b) Falsely representing that software has been disabled.
                                             
 (c) Causing software that the authorized user has properly
removed or disabled to automatically reinstall or reactivate on the
computer without the authorization of an authorized user.
                                             
 V. Intentionally misrepresenting that software will be uninstalled
or disabled by an authorized user's action, with knowledge that the
software will not be uninstalled or disabled.
                                             
 VI. Inducing, through deceptive means, an authorized user to install
a software component onto the computer, including deceptively
misrepresenting that installing software is necessary for security or
privacy reasons or in order to open, view, or play a particular type of
content.
                                             
 VII. Deceptively installing and executing on the computer one or
more additional computer software components with the intent of causing
an authorized user to use the components in a way that violates any
other provision of this section.
                                             
 VIII. Through intentionally deceptive means, removing, disabling, or
rendering inoperative a security, antispyware, or antivirus technology
installed on the computer.

**Source.** 2005, 238:1, eff. July 14, 2005.

### Section 359-H:3

 **359-H:3 Violation; Criminal Penalty. –** Any person who uses a
computer program or spyware in violation of RSA 359-H:2 shall be guilty
of a class A misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2005, 238:1, eff. July 14, 2005.

### Section 359-H:4

 **359-H:4 Limitations on Actions. –** A person may not bring an
action for a violation of this chapter against an Internet service
provider for the routine transmission of security information or
information that contains an advertisement violating this chapter. No
person may bring a class action under this chapter.

**Source.** 2005, 238:1, eff. July 14, 2005.

### Section 359-H:5

 **359-H:5 Enforcement; Information Gathering. –** The house standing
committee responsible for science, technology, and energy issues, in
consultation with the department of justice, may periodically review
implementation and enforcement of this chapter and shall make such
legislative recommendations as may be appropriate.

**Source.** 2005, 238:1, eff. July 14, 2005.

### Section 359-H:6

 **359-H:6 Exemption. –** A provider of software or provider of
interactive computer service shall not be held liable under this chapter
for any action voluntarily taken in good faith, or any service provided
in good faith, to remove or disable programs used to violate RSA 359-H:2
that reside on the consumer's computer if the consumer is a customer of
the provider and if the provider notifies the consumer prior to
undertaking the action or providing the service.

**Source.** 2005, 238:1, eff. July 14, 2005.
