---
title: 'CHAPTER 359-E TELEMARKETING'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 359-E
                                             
TELEMARKETING
--------------

Use of Automatic Telephone Dialing Systems and Caller Identification Services
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 359-E:1

 **359-E:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Automatic telephone dialing system'' means any automatic
terminal equipment which stores or produces numbers to be called
randomly or sequentially and which delivers a prerecorded message to the
number called without assistance of a live operator.
                                             
 I-a. "Caller identification information'' means:
                                             
 (a) The telephone listing number and/or name of the customer from
whose telephone instrument a telephone number is dialed; or
                                             
 (b) Other information that may be used to identify the specific
originating number or originating location of a wire or electronic
communication transmitted by a telephone instrument.
                                             
 I-b. "Caller identification service'' means a service offered by a
telecommunications utility that provides caller identification
information to a device capable of displaying the information.
                                             
 I-c. "Per-call blocking'' means a telecommunications service that
prevents the transmission of caller identification information to a
called party on an individual call if the calling party acts
affirmatively to prevent the transmission of the caller identification
information.
                                             
 I-d. "Per-line blocking'' means a telecommunications service that
prevents the transmission of caller identification information to a
called party on every call unless the calling party acts affirmatively
to release the caller identification information.
                                             
 II. "Solicitation'' means the unrequested initiation of a telephone
call to a residential telephone subscriber for the purposes of giving,
selling, or leasing services or goods, whether real or personal,
tangible or intangible; or to gain a pledge, promise or contribution in
circumstances where there is no pre-existing relationship between the
caller and the person called; or to obtain information, data or
opinions.

**Source.** 1989, 165:1. 1998, 14:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 359-E:2

 **359-E:2 Registration. –**
                                             
 I. Any person intending to use an automatic telephone dialing system
for solicitation in this state shall, at least 10 business days prior to
using the system, register with the consumer protection and antitrust
bureau of the department of justice the information required by RSA
359-E:3, and, if the registrant is a solicitor, as that term is used in
RSA 7:28-c, the information required by RSA 7:28-c. At the time of
filing, the registrant shall also pay to the department an annual
non-proratable administrative fee of 
                                             $20 for the calendar year.
                                             
 II. The registrant shall be responsible for providing timely
identification and automatic disconnect in accordance with RSA 359-E:4
and 359-E:5. Calls pertaining to an interest in real estate shall comply
with the disclosure requirements of RSA 356-A and 356-B.
                                             
 III. All transmissions shall be randomly generated in unequal
intervals, and shall not infiltrate any emergency lines, such as police,
fire, or ambulance lines, which are either 911 circuits or 7-digit
telephone numbers designated as emergency lines.

**Source.** 1989, 165:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 359-E:3

 **359-E:3 Registration Information. –** Each registration pursuant
to RSA 359-E:2 shall contain the following information:
                                             
 I. The name and address of the registrant, including the name under
which the registrant is doing or intends to do business.
                                             
 II. The complete street addresses of all locations from which the
registrant will be conducting business.

**Source.** 1989, 165:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 359-E:4

 **359-E:4 Dialer Disconnect. –** Any automatic telephone dialing
system used in this state shall be operated so that the system will
automatically disconnect or release within 30 seconds after the called
party hangs up.

**Source.** 1989, 165:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 359-E:5

 **359-E:5 Identification. –** Any solicitation message made through
the use of an automatic telephone dialing system shall disclose
immediately after telephone contact:
                                             
 I. The name of the person, company, or organization making the
call.
                                             
 II. The purpose of the call and the goods or services being offered,
if any.

**Source.** 1989, 165:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 359-E:5-a

 **359-E:5-a Blocking Prohibited. –** No person using an automated
telephone dialing system or any other method for solicitation in this
state shall use any method, including per-call blocking or per-line
blocking, that prevents caller identification information for the
telephone solicitor's lines used to make telephone calls to a
residential telephone subscriber from being shown by a device capable of
displaying caller identification information. The caller identification
information displayed shall contain a telephone number at which the
telephone solicitor may receive telephone calls if the telephone
solicitor leaves a message on a telephone answering device or uses an
automatic telephone dialing system that plays a recorded message when a
connection is completed to a telephone number.

**Source.** 1998, 14:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 359-E:6

 **359-E:6 Violations. –** Any violation of the provisions of this
subdivision shall constitute an unfair or deceptive act or practice
within the meaning of RSA 358-A:2. Any right, remedy, or power set forth
in RSA 358-A, including those set forth in RSA 358-A:4, may be used to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such remedies shall be in
addition to any other remedies provided by law or equity.

**Source.** 1989, 165:1. 2003, 303:4, eff. Sept. 16, 2003.

Telemarketing Sales Calls
-------------------------

### Section 359-E:7

 **359-E:7 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Bureau'' means the consumer protection and antitrust bureau of
the office of the attorney general.
                                             
 II. "Customer'' means any natural person who is a resident of this
state and who is or may be required to pay for or to exchange
consideration for goods and services offered through telemarketing.
                                             
 III. "Do-not-call list'' means a list of residential telephone
subscribers who have notified the list administrator of their desire not
to receive telemarketing sales calls.
                                             
 IV. "Doing business in this state'' means conducting telephonic
sales calls from a location:
                                             
 (a) In this state; or
                                             
 (b) Outside of this state to consumers residing in this state.
                                             
 V. "Established business relationship'' means an established
business relationship as defined by the Federal Trade Commission
Telemarketing Sales Rule, 16 C.F.R. part 310, section 310.2(n), as
amended.
                                             
 VI. "Goods and services'' means any goods and services, and shall
include any real property or any tangible personal property as well as
time share estates and licenses or services of any kind.
                                             
 VII. "List administrator'' means the Federal Trade Commission.
                                             
 VIII. "Person'' means any natural person, association, partnership,
firm, corporation and its affiliates or subsidiaries, or other business
entity.
                                             
 IX. "Telemarketer'' means any person who, for financial profit or
commercial purposes in connection with telemarketing, makes
telemarketing sales calls to a customer when the customer is in this
state or any person who directly controls or supervises the conduct of a
telemarketer or causes to be made a telemarketing call on such seller's
own behalf or through a salesperson. For the purposes of this
subdivision, "commercial purposes'' shall mean the sale or offer for
sale of goods or services.
                                             
 X. "Telemarketing'' means any plan, program, or campaign which is
conducted to induce payment or the exchange of any other consideration
for any goods or services by use of one or more telephones and which
involves more than 5 telephone calls per month by a telemarketer in
which the customer is located within the state at the time of the call.
Telemarketing shall not include the solicitation of sales through media
other than by telephone calls.
                                             
 XI. "Telemarketing sales call'' means a telephone call made by a
telemarketer to a customer for the purpose of inducing payment or the
exchange of any other consideration for any goods or services or for the
purpose of soliciting an extension of credit for consumer goods or
services, or for the purpose of obtaining information that may be used
for the direct solicitation of a sale of consumer goods or services or
an extension of credit for such purposes. A telemarketing sales call
shall not include a call made:
                                             
 (a) In response to an express written or verbal request of the
customer called.
                                             
 (b) In connection with an established business relationship.
                                             
 (c) On behalf of a nonprofit charity.
                                             
 (d) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (e) On behalf of a political campaign, except that a call made on
behalf of a political campaign by a vendor using automatic dialing
equipment shall be deemed a telemarketing sales call under this chapter.

**Source.** 2003, 303:3, eff. Sept. 16, 2003; 303:6, eff. Aug. 1, 2006.

### Section 359-E:8

 **359-E:8 Prohibited Telemarketing Sales Calls. –**
                                             
 I. Telemarketers are prohibited from conducting telemarketing sales
calls to any customer who has registered his or her name or telephone
number with the do-not-call registry maintained by the list
administrator or Federal Trade Commission. In the case of telemarketers
regulated by the Federal Communications Commission, this chapter shall
apply in a manner consistent with rules concerning a national
do-not-call list developed by that agency.
                                             
 II. In addition, any person who is required to comply with the
Federal Trade Commission Telemarketing Sales Rule, 16 C.F.R. part 310,
as amended, shall also comply with the provisions of the Federal Trade
Commission Telemarketing Sales Rule for telemarketing sales calls made
within the state of New Hampshire. This section shall also apply to any
person who would be required to comply with the Federal Trade Commission
Telemarketing Sales Rule, if such person were making interstate
telemarketing sales calls.

**Source.** 2003, 303:3, eff. Sept. 16, 2003.

### Section 359-E:9

 **359-E:9 Telemarketers' Obligation to Obtain Do-Not-Call List. –**
Telemarketers making telemarketing sales calls to customers in the state
of New Hampshire shall obtain from the list administrator quarterly
listings of customers in the state who have registered with the list
administrator for inclusion in its do-not-call list.

**Source.** 2003, 303:3, eff. Sept. 16, 2003.

### Section 359-E:10

 **359-E:10 Duties of List Administrator. –** The list
administrator:
                                             
 I. Shall provide the bureau with a copy of each quarterly
do-not-call list.
                                             
 II. Shall provide the bureau with the names and addresses of each
telemarketer who purchases the do-not-call list.
                                             
 III. Except as directed by the bureau, shall be prohibited from
disclosing or using in any way customer names, addresses, or telephone
numbers obtained in the course of registering customers' telephone
numbers on the do-not-call list.

**Source.** 2003, 303:3, eff. Sept. 16, 2003.

### Section 359-E:11

 **359-E:11 Violations; Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. The department of justice shall investigate any complaints
received concerning violations of this subdivision or RSA 664:14-a. If,
after investigating the complaint, the department finds that a person
has violated any provision of this subdivision or RSA 664:14-a, the
department shall impose a civil penalty of 
                                             $5,000 for each violation.
                                             
 II. Any person injured by another's violation of this subdivision
may bring an action for damages and for such equitable relief, including
an injunction, as the court deems necessary and proper. If the court
finds for the plaintiff, recovery shall be in the amount of actual
damages or 
                                             $1,000, whichever is greater. If the court finds that the
act or practice was a willful or knowing violation of this subdivision,
it shall award as much as 3 times, but not less than 2 times, such
amount. In addition, a prevailing plaintiff shall be awarded the costs
of the suit and reasonable attorney's fees, as determined by the court.
Any attempted waiver of the right to the damages set forth in this
paragraph shall be void and unenforceable. Injunctive relief shall be
available to private individuals under this subdivision without bond,
subject to the discretion of the court. Upon commencement of any action
brought under this section, the clerk of the court shall mail a copy of
the complaint or other initial pleadings to the attorney general and,
upon entry of any judgment or decree in the action, shall mail a copy of
such judgment or decree to the attorney general.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding paragraph I, a telemarketer shall not be held
liable for violating this subdivision if the telemarketer can
demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that, as part of the
telemarketer's routine business practice:
                                             
 (a) The telemarketer established and implemented written
procedures to comply with this subdivision.
                                             
 (b) The telemarketer trained his or her personnel in the
requirements of this subdivision.
                                             
 (c) The telemarketer uses a process to prevent telemarketing to
any telephone number on any do-not-call list or registry referenced in
this subdivision; maintains the current, quarterly version of the list
or registry; and maintains records documenting this process.
                                             
 (d) The telemarketer monitors and enforces compliance with the
procedures established under subparagraph (a).
                                             
 (e) The telemarketer uses a version of the do-not-call list
obtained no more than 3 months prior to the date that any call is made.
                                             
 (f) Any subsequent call otherwise violating this subdivision is
not part of a pattern of calls made in violation of this subdivision and
is the result of a good faith error.

**Source.** 2003, 303:3, eff. Sept. 16, 2003.
