---
title: 'CHAPTER 359-C RIGHT TO PRIVACY'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 359-C
                                             
RIGHT TO PRIVACY
----------------

### Section 359-C:1

 **359-C:1 Short Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the New
Hampshire right to privacy act.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1, eff. Sept. 17, 1977.

### Section 359-C:2

 **359-C:2 Purpose. –** The general court finds and declares as
follows:
                                             
 I. The confidential relationships between financial institutions and
creditors and their respective customers are built on trust and must be
preserved and protected.
                                             
 II. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the confidential
relationship between financial institutions and creditors and their
respective customers.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1. 1983, 174:1. 1992, 268:1, eff. July 17, 1992.

### Section 359-C:3

 **359-C:3 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Credit'' means any permission granted to any person to defer
payment of any debt, or to incur any debt and defer payment of such
debt.
                                             
 II. "Creditor'' means any person who regularly extends, or arranges
for the extension of, credit for which the payment of a finance charge
is required, whether such credit is extended by means of any card,
coupon book, or other device which may be used for the purpose of
obtaining any money, property, labor, service, or other thing of value
on credit, or by any other means.
                                             
 III. "Credit record'' means any information held by any creditor
concerning:
                                             
 (a) Any person to whom such creditor extends any credit; or
                                             
 (b) Any person seeking to obtain any credit from such creditor.
                                             
 IV. "Customer'' means any person who has transacted business with or
has used the services of a financial institution or a creditor, or for
whom a financial institution has acted as a fiduciary, in relation to an
account maintained in the person's name.
                                             
 V. "Financial institution'' means:
                                             
 (a) Any bank, trust company, savings and loan association,
building and loan association, homestead association, or credit union
which is organized under the laws of any state or of the United States;
and
                                             
 (b) Any other person organized under the banking laws of any
state.
                                             
 VI. "Financial record'' means any information held by any financial
institution concerning:
                                             
 (a) Any debit or credit to any deposit or share account with such
financial institution; or
                                             
 (b) Any person who maintains, or has maintained, any such account
or who transacts, or has transacted, any other business with such
financial institution.
                                             
 VII. "Investigation'' includes, but is not limited to, any inquiry
by a peace officer, sheriff, or county attorney or any inquiry made for
the purpose of determining whether there has been a violation of any law
enforceable by imprisonment, fine, or monetary liability.
                                             
 VIII. "Local agency'' includes a county; city; town; school
district; municipal corporation; district; political subdivision or any
board, commission or agency thereof; or other local public agency.
                                             
 IX. (a) "Person'' means an individual, partnership, corporation,
association, trust or other legal entity organized under the laws of
this state.
                                             
 (b) In the case of a partnership, corporation, association, trust
or other legal entity, the term "person'' shall also mean:
                                             
 (1) Any partner in a partnership, any director or officer of a
corporation, any trustee of a trust, or any member of an association;
or
                                             
 (2) Any agent who is authorized to maintain an account or
transact business with a financial institution on behalf of a
partnership, corporation, association, trust or other legal entity
organized under the laws of this state.
                                             
 X. "State agency'' means every state office, officer, department,
division, bureau, board, and commission or other state agency.
                                             
 XI. "Supervisory agency'' means:
                                             
 (a) Any authority of any state or of any political subdivision of
any state which is required by law to examine or audit any financial
record of any financial institution; and
                                             
 (b) Any authority of any state or of any political subdivision of
any state which the United States Secretary of the Treasury by
regulation determines to be exercising supervisory functions over any
financial institution which are substantially similar to those
supervisory functions exercised by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, the
Office of Thrift Supervision, the National Credit Union Administration,
the Federal Reserve Board, the Comptroller of the Currency or the
Federal Communications Commission.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1. 1983, 174:2. 1991, 107:1. 1992, 268:2, eff.
July 17, 1992.

### Section 359-C:4

 **359-C:4 Access to Records. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in RSA 359-C:11, no officer, employee, or
agent of a state or local agency or department thereof, in connection
with a civil or criminal investigation of a customer, whether or not
such investigation is being conducted pursuant to formal judicial or
administrative proceedings, may request or receive copies of, or the
information contained in, the financial or credit records of any
customer from a financial institution or creditor unless the financial
or credit records are described with particularity and are consistent
with the scope and requirements of the investigation giving rise to such
request and:
                                             
 (a) Such customer has authorized such disclosure under RSA
359-C:7;
                                             
 (b) Such financial records are disclosed in response to an
administrative subpoena meeting the requirements set forth in RSA
359-C:8;
                                             
 (c) Such financial records are disclosed in response to a search
warrant meeting the requirements set forth in RSA 359-C:9; or
                                             
 (d) Such financial records are disclosed in response to a
judicial subpoena or subpoena duces tecum pursuant to RSA 359-C:10.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. Nothing in this section or in RSA 359-C:7, 359-C:8, 359-C:9 or
359-C:10 shall require a financial institution or creditor to inquire or
determine that those seeking disclosure have duly complied with the
requirements set forth therein; provided only that the customer
authorization, administrative subpoena or summons, search warrant or
judicial subpoena or order served on or delivered to a financial
institution or creditor pursuant to such sections shows compliance on
its face. The burden of proof to show compliance with this chapter shall
be on the agency or body issuing such order.
                                             
 IV. The financial institution or creditor shall maintain for a
period of 5 years a record of all examinations or disclosures of the
financial or credit records of a customer including the identity and
purpose of the person examining the financial or credit records, the
state or local agency or department thereof which he represents and,
where applicable, a copy of the customer authorization, subpoena,
summons or search warrant providing for such examination or disclosure
or a copy of the certified crime report received pursuant to RSA
359-C:11, II. Any record maintained pursuant to this paragraph shall be
available at the office or branch where the customer's account is
located during normal business hours for review by the customer upon
request. A copy of such record shall be furnished to the customer upon
request and payment of the reasonable cost thereof.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1. 1983, 174:3. 1992, 268:3, 4, eff. July 17,
1992.

### Section 359-C:5

 **359-C:5 Disclosure of Records. –**
                                             
 I. Except in accordance with requirements of RSA 359-C:7, 359-C:8,
359-C:9 or 359-C:10, no financial institution or creditor, nor any
director, officer, employee, or agent thereof may provide or authorize
another to provide to an officer, employee or agent of a state or local
agency or department thereof any financial, or credit records, copies
thereof, or the information contained therein if the director, officer,
employee or agent of the financial institution or creditor knows or has
reasonable cause to believe that such financial or credit records or
information are being requested in connection with a civil or criminal
investigation of the customer, whether or not such investigation is
being conducted pursuant to formal judicial or administrative
proceedings.
                                             
 II. This section is not intended to prohibit disclosure of the
financial or credit records of a customer or the information contained
therein incidental to a transaction in the normal course of business of
such financial institution or creditor if the director, officer,
employee or agent thereof making or authorizing the disclosure has no
reasonable cause to believe that the financial or credit records or the
information contained in such records so disclosed will be used by a
state or local agency or department thereof in connection with an
investigation of the customer, whether or not such investigation is
being conducted pursuant to formal judicial or administrative
proceedings.
                                             
 II-a. This section is not intended to prevent a financial
institution from disclosing to the county attorney or the attorney
general, or either of their authorized designees, the financial or
credit records of a customer or any other person, or the information
contained therein when the director, officer, employee or agent of the
financial institution has reasonable cause to believe the customer, or
other person, is utilizing the services of the institution to defraud
the institution or any other person.
                                             
 III. A financial institution or creditor which refuses to disclose
the financial or credit records of a customer, copies thereof or the
information contained therein in reliance in good faith upon the
prohibitions of RSA 359-C:5, I, shall not be liable to its customer, to
a state or local agency or to any other person for any loss or damage
caused in whole or in part by such refusal.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1. 1983, 174:4. 1992, 268:5. 2005, 233:1, eff.
Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 359-C:6

 **359-C:6 Use Restricted. –** Copies of financial or credit records
or the information contained therein, including information supplied
pursuant to RSA 359-C:11, II, which are obtained by any state agency,
local agency or supervisory agency may not be:
                                             
 I. Used or retained in any form for any purpose other than the
specific statutory purposes for which the information was originally
obtained; or
                                             
 II. Provided to any other governmental department or agency or other
person except where authorized by state law. If in the course of an
investigation conducted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, an
officer, employee or agent of a state or local agency or department
thereof discovers financial or credit records indicating a possible
violation of law which such agency is without statutory authority to
investigate or prosecute, the information in such financial or credit
records shall be provided to the county attorney of the county in which
such financial or credit records were examined or to the attorney
general.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1. 1983, 174:5, eff. Aug. 9, 1983.

### Section 359-C:7

 **359-C:7 Customer Authorized Disclosure. –**
                                             
 I. A customer may authorize disclosure under RSA 359-C:4, I(a), if
those seeking disclosure furnish to the financial institution or
creditor a signed and dated statement by which the customer:
                                             
 (a) Authorizes such disclosure for a period to be set forth in
the authorization statement;
                                             
 (b) Specifies the name of the agency or department to which
disclosure is authorized and, if applicable, the statutory purpose for
which the information is to be obtained; and
                                             
 (c) Identifies the financial or credit records which are
authorized to be disclosed.
                                             
 II. No such authorization shall be required as a condition of doing
business with such financial institution or creditor.
                                             
 III. Any officer, employee or agent of a state or local agency
seeking customer authorization for disclosure of customer financial or
credit records shall notify the customer that the customer has the right
at any time to revoke such authorization, except where such
authorization is required by statute.
                                             
 IV. An agency or department examining the financial or credit
records of a customer pursuant to this section shall notify the customer
in writing within 30 days of such examination. Such notice shall specify
the financial or credit records which were examined and the reason for
such examination.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1. 1992, 268:6, eff. July 17, 1992.

### Section 359-C:8

 **359-C:8 Administrative Subpoena; Summons. –**
                                             
 I. An officer, employee or agent of a state or local agency or
department thereof may obtain financial or credit records under RSA
359-C:4, I(b), pursuant to an administrative subpoena or summons
otherwise authorized by law and served upon the financial institution or
creditor only if:
                                             
 (a) The person issuing such administrative summons or subpoena
has served a copy of the subpoena or summons on the customer; and
                                             
 (b) The subpoena or summons includes the name of the agency or
department on whose name the subpoena or summons is issued and the
statutory purpose for which the information is to be obtained; and
                                             
 (c) The customer has not moved to quash such subpoena or summons
within 10 days of service.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude a financial institution
or creditor from notifying a customer of the receipt of an
administrative summons or subpoena.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1. 1992, 268:7, 8, eff. July 17, 1992.

### Section 359-C:9

 **359-C:9 Obtaining Records by Search Warrant. –** An officer,
employee or agent of a state or local agency or department thereof may
obtain financial or credit records under RSA 359-C:4, I(c), only if he
obtains a search warrant pursuant to RSA 595-A. Examination of financial
or credit records may occur as soon as the warrant is served on the
financial institution or creditor.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1. 1992, 268:9, eff. July 17, 1992.

### Section 359-C:10

 **359-C:10 Obtaining Records by Subpoena. –**
                                             
 I. An officer, employee or agent of a state or local agency or
department thereof may obtain financial or credit records under RSA
359-C:4, I(d), pursuant to a judicial subpoena or subpoena duces tecum
only if:
                                             
 (a) The subpoena or subpoena duces tecum is issued and served
upon the financial institution or creditor and served upon or mailed to
the customer; and
                                             
 (b) Ten days after the service date passes, or 14 days after the
mailing date passes without notice to the financial institution or
creditor that the customer has moved to quash the subpoena. If testimony
is to be taken, or financial or credit records produced, before a court,
the notice periods provided for in this paragraph may be shortened by
the court issuing the subpoena or subpoena duces tecum upon a showing of
reasonable cause. The court shall direct that all reasonable measures be
taken to notify the customer within the time so shortened.
                                             
 II. Without limiting in any way the authority of the grand jury, a
grand jury is authorized to and may, upon a resolution adopted by a
majority of its members, obtain financial or credit records pursuant to
a subpoena duces tecum bearing the authenticating signature of the clerk
of court. The grand jury may appoint, by resolution, any person as its
agent for purposes of receiving the information set forth in the
subpoena. Notwithstanding RSA 359-C:4, IV, the grand jury may further
adopt a resolution prohibiting any owner, officer, director, partner,
employee, agent or attorney from a financial institution from notifying
any person named in a subpoena about the existence or contents of such
subpoena or that information has been furnished to a grand jury in
response to such subpoena. Such resolution shall continue until such
time as the customer has been notified pursuant to RSA 359-C:10, III, at
which time the grand jury shall so notify the financial institution.
                                             
 III. Upon issuing such subpoena or subpoena duces tecum, the judge
shall order the grand jury to notify the customer in writing within 180
days of such issuance; provided, however, that the judge may shorten the
180 day period or, upon a showing of good cause, may extend such period
beyond 180 days, but in no event beyond 360 days. The notice shall
specify the financial or credit records which were examined and the
reason for such examination.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1. 1983, 174:6. 1992, 268:10, eff. July 17, 1992.

### Section 359-C:11

 **359-C:11 Exceptions. –** Nothing in this chapter prohibits any of
the following:
                                             
 I. The dissemination of any financial or credit information which is
not identified with, or identifiable as being derived from, the
financial or credit records of a particular customer.
                                             
 II. When any police or sheriff's department or county attorney in
this state certifies to a financial institution in writing that a crime
report has been filed which involves the alleged fraudulent use of
drafts, checks or other orders drawn upon any financial institution in
this state, such police or sheriff's department or county attorney may
request a financial institution to furnish, and a financial institution
shall supply, a statement setting forth the following information with
respect to a customer account specified by the police or sheriff's
department or county attorney for a period of 30 days prior to and up to
30 days following the date of occurrence of the alleged illegal act
involving the account:
                                             
 (a) The number of items dishonored;
                                             
 (b) The number of items paid which created overdrafts;
                                             
 (c) The dollar volume of such dishonored items and items paid
which created overdrafts and a statement explaining any credit
arrangement between the financial institution and customer to pay
overdrafts;
                                             
 (d) The dates and amounts of deposits and debits and the account
balance on such dates;
                                             
 (e) A copy of the signature appearing on a customer's signature
card;
                                             
 (f) Date account opened and, if applicable, date account closed.
                                             
 III. Subject to the limitations in RSA 359-C:6, the examination by,
or disclosure to, any supervisory agency of financial or credit records
which relate solely to the exercise of its supervisory function. The
scope of an agency's supervisory function shall be determined by
reference to statutes which grant authority to examine, audit or require
reports of financial or credit records of financial institutions or
creditors.
                                             
 IV. Subject to the limitations of RSA 359-C:6, the examination by or
disclosure to the commissioner of the department of health and human
services of the financial records of a person upon a request by the
commissioner pursuant to RSA 126-A:38, I(b) for the purpose of reviewing
a person's ability to pay for care, treatment, maintenance, and services
provided by institutions; pursuant to RSA 161-C:3-a, I for the purpose
of establishing, modifying, or enforcing an obligation to pay child
support against such person; or pursuant to RSA 167:4-a for purposes
directly connected with the determination and verification of
eligibility for medical assistance for applicants and recipients whose
eligibility for medical assistance is based upon the applicant's or
recipient's age, blindness, or disability.
                                             
 V. Subject to the limitations of RSA 359-C:6, the examination by or
disclosure to the department of health and human services of financial
records requested by the commissioner or his or her authorized
representative, pursuant to RSA 161-F:56, for the purpose of
investigating a report of alleged abuse, neglect, or exploitation.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1. 1992, 268:11. 1995, 310:24. 2002, 36:8, eff.
July 1, 2002. 2010, 308:3, eff. Sept. 11, 2010. 2013, 144:41, eff. July
1, 2013.

### Section 359-C:12

 **359-C:12 Criminal Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who wilfully or knowingly participates in a violation
of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. Any person who induces or attempts to induce a violation of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1, eff. Sept. 17, 1977.

### Section 359-C:13

 **359-C:13 Costs. –** In any successful action to enforce liability
for a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the customer may
recover the cost of the action together with reasonable attorney's fees
as determined by the court.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1, eff. Sept. 17, 1977.

### Section 359-C:14

 **359-C:14 Injunction. –** In addition to any other remedy contained
in this chapter, injunctive relief shall be available to any customer
aggrieved by a violation, or threatened violation, of this chapter in
the same manner as such injunctive relief would be available if the
financial or credit records concerning the customer accounts were in his
possession. In any successful action by the customer, costs together
with reasonable attorney's fees as determined by the court may be
recovered.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1. 1983, 174:7, eff. Aug. 9, 1983.

### Section 359-C:14-a

 **359-C:14-a Remedies Exclusive. –** The remedies provided under the
provisions of this chapter shall be the exclusive remedies available to
a customer aggrieved by a violation of the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1983, 174:8, eff. Aug. 9, 1983.

### Section 359-C:15

 **359-C:15 Statute of Limitations. –** An action to enforce any
provision of this chapter must be commenced within 3 years after the
date on which the violation occurred.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1, eff. Sept. 17, 1977.

### Section 359-C:16

 **359-C:16 Effect of Customer Waiver. –** Except as provided in RSA
359-C:7, no waiver by a customer of any right hereunder shall be valid,
whether oral or written, and whether with or without consideration.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1, eff. Sept. 17, 1977.

### Section 359-C:17

 **359-C:17 Priority of This Chapter. –** Should any other law grant
or appear to grant power or authority to any person to violate the
provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall
supersede and pro tanto override and annul such law, except those
statutes enacted after September 17, 1977, which specifically refer to
this chapter.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1, eff. Sept. 17, 1977.

### Section 359-C:18

 **359-C:18 Provisions Severable. –** If any provision of this
chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held
invalid for any reason, such invalidity shall not affect any other
provisions or applications of this chapter which can be effected,
without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the
provisions of this chapter are severable.

**Source.** 1977, 594:1, eff. Sept. 17, 1977.

Notice of Security Breach
-------------------------

### Section 359-C:19

 **359-C:19 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Computerized data'' means personal information stored in an
electronic format.
                                             
 II. "Encrypted'' means the transformation of data through the use of
an algorithmic process into a form for which there is a low probability
of assigning meaning without use of a confidential process or key, or
securing the information by another method that renders the data
elements completely unreadable or unusable. Data shall not be considered
to be encrypted for purposes of this subdivision if it is acquired in
combination with any required key, security code, access code, or
password that would permit access to the encrypted data.
                                             
 III. "Person'' means an individual, corporation, trust, partnership,
incorporated or unincorporated association, limited liability company,
or other form of entity, or any agency, authority, board, court,
department, division, commission, institution, bureau, or other state
governmental entity, or any political subdivision of the state.
                                             
 IV. (a) "Personal information'' means an individual's first name or
initial and last name in combination with any one or more of the
following data elements, when either the name or the data elements are
not encrypted:
                                             
 (1) Social security number.
                                             
 (2) Driver's license number or other government identification
number.
                                             
 (3) Account number, credit card number, or debit card number,
in combination with any required security code, access code, or password
that would permit access to an individual's financial account.
                                             
 (b) "Personal information'' shall not include information that is
lawfully made available to the general public from federal, state, or
local government records.
                                             
 V. "Security breach'' means unauthorized acquisition of computerized
data that compromises the security or confidentiality of personal
information maintained by a person doing business in this state. Good
faith acquisition of personal information by an employee or agent of a
person for the purposes of the person's business shall not be considered
a security breach, provided that the personal information is not used or
subject to further unauthorized disclosure.

**Source.** 2006, 242:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 359-C:20

 **359-C:20 Notification of Security Breach Required. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Any person doing business in this state who owns or licenses
computerized data that includes personal information shall, when it
becomes aware of a security breach, promptly determine the likelihood
that the information has been or will be misused. If the determination
is that misuse of the information has occurred or is reasonably likely
to occur, or if a determination cannot be made, the person shall notify
the affected individuals as soon as possible as required under this
subdivision.
                                             
 (b) Any person engaged in trade or commerce that is subject to
RSA 358-A:3, I shall also notify the regulator which has primary
regulatory authority over such trade or commerce. All other persons
shall notify the New Hampshire attorney general's office. The notice
shall include the anticipated date of the notice to the individuals and
the approximate number of individuals in this state who will be
notified. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the
person to provide to any regulator or the New Hampshire attorney
general's office the names of the individuals entitled to receive the
notice or any personal information relating to them. The disclosure
shall be made to affected individuals as quickly as possible, after the
determination required under this section.
                                             
 (c) Any person or business that maintains computerized data that
includes personal information that the person or business does not own
shall notify and cooperate with the owner or licensee of the information
of any breach of the security of the data immediately following
discovery, if the personal information was acquired by an unauthorized
person. Cooperation includes sharing with the owner or licensee
information relevant to the breach; except that such cooperation shall
not be deemed to require the disclosure of confidential or business
information or trade secrets.
                                             
 II. Notification pursuant to paragraph I may be delayed if a law
enforcement agency, or national or homeland security agency determines
that the notification will impede a criminal investigation or jeopardize
national or homeland security.
                                             
 III. The notice required under this section shall be provided by one
of the following methods:
                                             
 (a) Written notice.
                                             
 (b) Electronic notice, if the agency or business' primary means
of communication with affected individuals is by electronic means.
                                             
 (c) Telephonic notice, provided that a log of each such
notification is kept by the person or business who notifies affected
persons.
                                             
 (d) Substitute notice, if the person demonstrates that the cost
of providing notice would exceed 
                                             $5,000, that the affected class of
subject individuals to be notified exceeds 1,000, or the person does not
have sufficient contact information or consent to provide notice
pursuant to subparagraphs I(a)-I(c). Substitute notice shall consist of
all of the following:
                                             
 (1) E-mail notice when the person has an e-mail address for
the affected individuals.
                                             
 (2) Conspicuous posting of the notice on the person's business
website, if the person maintains one.
                                             
 (3) Notification to major statewide media.
                                             
 (e) Notice pursuant to the person's internal notification
procedures maintained as part of an information security policy for the
treatment of personal information.
                                             
 IV. Notice under this section shall include at a minimum:
                                             
 (a) A description of the incident in general terms.
                                             
 (b) The approximate date of breach.
                                             
 (c) The type of personal information obtained as a result of the
security breach.
                                             
 (d) The telephonic contact information of the person subject to
this section.
                                             
 V. Any person engaged in trade or commerce that is subject to RSA
358-A:3, I which maintains procedures for security breach notification
pursuant to the laws, rules, regulations, guidances, or guidelines
issued by a state or federal regulator shall be deemed to be in
compliance with this subdivision if it acts in accordance with such
laws, rules, regulations, guidances, or guidelines.
                                             
 VI. (a) If a person is required to notify more than 1,000 consumers
of a breach of security pursuant to this section, the person shall also
notify, without unreasonable delay, all consumer reporting agencies that
compile and maintain files on consumers on a nationwide basis, as
defined by 15 U.S.C. section 1681a(p), of the anticipated date of the
notification to the consumers, the approximate number of consumers who
will be notified, and the content of the notice. Nothing in this
paragraph shall be construed to require the person to provide to any
consumer reporting agency the names of the consumers entitled to receive
the notice or any personal information relating to them.
                                             
 (b) Subparagraph (a) shall not apply to a person who is subject
to Title V of the Gramm, Leach-Bliley Act, 15 U.S.C. section 6801 et
seq.

**Source.** 2006, 242:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 359-C:21

 **359-C:21 Violation. –**
                                             
 I. Any person injured by any violation under this subdivision may
bring an action for damages and for such equitable relief, including an
injunction, as the court deems necessary and proper. If the court finds
for the plaintiff, recovery shall be in the amount of actual damages. If
the court finds that the act or practice was a willful or knowing
violation of this chapter, it shall award as much as 3 times, but not
less than 2 times, such amount. In addition, a prevailing plaintiff
shall be awarded the costs of the suit and reasonable attorney's fees,
as determined by the court. Any attempted waiver of the right to the
damages set forth in this paragraph shall be void and unenforceable.
Injunctive relief shall be available to private individuals under this
chapter without bond, subject to the discretion of the court.
                                             
 II. The New Hampshire attorney general's office shall enforce the
provisions of this subdivision pursuant to RSA 358-A:4.
                                             
 III. The burden shall be on the person responsible for the
determination under RSA 359-C:20, I to demonstrate compliance with this
subdivision.

**Source.** 2006, 242:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.
