---
title: 'CHAPTER 359-I IDENTITY THEFT'
---

TITLE XXXI
                                             
TRADE AND COMMERCE
==================

CHAPTER 359-I
                                             
IDENTITY THEFT
--------------

### Section 359-I:1

 **359-I:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Financial device'' means any instrument or device that can be
used to obtain cash, credit, property, services, or any other thing of
value or to make financial payments, including but not limited to any of
the following:
                                             
 (a) A credit card, banking card, debit card, electronic fund
transfer card, or guaranteed check card.
                                             
 (b) A check.
                                             
 (c) A negotiable order of withdrawal.
                                             
 (d) A share draft.
                                             
 (e) A money order.
                                             
 (f) An Automated Clearing House ("ACH'') or other electronic
transaction.
                                             
 (g) Any device or process, whether based on a binary or digital
code used to transfer value from one person or entity to another.
                                             
 II. "Personal information'' shall include any one or more of the
following, whether the information is owned by or assigned to the person
it relates to:
                                             
 (a) A first and last name of a user, whether given at birth or
adoption, assumed, or legally changed.
                                             
 (b) A home or physical address.
                                             
 (c) A telephone number.
                                             
 (d) A social security number.
                                             
 (e) Any personal identification number.
                                             
 (f) A credit or debit card number.
                                             
 (g) Any access code associated with a credit or debit card.
                                             
 (h) A date of birth, birth certificate number, or place of
birth.
                                             
 (i) A password or access code.
                                             
 (j) A financial institution account number.
                                             
 (k) A driver's license or other governmental identification.
                                             
 III. "Victim'' means any person whose personal information or
financial device has been obtained, accessed, possessed, or recorded in
violation of this chapter or any person that provided money, credit,
goods, services, or anything of value and has suffered financial loss as
a direct result of the commission or attempted commission of a violation
of this chapter.
                                             
 IV. "Person'' means an individual, corporation, trust, partnership,
incorporated or unincorporated association, limited liability company,
or other form of entity, or any agency, authority, board, court,
department, division, commission, institution, bureau, or other state
governmental entity, or any political subdivision of the state.

**Source.** 2007, 78:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 359-I:2

 **359-I:2 Prohibited Conduct. –**
                                             
 I. Unless otherwise permitted by state law or rules or federal
statute or regulation, no person shall, without the authorization,
consent, or permission of the other person, do any of the following with
fraudulent intent:
                                             
 (a) Obtain, record, or access personal information or a financial
device that would assist the person in accessing financial resources or
obtaining personal information owned by the other person other than that
which is necessary to process a transaction for the benefit of the other
person.
                                             
 (b) Obtain goods, services, or some other benefit through the use
of personal information or a financial device of the other person.
                                             
 (c) Obtain personal information or financial device documents in
the other person's name.
                                             
 (d) Possess the personal information or a financial device of the
other person without permission or lawful authority, with the intent to
use or to aid or permit some third person to use such information or
device to obtain cash, credit, property, services, or any other thing of
value or to make a financial payment.
                                             
 (e) Use or possess personal information or a financial device of
the other person without permission or lawful authority with the intent
to obtain, or to aid or permit some third person to obtain, a
government-issued document.
                                             
 (f) Falsely make, complete, or alter a written instrument
containing any personal information of the other person.
                                             
 (g) Make or convey a materially false statement, without
permission or lawful authority, with the intent to obtain, record, or
access the personal information or financial device of the other
person.
                                             
 II. This section shall not apply when a person obtains the identity
of another person to misrepresent his or her age for the sole purpose of
obtaining alcoholic beverages, tobacco, or another privilege denied to
minors.

**Source.** 2007, 78:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 359-I:3

 **359-I:3 Liability. –** In addition to any other remedies provided
by law, a victim may bring an action in his or her county of residence
or any county in which any part of the act took place, regardless of
whether the person who committed the violation was ever actually present
in that county, against the person who violated this chapter to recover
the following:
                                             
 I. 
                                             $5,000 for each incident, or 3 times the actual damages,
whichever is greater.
                                             
 II. Reasonable attorney's fees and court costs.

**Source.** 2007, 78:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 359-I:4

 **359-I:4 Correction of Public and Private Records. –**
                                             
 I. Any order obtained under this chapter, or any conviction under
RSA 638:26, may be submitted in any civil proceeding to set aside a
judgment against the victim.
                                             
 II. The victim may submit the order obtained under this chapter, or
any conviction under RSA 638:26, to any governmental entity or private
business as proof that any financial accounts therein created or altered
in violation of this chapter, RSA 638:26, or RSA 638:5 were not the
actions of the victim.

**Source.** 2007, 78:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.
