---
title: 'CHAPTER 107-B NUCLEAR PLANNING AND RESPONSE PROGRAM'
---

TITLE VIII
                                             
PUBLIC DEFENSE AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS
====================================

CHAPTER 107-B
                                             
NUCLEAR PLANNING AND RESPONSE PROGRAM
-------------------------------------

### Section 107-B:1

 **107-B:1 Nuclear Emergency Response Plan. –**
                                             
 I. The director of the division of homeland security and emergency
management shall, in cooperation with affected local units of
government, initiate and carry out a nuclear emergency response plan as
specified in the licensing regulations of each nuclear electrical
generating plant. The commissioner of safety shall assess a fee, as
necessary, to pay for the cost of preparing, maintaining, and operating
each plan and providing equipment and materials to implement it.
                                             
 II. The director of the division of homeland security and emergency
management shall conduct an annual review of each nuclear emergency
response plan for those municipalities located in an emergency planning
zone, as defined in Nuclear Regulatory Commission regulation Title 10,
Code of Federal Regulations, Part 50.

**Source.** 1981, 549:2. 1987, 162:2. 2003, 11:2. 2011, 169:3, eff. Jan.
1, 2012.

### Section 107-B:1-a

 **107-B:1-a Definition. –** In this chapter, "assessed entity''
means the entity or entities which have applied to the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission for a license to operate or are licensed to
operate a nuclear electrical generating facility which affects
municipalities under RSA 107-B:1, II.

**Source.** 2003, 11:2, eff. June 21, 2003.

### Section 107-B:2

 **107-B:2 Annual Emergency Response Budget. –** The municipalities
in each emergency planning zone shall submit annually their emergency
response budget to the director of fire safety and emergency management
who shall provide a reasonable opportunity for public comment and
consideration. The director shall also receive and review the
appropriateness of any budget request from any other state agency
necessary for radiological emergency preparedness as outlined in the
relevant plan. The director shall then submit an approved total annual
budget to the commissioner of safety for assessment under RSA 107-B:3
and RSA 107-B:4. Prior to assessing the annual budget, the commissioner
shall consult with the assessed entity and obtain its input into the
budget.

**Source.** 1981, 549:2. 1987, 162:2. 2003, 11:2, eff. June 21, 2003.

### Section 107-B:3

 **107-B:3 Assessment and Reporting. –**
                                             
 I. The cost of preparing, maintaining, and operating a nuclear
emergency response plan shall be assessed against each assessed entity
in such proportions as the commissioner of safety determines to be fair
and equitable.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of safety shall enter into a memorandum of
understanding with each assessed entity that contains mechanisms to
address budget compliance and periodic reporting, performance standards
to ensure compliance with federal emergency preparedness requirements,
and other topics as the parties deem appropriate.
                                             
 III. Within 60 days after the close of the fiscal year, the
commissioner of safety shall cause a report to be prepared and provided
to the assessed entity detailing the use of the fees assessed during the
prior fiscal year.

**Source.** 1981, 549:2. 2003, 11:2, eff. June 21, 2003.

### Section 107-B:4

 **107-B:4 Collection of Assessment. –** The department of safety
shall bill each assessed entity for the amount assessed against it. The
bill shall be sent by registered mail, and shall constitute notice of
assessment and demand for payment. Payment shall be made to the
department of safety within 30 days after the receipt of the bill. If
any assessed entity shall fail or refuse to pay the assessed fee within
30 days, the commissioner shall add to the fee a late penalty fee and
certify the amount of the delinquent fee and penalty to the attorney
general for collection.

**Source.** 1981, 549:2. 1997, 208:12. 2003, 11:2, eff. June 21, 2003.

### Section 107-B:5

 **107-B:5 Fund Established. –** All funds collected under this
chapter shall be deposited in the state treasury as "restricted
revenues.'' The full amount shall be credited to the New Hampshire
nuclear planning and response fund and shall be used exclusively for the
New Hampshire nuclear planning and response program.

**Source.** 1981, 549:2, eff. June 30, 1981.

### Section 107-B:6

 **107-B:6 Authority in Radiological Emergency. –** In the event of a
radiological emergency at a nuclear electric generating facility where
the operator is unable to control the situation as necessary to protect
public health and safety, the governor shall regulate the facility under
RSA 4:45-4:47.

**Source.** 1981, 549:2. 2003, 11:3, eff. June 21, 2003.
