---
title: 'CHAPTER 110-C NATIONAL GUARD; RIGHTS AND PROTECTIONS'
---

TITLE VIII
                                             
PUBLIC DEFENSE AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS
====================================

CHAPTER 110-C
                                             
NATIONAL GUARD; RIGHTS AND PROTECTIONS
--------------------------------------

### Section 110-C:1

 **110-C:1 Employment Protection for Members of the National Guard,
State Guard, or Militia. –**
                                             
 I. It is the intention of this section to eliminate the differences
in benefits, rights, and protections in employment between individuals
called to active duty by the federal government and those called to
active duty by the state. Members of the national guard or state guard,
when called to active service, state or federal, shall receive the same
benefits, privileges, and protections in employment regardless of the
activation authority or location of service.
                                             
 II. Any person who shall be called by the governor to active duty,
pursuant to RSA 110-B:6 or RSA 111:1, as a member of the national guard
or as a member of the militia shall be afforded such employment and
reemployment rights, privileges, benefits, and protections in employment
as provided in the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights
Act (USERRA), 38 U.S.C. 4301 et seq., as though that person had been
called to active duty in the service of the United States; and shall not
be denied hiring, retention in employment, promotion, or other incidents
or advantages of employment because of any obligation as a member of the
national guard or the militia.
                                             
 III. (a) Any member of national guard who believes his or her rights
have been violated under this section must first attempt mediation
through the Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve organization. If
mediation is unsuccessful for any reason, including a refusal to
participate by the employer, then the mediator shall certify the
complaint to the New Hampshire department of labor.
                                             
 (b) The department of labor shall provide assistance to affected
military members with respect to the enforcement of rights and benefits
under this section. If the department, after notice and a hearing,
determines that an employer has violated this section, the department
shall order a remedy which corrects the violation and may further order
the employer to take action which compensates the member for any adverse
impact of the violation. Any order to make the member whole shall be
limited to pay, time credit, health benefits or other areas over which
the employer has control.
                                             
 (c) The department of labor shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA
541-A, to govern complaint and hearing procedures under this section.
                                             
 (d) In the event the department of labor is unable to
successfully resolve a complaint against an employer, the department of
labor shall notify the affected military member and the military member
may request that the complaint be referred to the attorney general. The
attorney general may commence an action in the name of the state of New
Hampshire for relief under this chapter for such person.
                                             
 (e) If the attorney general declines to proceed in a given case,
or if the person does not desire the assistance of the attorney general,
the affected member may file a petition in superior court seeking relief
against the employer for violation of this section. In any civil action
to enforce the provisions of this section, the prevailing party may be
allowed reasonable attorney's fees to be assessed by the court and
collected as costs.
                                             
 (f) The courts shall give proceedings under this chapter priority
on the court calendar.

**Source.** 2002, 82:1, eff. May 3, 2002.

### Section 110-C:2

 **110-C:2 Civil Relief for Members of the New Hampshire National
Guard, State Guard, or Militia. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who shall be called by the governor to active duty for
a period of 30 days or more as a member of the state guard or national
guard or as a member of the militia, shall be afforded the same civil
protections, rights, privileges, benefits and relief, accorded under the
Soldiers and Sailors Civil Relief Act, 50 U.S.C. Section 500 et seq.,
and Section 560 et seq., as if they had been called to federal active
duty in the service of the United States.
                                             
 II. In any civil action to enforce the provisions of this section,
the prevailing party may be allowed reasonable attorney's fees to be
assessed by the court and collected as costs.

**Source.** 2002, 82:1, eff. May 3, 2002.
