---
title: |
    CHAPTER 110-D INTERSTATE COMPACT ON EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY FOR MILITARY
    CHILDREN
---

TITLE VIII
                                             
PUBLIC DEFENSE AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS
====================================

CHAPTER 110-D
                                             
INTERSTATE COMPACT ON EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY FOR MILITARY CHILDREN
-------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 110-D:1

 **110-D:1 Compact. –** The interstate compact on educational
opportunity for military children, hereinafter called "the compact'', is
hereby enacted into law and entered into with all other jurisdictions
legally joining therein, in the form substantially as follows in this
chapter.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE I
---------

### Section 110-D:2

 **110-D:2 Purpose. –** It is the purpose of this compact to remove
barriers to educational success imposed on children of military families
because of frequent moves and deployment of their parents by:
                                             
 I. Facilitating the timely enrollment of children of military
families and ensuring that they are not placed at a disadvantage due to
difficulty in the transfer of education records from the previous school
district or districts or variations in entrance/age requirements.
                                             
 II. Facilitating the student placement process through which
children of military families are not disadvantaged by variations in
attendance requirements, scheduling, sequencing, grading, course
content, or assessment.
                                             
 III. Facilitating the qualification and eligibility for enrollment,
educational programs, and participation in extracurricular academic,
athletic, and social activities.
                                             
 IV. Facilitating the on-time graduation of children of military
families.
                                             
 V. Providing for the adoption and enforcement of administrative
rules implementing the provisions of this compact.
                                             
 VI. Providing for the uniform collection and sharing of information
between and among member states, schools, and military families under
this compact.
                                             
 VII. Promoting coordination between this compact and other compacts
affecting military children.
                                             
 VIII. Promoting flexibility and cooperation between the educational
system, parents, and the student in order to achieve educational success
for the student.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE II
----------

### Section 110-D:3

 **110-D:3 Definitions. –** As used in this compact, unless the
context clearly requires a different construction:
                                             
 I. "Accredited school'' means a school that has completed the
accreditation process from a regional accrediting association, such as
the New England Association of Schools and Colleges, that validates the
establishment of high standards for all levels of education.
                                             
 II. "Active duty'' means full-time duty status in the active
uniformed service of the United States, including members of the
National Guard and Reserve on active duty orders pursuant to 10 U.S.C.
sections 1209 and 1211.
                                             
 III. "Children of military families'' means a school-aged child or
school-aged children, enrolled in kindergarten through grade 12, in the
household of an active duty member.
                                             
 IV. "Cocurricular'' shall include those activities which are
designed to supplement and enrich regular academic programs of study,
provide opportunities for social development, and encourage
participation in clubs, athletics, performing groups, and services to
school and community, as defined in RSA 193:1-c.
                                             
 V. "Compact commissioner'' means the voting representative of each
compacting state appointed pursuant to Article VIII of this compact.
                                             
 VI. "Deployment'' means the period one month prior to the service
members' departure from their home station on military orders through 6
months after return to their home station.
                                             
 VII. "Education records'' means those official records, files, and
data directly related to a student and maintained by the school or local
education agency, including but not limited to records encompassing all
the material kept in the student's cumulative folder such as general
identifying data, records of attendance and of academic work completed,
records of achievement and results of evaluative tests, health data,
disciplinary status, test protocols, and individualized education
programs.
                                             
 VIII. "Interstate Commission on Educational Opportunity for Military
Children'' means the commission that is created under Article IX of this
compact, which is generally referred to as Interstate Commission.
                                             
 IX. "Local education agency'' means a public authority legally
constituted by the state as an administrative agency to provide control
of and direction for kindergarten through grade 12 public educational
institutions.
                                             
 X. "Member state'' means a state that has enacted this compact.
                                             
 XI. "Military installation'' means a base, camp, post, station,
yard, center, homeport facility for any ship, or other activity under
the jurisdiction of the Department of Defense, including any leased
facility, which is located within any of the several states, the
District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin
Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Northern Marianas Islands, and any
other U.S. territory. Such term does not include any facility used
primarily for civil works, rivers and harbors projects, or flood control
projects.
                                             
 XII. "Non-member state'' means a state that has not enacted this
compact.
                                             
 XIII. "Receiving state'' means the state to which a child of a
military family is sent, brought, or caused to be sent or brought.
                                             
 XIV. "Rule'' means a written statement by the Interstate Commission
promulgated pursuant to Article XII of this compact that is of general
applicability, implements, interprets or prescribes a policy or
provision of the compact, or an organizational, procedural, or practice
requirement of the Interstate Commission, and has the force and effect
of statutory law in a member state, and includes the amendment, repeal,
or suspension of an existing rule.
                                             
 XV. "Sending state'' means the state from which a child of a
military family is sent, brought, or caused to be sent or brought.
                                             
 XVI. "State'' means a state of the United States, the District of
Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands,
Guam, American Samoa, the Northern Marianas Islands, and any other U.S.
territory.
                                             
 XVII. "Student'' means the child of a military family for whom the
local education agency receives public funding and who is formally
enrolled in kindergarten through grade 12.
                                             
 XVIII. "Transition'' means:
                                             
 (a) The formal and physical process of transferring from school
to school; or
                                             
 (b) The period of time in which a student moves from one school
in the sending state to another school in the receiving state.
                                             
 XIX. "Uniformed service'' or "uniformed services'' means the Army,
Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Coast Guard as well as the Commissioned
Corps of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Public
Health Services.
                                             
 XX. "Veteran'' means a person who served in the uniformed services
and who was discharged or released there from under conditions other
than dishonorable.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE III
-----------

### Section 110-D:4

 **110-D:4 Applicability. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph II, this compact shall
apply to the children of:
                                             
 (a) Active duty members of the uniformed services as defined in
this compact, including members of the National Guard and Reserve on
active duty orders pursuant to 10 U.S.C. section 1209 and 1211;
                                             
 (b) Members or veterans of the uniformed services who are
severely injured and medically discharged or retired for a period of one
year after medical discharge or retirement; and
                                             
 (c) Members of the uniformed services who die on active duty or
as a result of injuries sustained on active duty for a period of one
year after death.
                                             
 II. The provisions of this interstate compact shall only apply to
local education agencies as defined in this compact.
                                             
 III. The provisions of this compact shall not apply to the children
of:
                                             
 (a) Inactive members of the national guard and military
reserves;
                                             
 (b) Members of the uniformed services now retired, except as
provided in paragraph I;
                                             
 (c) Veterans of the uniformed services, except as provided in
paragraph I; and
                                             
 (d) Other United States Department of Defense personnel and other
federal agency civilian and contract employees not defined as active
duty members of the uniformed services.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE IV
----------

### Section 110-D:5

 **110-D:5 Educational Records and Enrollment. –**
                                             
 I. Unofficial or "hand-carried'' education records. In the event
that official education records cannot be released to the parents for
the purpose of transfer, the custodian of the records in the sending
state shall prepare and furnish to the parent a complete set of
unofficial educational records containing uniform information as
determined by the Interstate Commission. Upon receipt of the unofficial
education records by a school in the receiving state, the school shall
enroll and appropriately place the student based on the information
provided in the unofficial records pending validation by the official
records, as quickly as possible.
                                             
 II. Official education records/transcripts. Simultaneous with the
enrollment and conditional placement of the student, the school in the
receiving state shall request the student's official education record
from the school in the sending state. Upon receipt of this request, the
school in the sending state will process and furnish the official
education records to the school in the receiving state within 10 days or
within such time as is reasonably determined under the rules promulgated
by the Interstate Commission.
                                             
 III. Immunizations. The state of New Hampshire may give 30 days from
the date of enrollment, or within such time as is reasonably determined
under the rules promulgated by the Interstate Commission, for students
to obtain any required immunization or immunizations in accordance with
RSA 141-C:20-a. For a series of immunizations, initial vaccinations
shall be obtained within 30 days or within such time as is reasonably
determined under the rules promulgated by the Interstate Commission.
                                             
 IV. Kindergarten and first grade entrance age. Students shall be
allowed to continue their enrollment at grade level in the receiving
state commensurate with their grade level, including kindergarten, from
a local education agency in the sending state at the time of transition,
regardless of age. A student that has satisfactorily completed the
prerequisite grade level in the local education agency in the sending
state shall be eligible for enrollment in the next highest grade level
in the receiving state, regardless of age. A student transferring after
the start of the school year in the receiving state shall enter the
school in the receiving state on their validated level from an
accredited school in the sending state.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE V
---------

### Section 110-D:6

 **110-D:6 Placement and Attendance. –**
                                             
 I. Course placement. When the student transfers before or during the
school year, the receiving state school shall initially honor placement
of the student in educational courses based on the student's enrollment
in the sending state school and/or educational assessments conducted at
the school in the sending state if the courses are offered. Course
placement includes but is not limited to Honors, International
Baccalaureate, Advanced Placement, vocational, technical, and career
pathways courses. Continuing the student's academic program from the
previous school and promoting placement in academically and career
challenging courses should be paramount when considering placement. This
does not preclude the school in the receiving state from performing
subsequent evaluations to ensure appropriate placement and continued
enrollment of the student in the course or courses.
                                             
 II. Educational program placement. The receiving state school shall
initially honor placement of the student in educational programs based
on current educational assessments conducted at the school in the
sending state or participation/placement in like programs in the sending
state. Such programs include, but are not limited to, gifted and
talented programs, remedial services, and English Language Learner
(ELL). This does not preclude the school in the receiving state from
performing subsequent evaluations to ensure appropriate placement of the
student. The school placement process should promote and measure
knowledge and skills that lead students to meet learning competencies
across content domains.
                                             
 III. Special education services. (1) In compliance with the federal
requirements of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA),
20 U.S.C.A. section 1400 et seq., the receiving state shall initially
provide comparable services to a student with disabilities based on his
or her current Individualized Education Program (IEP); and (2) In
compliance with the requirements of section 504 of the Rehabilitation
Act, 29 U.S.C.A. section 794, and with Title II of the Americans with
Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C.A. sections 12131-12165, the receiving state
shall make reasonable accommodations and modifications to address the
needs of incoming students with disabilities, subject to an existing 504
or Title II Plan, to provide the student with equal access to education.
This does not preclude the school in the receiving state from performing
subsequent evaluations to ensure appropriate placement of the student.
                                             
 IV. Placement flexibility. Local education agency administrative
officials shall have flexibility in waiving course/program
prerequisites, or other preconditions for placement in courses/programs
offered under the jurisdiction of the local education agency.
                                             
 V. Absence as related to deployment activities. A student whose
parent or legal guardian is an active duty member of the uniformed
services, as defined by the compact, and has been called to duty for, is
on leave from, or immediately returned from deployment to a combat zone
or combat support posting, shall be granted additional excused absences
at the discretion of the local education agency superintendent to visit
with his or her parent or legal guardian relative to such leave or
deployment of the parent or guardian.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE VI
----------

### Section 110-D:7

 **110-D:7 Eligibility. –**
                                             
 I. Eligibility for enrollment.
                                             
 (a) Special power of attorney, relative to the guardianship of a
child of a military family and executed under applicable law, shall be
sufficient for the purposes of enrollment and all other actions
requiring parental participation and consent.
                                             
 (b) A local education agency shall be prohibited from charging
local tuition to a transitioning military child placed in the care of a
non-custodial parent or other person standing in loco parentis who lives
in a jurisdiction other than that of the custodial parent.
                                             
 (c) A transitioning military child, placed in the care of a
noncustodial parent or other person standing in loco parentis who lives
in a jurisdiction other than that of the custodial parent, may continue
to attend the school in which he/she was enrolled while residing with
the custodial parent.
                                             
 II. Eligibility for cocurricular participation. State and local
education agencies shall facilitate the opportunity for transitioning
military children's inclusion in cocurricular activities, regardless of
application deadlines, to the extent they are otherwise qualified and
eligible.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE VII
-----------

### Section 110-D:8

 **110-D:8 Graduation. –** In order to facilitate the on-time
graduation of children of military families, states and local education
agencies shall incorporate the following procedures:
                                             
 I. Waiver requirements. Local education agency administrative
officials shall waive specific courses required for graduation if
similar course work has been satisfactorily completed in another local
education agency or shall provide reasonable justification for denial.
Should a waiver not be granted to a student who would qualify to
graduate from the sending school, the local education agency shall
provide an alternative means of acquiring required coursework so that
graduation may occur on time.
                                             
 II. Exit exams. States shall accept: (1) exit or end-of-course exams
required for graduation from the sending state; or (2) national
norm-referenced achievement tests; or (3) alternative testing, in lieu
of testing requirements for graduation in the receiving state. If none
of these alternatives can be accommodated by the receiving state for a
student transferring in his or her senior year, then the provisions of
paragraph III shall apply.
                                             
 III. Transfers during senior year. Should a military student
transferring at the beginning or during his or her senior year be
ineligible to graduate from the receiving local education agency after
all alternatives have been considered, the sending and receiving local
education agencies shall ensure the receipt of a diploma from the
sending local education agency, if the student meets the graduation
requirements of the sending local education agency. In the event that
one of the states in question is not a member of this compact, the
member state shall use best efforts to facilitate the on-time graduation
of the student in accordance with paragraphs I and II.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE VIII
------------

### Section 110-D:9

 **110-D:9 State Coordination. –**
                                             
 I. Each member state shall, through the creation of a state council
or use of an existing body or board, provide for the coordination among
its agencies of government, local education agencies, and military
installations concerning the state's participation in, and compliance
with, this compact and Interstate Commission activities. While each
member state may determine the membership of its own state council, its
membership shall include at least: the state superintendent of
education, superintendent of a school district with a high concentration
of military children, one representative from a military installation,
one representative each from the legislative and executive branches of
government, and other offices and stakeholder groups the state council
deems appropriate. A member state that does not have a school district
deemed to contain a high concentration of military children may appoint
a superintendent from another school district to represent local
education agencies on the state council.
                                             
 II. The state council of each member state shall appoint or
designate a military family education liaison to assist military
families and the state in facilitating the implementation of this
compact.
                                             
 III. The compact commissioner responsible for the administration and
management of the state's participation in the compact shall be
appointed by the governor or as otherwise determined by each member
state.
                                             
 IV. The compact commissioner and the military family education
liaison designated herein shall be ex-officio members of the state
council, unless either is already a full voting member of the state
council.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE IX
----------

### Section 110-D:10

 **110-D:10 Interstate Commission on Educational Opportunity For
Military Children. –** The member states hereby create the "Interstate
Commission on Educational Opportunity for Military Children.'' The
activities of the Interstate Commission are the formation of public
policy and are a discretionary state function. The Interstate Commission
shall:
                                             
 I. Be a body corporate and joint agency of the member states and
shall have all the responsibilities, powers and duties set forth herein,
and such additional powers as may be conferred upon it by a subsequent
concurrent action of the respective legislatures of the member states in
accordance with the terms of this compact.
                                             
 II. Consist of one Interstate Commission voting representative from
each member state who shall be that state's compact commissioner.
                                             
 (a) Each member state represented at a meeting of the Interstate
Commission is entitled to one vote.
                                             
 (b) A majority of the total member states shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business, unless a larger quorum is
required by the bylaws of the Interstate Commission.
                                             
 (c) A representative shall not delegate a vote to another member
state. In the event the compact commissioner is unable to attend a
meeting of the Interstate Commission, the governor or state council may
delegate voting authority to another person from their state for a
specified meeting.
                                             
 (d) The bylaws may provide for meetings of the Interstate
Commission to be conducted by telecommunication or electronic
communication.
                                             
 III. Consist of ex-officio, non-voting representatives who are
members of interested organizations. Such ex-officio members, as defined
in the bylaws, may include but not be limited to, members of the
representative organizations of military family advocates, local
education agency officials, parent and teacher groups, the United States
Department of Defense, the Education Commission of the States, the
Interstate Agreement on the Qualification of Educational Personnel, and
other interstate compacts affecting the education of children of
military members.
                                             
 IV. Meet at least once each calendar year. The chairperson may call
additional meetings and, upon the request of a simple majority of the
member states, shall call additional meetings.
                                             
 V. Establish an executive committee, whose members shall include the
officers of the Interstate Commission and such other members of the
Interstate Commission as determined by the bylaws. Members of the
executive committee shall serve a one year term. Members of the
executive committee shall be entitled to one vote each. The executive
committee shall have the power to act on behalf of the Interstate
Commission, with the exception of rulemaking, during periods when the
Interstate Commission is not in session. The executive committee shall
oversee the day-to-day activities of the administration of the compact
including enforcement and compliance with the provisions of the compact,
its bylaws and rules, and other such duties as deemed necessary. The
United States Department of Defense, shall serve as an ex-officio,
nonvoting member of the executive committee.
                                             
 VI. Establish bylaws and rules that provide for conditions and
procedures under which the Interstate Commission shall make its
information and official records available to the public for inspection
or copying. The Interstate Commission may exempt from disclosure
information or official records to the extent they would adversely
affect personal privacy rights or proprietary interests.
                                             
 VII. Give public notice of all meetings and all meetings shall be
open to the public, except as set forth in the rules or as otherwise
provided in the compact. The Interstate Commission and its committees
may close a meeting, or portion thereof, where it determines by 2/3 vote
that an open meeting would be likely to:
                                             
 (a) Relate solely to the Interstate Commission's internal
personnel practices and procedures;
                                             
 (b) Disclose matters specifically exempted from disclosure by
federal and state statute;
                                             
 (c) Disclose trade secrets or commercial or financial information
which is privileged or confidential;
                                             
 (d) Involve accusing a person of a crime, or formally censuring a
person;
                                             
 (e) Disclose information of a personal nature where disclosure
would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy;
                                             
 (f) Disclose investigative records compiled for law enforcement
purposes; or
                                             
 (g) Specifically relate to the Interstate Commission's
participation in a civil action or other legal proceeding.
                                             
 VIII. Cause its legal counsel or designee to certify that a meeting
may be closed and shall reference each relevant exemptible provision for
any meeting, or portion of a meeting, which is closed pursuant to this
provision. The Interstate Commission shall keep minutes which shall
fully and clearly describe all matters discussed in a meeting and shall
provide a full and accurate summary of actions taken, and the reasons
therefor, including a description of the views expressed and the record
of a roll call vote. All documents considered in connection with an
action shall be identified in such minutes. All minutes and documents of
a closed meeting shall remain under seal, subject to release by a
majority vote of the Interstate Commission.
                                             
 IX. Collect standardized data concerning the educational transition
of the children of military families under this compact as directed
through its rules which shall specify the data to be collected, the
means of collection, and data exchange and reporting requirements. Such
methods of data collection, exchange, and reporting shall, in so far as
is reasonably possible, conform to current technology and coordinate its
information functions with the appropriate custodian of records as
identified in the bylaws and rules.
                                             
 X. Create a process that permits military officials, education
officials, and parents to inform the Interstate Commission if and when
there are alleged violations of the compact or its rules or when issues
subject to the jurisdiction of the compact or its rules are not
addressed by the state or local education agency. This section shall not
be construed to create a private right of action against the Interstate
Commission or any member state.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE X
---------

### Section 110-D:11

 **110-D:11 Powers and Duties of the Interstate Commission. –** The
Interstate Commission shall have the following powers:
                                             
 I. To provide for dispute resolution among member states.
                                             
 II. To promulgate rules and take all necessary actions to effect the
goals, purposes and obligations as enumerated in this compact. The rules
shall have the force and effect of statutory law and shall be binding in
the compact states to the extent and in the manner provided in this
compact.
                                             
 III. To issue, upon request of a member state, advisory opinions
concerning the meaning or interpretation of the interstate compact, its
bylaws, rules, and actions.
                                             
 IV. To enforce compliance with the compact provisions, the rules
promulgated by the Interstate Commission, and the bylaws, using all
necessary and proper means, including but not limited to the use of
judicial process.
                                             
 V. To establish and maintain offices which shall be located within
one or more of the member states.
                                             
 VI. To purchase and maintain insurance and bonds.
                                             
 VII. To borrow, accept, hire, or contract for services of
personnel.
                                             
 VIII. To establish and appoint committees including, but not limited
to, an executive committee as required by RSA 110-D:10, V, which shall
have the power to act on behalf of the Interstate Commission in carrying
out its powers and duties hereunder.
                                             
 IX. To elect or appoint such officers, attorneys, employees, agents,
or consultants, and to fix their compensation, define their duties and
determine their qualifications; and to establish the Interstate
Commission's personnel policies and programs relating to conflicts of
interest, rates of compensation, and qualifications of personnel.
                                             
 X. To accept any and all donations and grants of money, equipment,
supplies, materials, and services, and to receive, utilize, and dispose
of it.
                                             
 XI. To lease, purchase, accept contributions or donations of, or
otherwise to own, hold, improve, or use any property, real, personal, or
mixed.
                                             
 XII. To sell, convey, mortgage, pledge, lease, exchange, abandon, or
otherwise dispose of any property, real, personal, or mixed.
                                             
 XIII. To establish a budget and make expenditures.
                                             
 XIV. To adopt a seal and bylaws governing the management and
operation of the Interstate Commission.
                                             
 XV. To report annually to the legislatures, governors, judiciary,
and state councils of the member states concerning the activities of the
Interstate Commission during the preceding year. Such reports shall also
include any recommendations that may have been adopted by the Interstate
Commission.
                                             
 XVI. To coordinate education, training and public awareness
regarding the compact, its implementation and operation for officials
and parents involved in such activity.
                                             
 XVII. To establish uniform standards for the reporting, collecting,
and exchanging of data.
                                             
 XVIII. To maintain corporate books and records in accordance with
the bylaws.
                                             
 XIX. To perform such functions as may be necessary or appropriate to
achieve the purposes of this compact.
                                             
 XX. To provide for the uniform collection and sharing of information
between and among member states, schools, and military families under
this compact.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE XI
----------

### Section 110-D:12

 **110-D:12 Organization and Operation of the Interstate Commission.
–**
                                             
 I. The Interstate Commission shall, by a majority of the members
present and voting, within 12 months after the first Interstate
Commission meeting, adopt bylaws to govern its conduct as may be
necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of the compact,
including, but not limited to:
                                             
 (a) Establishing the fiscal year of the Interstate Commission.
                                             
 (b) Establishing an executive committee, and such other
committees as may be necessary.
                                             
 (c) Providing for the establishment of committees and for
governing any general or specific delegation of authority or function of
the Interstate Commission.
                                             
 (d) Providing reasonable procedures for calling and conducting
meetings of the Interstate Commission, and ensuring reasonable notice of
each such meeting.
                                             
 (e) Establishing the titles and responsibilities of the officers
and staff of the Interstate Commission.
                                             
 (f) Providing a mechanism for concluding the operations of the
Interstate Commission and the return of surplus funds that may exist
upon the termination of the compact after the payment and reserving of
all of its debts and obligations.
                                             
 (g) Providing "start up'' rules for initial administration of the
compact.
                                             
 II. The Interstate Commission shall, by a majority of the members,
elect annually from among its members a chairperson, a vice-chairperson,
and a treasurer, each of whom shall have such authority and duties as
may be specified in the bylaws. The chairperson or, in the chairperson's
absence or disability, the vice-chairperson, shall preside at all
meetings of the Interstate Commission. The officers so elected shall
serve without compensation or remuneration from the Interstate
Commission; provided that, subject to the availability of budgeted
funds, the officers shall be reimbursed for ordinary and necessary costs
and expenses incurred by them in the performance of their
responsibilities as officers of the Interstate Commission.
                                             
 III. (a) The executive committee shall have such authority and
duties as may be set forth in the bylaws, including but not limited to:
                                             
 (1) Managing the affairs of the Interstate Commission in a
manner consistent with the bylaws and purposes of the Interstate
Commission;
                                             
 (2) Overseeing an organizational structure within, and
appropriate procedures for the Interstate Commission to provide for the
creation of rules, operating procedures, and administrative and
technical support functions; and
                                             
 (3) Planning, implementing, and coordinating communications
and activities with other state, federal and local government
organizations in order to advance the goals of the Interstate
Commission.
                                             
 (b) The executive committee may, subject to the approval of the
Interstate Commission, appoint or retain an executive director for such
period, upon such terms and conditions and for such compensation, as the
Interstate Commission may deem appropriate. The executive director shall
serve as secretary to the Interstate Commission, but shall not be a
member of the Interstate Commission. The executive director shall hire
and supervise such other persons as may be authorized by the Interstate
Commission.
                                             
 IV. The Interstate Commission's executive director and its employees
shall be immune from suit and liability, either personally or in their
official capacity, for a claim for damage to or loss of property or
personal injury or other civil liability caused or arising out of or
relating to an actual or alleged act, error, or omission that occurred,
or that such person had a reasonable basis for believing occurred,
within the scope of Interstate Commission employment, duties, or
responsibilities; provided, that such person shall not be protected from
suit or liability for damage, loss, injury, or liability caused by the
intentional or willful and wanton misconduct of such person.
                                             
 (a) The liability of the Interstate Commission's executive
director and employees or Interstate Commission representatives, acting
within the scope of such person's employment or duties for acts, errors,
or omissions occurring within such person's state may not exceed the
limits of liability set forth under the Constitution and laws of that
state for state officials, employees, and agents. The Interstate
Commission is considered to be an instrumentality of the states for the
purposes of any such action. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to protect such person from suit or liability for damage, loss, injury,
or liability caused by the intentional or willful and wanton misconduct
of such person.
                                             
 (b) The Interstate Commission shall defend the executive director
and its employees and, subject to the approval of the attorney general
or other appropriate legal counsel of the member state represented by an
Interstate Commission representative, shall defend such Interstate
Commission representative in any civil action seeking to impose
liability arising out of an actual or alleged act, error or omission
that occurred within the scope of Interstate Commission employment,
duties or responsibilities, or that the defendant had a reasonable basis
for believing occurred within the scope of Interstate Commission
employment, duties, or responsibilities, provided that the actual or
alleged act, error, or omission did not result from intentional or
willful and wanton misconduct on the part of such person.
                                             
 (c) To the extent not covered by the state involved, member
state, or the Interstate Commission, the representatives or employees of
the Interstate Commission shall be held harmless in the amount of a
settlement or judgment, including attorney's fees and costs, obtained
against such persons arising out of an actual or alleged act, error, or
omission that occurred within the scope of Interstate Commission
employment, duties, or responsibilities, or that such persons had a
reasonable basis for believing occurred within the scope of Interstate
Commission employment, duties, or responsibilities, provided that the
actual or alleged act, error, or omission did not result from
intentional or willful and wanton misconduct on the part of such
persons.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE XII
-----------

### Section 110-D:13

 **110-D:13 Rulemaking Functions of The Interstate Commission. –**
                                             
 I. The Interstate Commission shall promulgate reasonable rules in
order to effectively and efficiently achieve the purposes of this
compact. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the Interstate
Commission exercises its rulemaking authority in a manner that is beyond
the scope of the purposes of this act, or the powers granted hereunder,
then such an action by the Interstate Commission shall be invalid and
have no force or effect.
                                             
 II. Rules shall be made pursuant to a rulemaking process that
substantially conforms to the "Model State Administrative Procedure
Act,'' of 1981 act, Uniform Laws Annotated, Vol. 15, p.1 (2000) as
amended, as may be appropriate to the operations of the Interstate
Commission.
                                             
 III. Not later than 30 days after a rule is promulgated, any person
may file a petition for judicial review of the rule; provided, that the
filing of such a petition shall not stay or otherwise prevent the rule
from becoming effective unless the court finds that the petitioner has a
substantial likelihood of success. The court shall give deference to the
actions of the Interstate Commission consistent with applicable law and
shall not find the rule to be unlawful if the rule represents a
reasonable exercise of the Interstate Commission's authority.
                                             
 IV. If a majority of the legislatures of the compacting states
reject a rule by enactment of a statute or resolution in the same manner
used to adopt the compact, then such rule shall have no further force
and effect in any compacting state.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE XIII
------------

### Section 110-D:14

 **110-D:14 Oversight, Enforcement, and Dispute Resolution. –**
                                             
 I. Oversight.
                                             
 (a) The executive, legislative, and judicial branches of state
government in each member state shall enforce this compact and shall
take all actions necessary and appropriate to effectuate the compact's
purposes and intent. The provisions of this compact and the rules
promulgated hereunder shall have standing as statutory law.
                                             
 (b) All courts shall take judicial notice of the compact and the
rules in any judicial or administrative proceeding in a member state
pertaining to the subject matter of this compact which may affect the
powers, responsibilities, or actions of the Interstate Commission.
                                             
 (c) The Interstate Commission shall be entitled to receive all
service of process in any such proceeding, and shall have standing to
intervene in the proceeding for all purposes. Failure to provide service
of process to the Interstate Commission shall render a judgment or order
void as to the Interstate Commission, this compact, or promulgated
rules.
                                             
 II. Default, technical assistance, suspension, and termination. If
the Interstate Commission determines that a member state has defaulted
in the performance of its obligations or responsibilities under this
compact, or the bylaws or promulgated rules, the Interstate Commission
shall:
                                             
 (a) Provide written notice to the defaulting state and other
member states, of the nature of the default, the means of curing the
default and any action taken by the Interstate Commission. The
Interstate Commission shall specify the conditions by which the
defaulting state must cure its default.
                                             
 (b) Provide remedial training and specific technical assistance
regarding the default.
                                             
 (c) If the defaulting state fails to cure the default, the
defaulting state shall be terminated from the compact upon an
affirmative vote of a majority of the member states and all rights,
privileges, and benefits conferred by this compact shall be terminated
from the effective date of termination. A cure of the default does not
relieve the offending state of obligations or liabilities incurred
during the period of the default.
                                             
 (d) Suspension or termination of membership in the compact shall
be imposed only after all other means of securing compliance have been
exhausted. Notice of intent to suspend or terminate shall be given by
the Interstate Commission to the governor, the majority and minority
leaders of the defaulting state's legislature, and each of the member
states.
                                             
 (e) The state which has been suspended or terminated is
responsible for all assessments, obligations, and liabilities incurred
through the effective date of suspension or termination including
obligations, the performance of which extends beyond the effective date
of suspension or termination.
                                             
 (f) The Interstate Commission shall not bear any costs relating
to any state that has been found to be in default or which has been
suspended or terminated from the compact, unless otherwise mutually
agreed upon in writing between the Interstate Commission and the
defaulting state.
                                             
 (g) The defaulting state may appeal the action of the Interstate
Commission by petitioning the United States District Court for the
District of Columbia or the federal district where the Interstate
Commission has its principal offices. The prevailing party shall be
awarded all costs of such litigation including reasonable attorney's
fees.
                                             
 III. Dispute resolution.
                                             
 (a) The Interstate Commission shall attempt, upon the request of
a member state, to resolve disputes which are subject to the compact and
which may arise among member states and between member and non-member
states.
                                             
 (b) The Interstate Commission shall promulgate a rule providing
for both mediation and binding dispute resolution for disputes as
appropriate.
                                             
 IV. Enforcement.
                                             
 (a) The Interstate Commission, in the reasonable exercise of its
discretion, shall enforce the provisions and rules of this compact.
                                             
 (b) The Interstate Commission, may by majority vote of the
members, initiate legal action in the United State District Court for
the District of Columbia or, at the discretion of the Interstate
Commission, in the federal district where the Interstate Commission has
its principal offices, to enforce compliance with the provisions of the
compact, its promulgated rules and bylaws, against a member state in
default. The relief sought may include both injunctive relief and
damages. In the event judicial enforcement is necessary the prevailing
party shall be awarded all costs of such litigation including reasonable
attorney's fees.
                                             
 (c) The remedies herein shall not be the exclusive remedies of
the Interstate Commission. The Interstate Commission may avail itself of
any other remedies available under state law or the regulation of a
profession.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE XIV
-----------

### Section 110-D:15

 **110-D:15 Financing of the Interstate Commission. –**
                                             
 I. The Interstate Commission shall pay, or provide for the payment
of the reasonable expenses of its establishment, organization, and
ongoing activities.
                                             
 II. The Interstate Commission may levy on and collect an annual
assessment from each member state to cover the cost of the operations
and activities of the Interstate Commission and its staff which must be
in a total amount sufficient to cover the Interstate Commission's annual
budget as approved each year. The aggregate annual assessment amount
shall be allocated based upon a formula to be determined by the
Interstate Commission, which shall promulgate a rule binding upon all
member states.
                                             
 III. The Interstate Commission shall not incur obligations of any
kind prior to securing the funds adequate to meet the same; nor shall
the Interstate Commission pledge the credit of any of the member states,
except by and with the authority of the member state.
                                             
 IV. The Interstate Commission shall keep accurate accounts of all
receipts and disbursements. The receipts and disbursements of the
Interstate Commission shall be subject to the audit and accounting
procedures established under its bylaws. However, all receipts and
disbursements of funds handled by the Interstate Commission shall by
audited yearly by a certified or licensed public accountant and the
report of the audit shall be included in and become part of the annual
report of the Interstate Commission.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE XV
----------

### Section 110-D:16

 **110-D:16 Member States, Effective Date and Amendment. –**
                                             
 I. Any state is eligible to become a member state.
                                             
 II. The compact shall become effective and binding upon legislative
enactment of the compact into law by no less than 10 of the states. The
effective date shall be no earlier than December 1, 2007. Thereafter it
shall become effective and binding as to any other member state upon
enactment of the compact into law by that state. The governors of
non-member states or their designees shall be invited to participate in
the activities of the Interstate Commission on a nonvoting basis prior
to adoption of the compact by all states.
                                             
 III. The Interstate Commission may propose amendments to the compact
for enactment by the member states. No amendment shall become effective
and binding upon the Interstate Commission and the member states unless
and until it is enacted into law by unanimous consent of the member
states.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE XVI
-----------

### Section 110-D:17

 **110-D:17 Withdrawal and Dissolution. –**
                                             
 I. Withdrawal.
                                             
 (a) Once effective, the compact shall continue in force and
remain binding upon each and every member state; provided that a member
state may withdraw from the compact by specifically repealing the
statute which enacted the compact into law.
                                             
 (b) Withdrawal from this compact shall be by the enactment of a
statute repealing the same, but shall not take effect until one year
after the effective date of such statute and until written notice of the
withdrawal has been given by the withdrawing state to the governor of
each other member jurisdiction.
                                             
 (c) The withdrawing state shall immediately notify the
chairperson of the Interstate Commission in writing upon the
introduction of legislation repealing this compact in the withdrawing
state. The Interstate Commission shall notify the other member states of
the withdrawing state's intent to withdraw within 60 days of its receipt
thereof.
                                             
 (d) The withdrawing state is responsible for all assessments,
obligations, and liabilities incurred through the effective date of
withdrawal, including obligations, the performance of which extend
beyond the effective date of withdrawal.
                                             
 (e) Reinstatement following withdrawal of a member state shall
occur upon the withdrawing state reenacting the compact or upon such
later date as determined by the Interstate Commission.
                                             
 II. Dissolution of compact.
                                             
 (a) This compact shall dissolve effective upon the date of the
withdrawal or default of the member state which reduces the membership
in the compact to one member state.
                                             
 (b) Upon the dissolution of this compact, the compact becomes
null and void and shall be of no further force or effect, and the
business and affairs of the Interstate Commission shall be concluded and
surplus funds shall be distributed in accordance with the bylaws.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE XVII
------------

### Section 110-D:18

 **110-D:18 Severability and Construction. –**
                                             
 I. The provisions of this compact shall be severable, and if any
phrase, clause, sentence, or provision is deemed unenforceable, the
remaining provisions of the compact shall be enforceable.
                                             
 II. The provisions of this compact shall be liberally construed to
effectuate its purposes.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this compact shall be construed to prohibit the
applicability of other interstate compacts to which the states are
members.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

ARTICLE XVIII
-------------

### Section 110-D:19

 **110-D:19 Binding Effect of Compact and Other Laws. –**
                                             
 I. Other laws.
                                             
 (a) Nothing herein prevents the enforcement of any other law of a
member state that is not inconsistent with this compact.
                                             
 (b) All member states' laws conflicting with this compact are
superseded to the extent of the conflict.
                                             
 II. Binding effect of the compact.
                                             
 (a) All lawful actions of the Interstate Commission, including
all rules and bylaws promulgated by the Interstate Commission, are
binding upon the member states.
                                             
 (b) All agreements between the Interstate Commission and the
member states are binding in accordance with their terms.
                                             
 (c) In the event any provision of this compact exceeds the
constitutional limits imposed on the legislature of any member state,
such provision shall be ineffective to the extent of the conflict with
the constitutional provision in question in that member state.

**Source.** 2014, 308:1, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.
