---
title: 'CHAPTER 110-B THE MILITIA'
---

TITLE VIII
                                             
PUBLIC DEFENSE AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS
====================================

CHAPTER 110-B
                                             
THE MILITIA
--------------

### Section 110-B:1

 **110-B:1 Composition of the Militia. –**
                                             
 I. The militia shall be divided into 3 classes, namely the national
guard, the state guard, and the unorganized militia.
                                             
 II. The national guard shall consist of an army national guard, an
air national guard, and an inactive national guard. As used in this
chapter, the term "national guard'' shall mean and refer to the army
national guard and the air national guard unless otherwise indicated.
                                             
 III. The state guard shall consist of those persons serving in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 111.
                                             
 IV. The unorganized militia shall consist of all able-bodied
residents of the state who are 18 years of age or older, who are, or
have declared their intention to become, citizens of the United States,
and who are not serving in the national guard or the state guard.
                                             
 V. When authorized by the laws and regulations of the United States,
there shall be an additional section of the state guard to be known as
the New Hampshire naval militia.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1985, 144:1, eff. July 19, 1985.

### Section 110-B:2

 **110-B:2 Commander-in-Chief; Regulations. –** The governor shall be
the commander-in-chief of the militia and is hereby authorized to issue
regulations for the organization and government thereof. Such
regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of
this chapter, but they shall conform to the laws and regulations of the
United States relating to the organization, discipline, and training of
the militia, to the provisions of this chapter and, as nearly as
practicable, to the laws and regulations governing the army and air
force of the United States. The regulations in force at the time of the
passage of this chapter shall remain in force until new regulations are
issued.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:3

 **110-B:3 Registration and Draft of Unorganized Militia. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever it shall be deemed necessary, the governor may direct
the members of the unorganized militia to present themselves for and
submit to registration at such time and place and in such manner as the
governor may prescribe in regulations issued pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 II. Whenever it shall be necessary in case of invasion, disaster,
insurrection, riot, breach of the peace, or imminent danger thereof, or
to maintain the national guard at the number required for public safety
or prescribed by the laws of the United States, the governor may call
for and accept from the unorganized militia as many volunteers as are
required for service in the national guard, or the governor may direct
the members of the unorganized militia or such of them as may be
necessary to be drafted into the national guard.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:4

 **110-B:4 Notice of Draft; Order. –**
                                             
 I. Notice of the draft shall be by proclamation or otherwise, as the
governor shall deem proper; and the selection of draft classes for
ablebodied persons 18 years of age or older shall be by lot, all in
conformity with such regulations as the governor shall promulgate.
                                             
 II. The draft shall be made from such classes as specified by the
regulations issued under paragraph I. For purposes of such a draft the
term "able bodied'' shall, unless otherwise specified by regulation,
mean those persons who are without a functional disability, medical or
psychological, that would reasonably prevent them from performing state
military service.
                                             
 III. Any member of the unorganized militia who is ordered to
register or to be drafted into the national guard or the state guard
under the provisions of this chapter and who fails to appear at the time
and place designated in such order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1985, 144:2, eff. July 19, 1985.

### Section 110-B:5

 **110-B:5 Militia Call by the United States. –** When the militia of
the state is called forth under the constitution and laws of the United
States, the governor shall order out for service the national guard or
such part thereof as may be necessary; and if the number available be
insufficient, the governor may call for and accept from the unorganized
militia as many volunteers as are required for service in the national
guard, or the governor may direct the members of the unorganized militia
or such of them as may be necessary to be drafted into the national
guard.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:6

 **110-B:6 Ordering National Guard Into Active State Service. –** The
governor shall have power, in case of invasion, disaster, insurrection,
riot, breach of the peace, resistance to process of this state, or
imminent danger thereof, or for the safety of the inhabitants of the
state, to order into the active service of the state for such period, to
such extent, and in such manner as the governor may deem necessary, all
or any part of the national guard. Such power shall include the power to
order the national guard or any part thereof to function under the
operational control of the United States army, navy or air force
commander in charge of the defense of any area within the state which is
invaded or attacked or is or may be threatened with invasion or attack.
The governor shall also permit paid and unpaid training and other state
duty under such regulations as prescribed by the adjutant general.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1985, 25:1, eff. May 31, 1985.

### Section 110-B:6-a

 **110-B:6-a Active State Service; Required Health Coverage. –**
                                             
 I. National Guard members ordered to or retained on state active
duty for longer than 30 days who do not have other health care coverage
shall elect TRICARE coverage. The state shall pay the TRICARE premiums,
up to a maximum of 100 percent of the service member's share of the
premium for the period of state active duty to include the whole month
in which the state active duty ends.
                                             
 II. The governor is hereby authorized to draw a warrant for sums
sufficient to pay for premiums paid under this section out of any money
in the treasury not otherwise appropriated, and said sums are hereby
appropriated.

**Source.** 2007, 369:1, eff. Sept. 15, 2007.

### Section 110-B:7

 **110-B:7 Military Staff of the Governor. –**
                                             
 I. The military staff of the governor shall consist of the adjutant
general who shall be the chief of staff and 12 aides-de-camp. Four shall
be detailed from the national guard and 4 others shall be appointed from
the reserve components of the armed forces of the United States. The
remaining 4 may be appointed from officers or former officers of the
United States army, navy, marine corps, coast guard or air force, or of
the national guard or of the various officers' reserves components or
from civilian life.
                                             
 II. Officers detailed from the national guard shall retain their
existing rank and shall remain subject to duty except as their services
may be required by the governor as staff members. Officers or enlisted
persons or former officers or enlisted persons appointed from the army,
navy, air force, marine corps, coast guard, or the various military
reserve corps, shall be of the rank held or last held by them in these
organizations; except that, if the rank last held by a former member of
the army, marine corps or air force is lower than major, such former
member shall be commissioned in the rank of major; and that, if the rank
last held by a former member of the navy or coast guard is lower than
lieutenant-commander, such former member shall be commissioned in the
rank of lieutenant-commander. Except as provided above, civilians
appointed to the military staff of the governor shall be commissioned in
the rank of major or its naval equivalent but shall not thereby be
exempted from military duties. The 12 aides-de-camp shall hold office
during the pleasure and not exceeding the term of office of the governor
appointing them.
                                             
 III. As soon as may be after each state general election, the
governor-elect shall submit to the governor and council the names of
those persons not then officers of the militia whom the governor-elect
shall wish to appoint to the military staff; and it shall thereupon be
the duty of the governor and council to commission such nominees as
officers of the militia in the appropriate rank as prescribed in this
section. Such commission shall take effect on the day the governor-elect
takes office.
                                             
 IV. The military staff of the governor shall perform such ceremonial
functions and duties as the governor may prescribe.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:8

 **110-B:8 The Adjutant General. –**
                                             
 I. The adjutant general shall be appointed as provided in the
constitution and the tenure of office shall be until the officer has
reached the age of 65 years. At the time of appointment, the adjutant
general shall have had not less than 5 years of service as a member of
the New Hampshire national guard, immediately preceding that
appointment, shall have attained at least the rank of colonel and shall
be eligible for federal recognition by the department of defense as a
brigadier general. After one year as a brigadier general, the adjutant
general may be appointed to the rank of major general. The adjutant
general's salary shall be prescribed by law.
                                             
 II. The adjutant general shall be the chief of staff to the governor
and shall be the executive head of the adjutant general's department.
The adjutant general may perform any act authorized by this chapter or
by the regulations issued pursuant thereto through or with the aid of
such officers of the national guard or other personnel as the adjutant
general may designate. The adjutant general shall exercise and perform
all powers, functions and duties which are or may be imposed by the laws
and regulations of the United States. It shall be the duty of the
adjutant general to direct the planning and employment of the forces of
the national guard in carrying out their state military mission; to
establish unified command of state forces whenever they shall be jointly
engaged; to submit such written reports to the governor as the governor
may prescribe; and to perform such other duties as the governor may
direct. Whenever the governor and those who would act in succession to
the governor under the constitution and laws of the state shall be
unable to perform the duties of commander-in-chief, the adjutant general
shall command the militia.
                                             
 III. The adjutant general is authorized and empowered, subject to
the approval of the governor and council, to contract with any person or
private or public agency to provide group life or disability insurance
coverage for members of the national guard, while on active state duty,
within the limits of appropriations made for the national guard.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1983, 276:1. 1995, 12:1, eff. June 11, 1995.

### Section 110-B:8-a

 **110-B:8-a Rulemaking. –** All military and departmental
regulations adopted under this chapter shall be exempt from the
requirements of RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1985, 1:1. 2002, 248:6, eff. May 17, 2002.

### Section 110-B:8-b

 **110-B:8-b Deputy Adjutant General. –** The deputy adjutant general
shall be appointed as provided in the constitution and the tenure of
office shall be for 4 years or until the officer has reached the age of
65 years. At the time of appointment, the deputy adjutant general shall
have had at least 5 years of service as a member of the New Hampshire
national guard or United States armed forces, preceding the appointment
and shall have at least attained the rank of major. The deputy adjutant
general's salary shall be prescribed by law. The deputy adjutant general
shall:
                                             
 I. Assume full responsibility for the adjutant general's department
in the absence of the adjutant general.
                                             
 II. Assist the adjutant general to implement the department's duties
and responsibilities.
                                             
 III. Serve as principal liaison to senior military officials,
various state and federal officials, the legislature, local governments,
and community groups.
                                             
 IV. Provide overall guidance and direction for state operations
including business administration, facilities management, and the state
veterans cemetery.

**Source.** 1998, 81:2, eff. July 1, 1998.

### Section 110-B:9

 **110-B:9 Staff for the National Guard. –** There shall be under the
adjutant general one assistant adjutant general who shall be director of
the army national guard and one assistant adjutant general who shall be
director of the air national guard, both of whom shall have at least the
rank of brigadier general. Under the adjutant general, there shall also
be a staff for the national guard. The staff shall consist of such
officers as shall be designated in permanent orders and shall perform
such functions and duties as the adjutant general may prescribe.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:10

 **110-B:10 Emergency Purchases for the National Guard. –**
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, in
emergencies, the adjutant general may purchase such necessities as are
required for the immediate use and care of any command of the national
guard; and the governor shall draw his warrant for the necessary sums
from any funds not otherwise appropriated.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:11

 **110-B:11 State Retired List. –**
                                             
 I. Any commissioned officer or warrant officer of the national guard
who is retired by reason of age or otherwise shall be transferred to the
state retired list by the governor.
                                             
 II. Upon the recommendation of the adjutant general, the governor
may order any person on the state retired list to active duty for the
purpose of serving on military courts or boards or performing staff duty
in or with the national guard, and, in time of emergency, to perform any
military duty. In any such case, the person so ordered shall rank in his
grade from the date of such order.
                                             
 III. Time spent on the state retired list shall not be credited in
the computation of seniority, pay, length of service for promotion, or
otherwise, or any of the privileges and exemptions pertaining thereto;
except that, time served on active duty by order of the governor shall
be so credited.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:12

 **110-B:12 Service Without the State. –** The governor may order the
national guard or any part thereof to serve outside the borders of this
state or of the United States in order to perform military duty of every
description and to participate in parades, reviews, conferences,
encampments, maneuvers or other training, and to participate in small
arms and other military competitions and to attend service schools. The
provisions of this chapter shall apply to members of the national guard
while serving outside the state and while going to and returning from
such service outside the state in like manner and to the same extent as
while serving within the state.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

The National Guard
------------------

### Section 110-B:13

 **110-B:13 Army National Guard. –** The army national guard shall
comprise the army units which are a part of the New Hampshire national
guard at the time of the enactment of this chapter and such other army
units as may be organized hereafter, including the personnel who are
enlisted, appointed or commissioned therein. When authorized by the laws
and regulations of the United States, such personnel may include
females.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:14

 **110-B:14 Air National Guard. –** The air national guard shall
comprise the air units which are a part of the New Hampshire national
guard at the time of the enactment of this chapter and such other air
units as may be organized hereafter, including the personnel who are
enlisted, appointed or commissioned therein. Any aviation units of the
army national guard shall not be considered air units within the meaning
of this chapter. When authorized by the laws and regulations of the
United States, such personnel may include females.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:15

 **110-B:15 Organization and Training. –**
                                             
 I. The national guard shall be organized, armed, disciplined,
governed, administered and trained as prescribed by the laws of the
United States and by this chapter and the regulations issued
thereunder.
                                             
 II. Unless the same shall be furnished by the United States, the
state shall provide adequate armory accommodations, bases, camps, target
ranges and other facilities and shall maintain the same for units of the
army national guard and of the air national guard allotted to the state
under the laws of the United States, accepted by the governor and
organized under the authority of this chapter.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:16

 **110-B:16 Assemblies, Annual Training and Other Duty. –**
                                             
 I. Members and units of the national guard shall assemble for drill
or other equivalent training, instruction or duties during each year and
shall participate in field training, encampments, maneuvers, schools,
conferences or other similar duties as may be prescribed by the laws of
the United States and of the state and the regulations issued
thereunder.
                                             
 II. Within the amount appropriated therefor, the adjutant general
may prescribe and order the number of days, if any, for assemblies for
drills or other equivalent training, instructions or duties to be
performed annually by members of the national guard for which they may
receive pay.
                                             
 III. Within the amount appropriated therefor, the adjutant general
may prescribe and order the number of days, if any, of field training,
encampments, maneuvers, schools, conferences or other similar duties to
be performed by members of the national guard for which they may receive
pay and allowances.
                                             
 IV. Members of the national guard may be ordered by the governor or
under his authority to perform special duty, including duty in a
judicial proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter or as a member of
or in any other capacity with any military board or as an investigating
officer or as a medical examiner or as a judge advocate in the
performance of legal services in any suit, action or proceeding. In all
cases where a member of the national guard judge advocate staff serves
as lead counsel in a New Hampshire state court, such counsel shall be a
member of the New Hampshire Bar Association.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 2012, 188:2, eff. June 11, 2012.

### Section 110-B:17

 **110-B:17 Organization of Units. –** The governor shall conform the
organization of the New Hampshire national guard, including the
composition of all units thereof, to the organization of national guard
units prescribed by the laws of the United States and the regulations
issued thereunder. For that purpose, the governor is authorized to
organize, reorganize or disband any unit, headquarters or staff therein,
to increase or decrease the number of commissioned officers, warrant
officers, and non-commissioned officers of any grade therein, and to
increase or decrease the strength of the New Hampshire national guard.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:18

 **110-B:18 Inactive National Guard. –** The inactive national guard
shall consist of the persons commissioned, appointed or enlisted therein
at the time of the enactment of this chapter, such officers and enlisted
persons as may be hereafter transferred thereto from the army national
guard and the air national guard, and such persons as may be enlisted
therein under the laws of the United States and the regulations issued
thereunder.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:19

 **110-B:19 Credit for Active Federal Service. –** For all purposes
under this chapter, members of the national guard who entered the active
military service of the United States in time of war or under a call,
order or draft by the president or who hereafter enter such service
under like conditions or who enter and serve on active duty in the
military service of the United States in time of peace and who
thereafter return to the military service of the state shall be entitled
to credit for time so served as if such service had been rendered to the
state.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

Officers, Warrant Officers and Enlisted Personnel
-------------------------------------------------

### Section 110-B:20

 **110-B:20 Qualifications of Officers, Warrant Officers and Enlisted
Personnel. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall be appointed or promoted as a commissioned
officer or warrant officer of the national guard unless such person
shall have passed such examination as to his physical, moral and
professional qualifications as may be prescribed by this chapter and the
regulations issued thereunder.
                                             
 II. Any person who has been dismissed or dishonorably discharged
from the organized militia of this or any other state or from the armed
forces of the United States and has not been restored to duty, or any
commissioned officer or warrant officer who was discharged from the
national guard as a result of the findings of an efficiency examining
board or whose resignation from the national guard was accepted by the
governor at a time when such officer was under arrest or under charges
for the commission of an offense involving moral turpitude or punishable
by a court-martial, shall not be eligible for appointment as a
commissioned officer or warrant officer in the national guard.
                                             
 III. Every commissioned officer or warrant officer shall take and
subscribe the oaths of office prescribed for officers of the national
guard by the laws of this state.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:21

 **110-B:21 Examining Boards. –**
                                             
 I. The efficiency, moral character and general fitness for retention
in the national guard of any commissioned officer or warrant officer may
be investigated and determined by an efficiency examining board. Such
board shall, whenever practicable, be composed of officers senior in
rank to the officer under investigation.
                                             
 II. The physical fitness for further service of any commissioned
officer or warrant officer in the national guard may be investigated and
determined by a medical examining board of officers.
                                             
 III. Efficiency and medical examining boards shall be appointed by
the governor upon the recommendation of the adjutant general.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:22

 **110-B:22 Powers and Procedure. –** Efficiency and medical
examining boards appointed by the governor are hereby vested with the
powers of courts of inquiry and courts-martial. Such boards shall follow
the practice and procedure prescribed by applicable laws of the United
States and the state and the regulations issued thereunder. Any officer
ordered to appear before such board shall be allowed to appear in person
or represented by counsel, to cross-examine witnesses and to call
witnesses in his or her behalf. The individual shall be allowed full
access to records pertinent to the case and shall be furnished with
copies of the same. Failure to obey an order to appear before such
examining board shall be sufficient ground for a finding by the board
that the officer or warrant officer be discharged. If the findings of
such board are unfavorable to an officer and are approved under the
applicable statutes and regulations of the United States, if approval be
thereby required, the governor, if he approves the findings of the
board, shall relieve the officer from duty and shall give the individual
a discharge in such form as may be appropriate; provided that, if the
discharge of an officer is recommended solely because of physical
inability to perform active service, such officer may be transferred to
the state retired list in accordance with this chapter.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:23

 **110-B:23 Loss of Commission, Dismissal. –** The commission of any
officer or warrant officer absent without leave for 3 months may be
vacated by the governor upon the recommendation of the adjutant general.
An officer who shall have been absent without leave for a period of 6
months or more shall be dismissed by the governor.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:24

 **110-B:24 Resignation. –** An officer or warrant officer of the
national guard may tender a resignation of office at any time. If the
resignation is accepted, the officer shall receive an honorable
discharge; but, if the officer tendering the resignation shall be under
arrest or if charges have been preferred for the commission of an
offense involving moral turpitude or punishable by court-martial, the
individual may be given a discharge in such form as may be prescribed by
regulations.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:25

 **110-B:25 Enlistment in the National Guard. –** The qualifications
for enlistment and re-enlistment, the periods of enlistment,
re-enlistment and voluntary extension of enlistment, the period of
service, the form of contract to be executed, the oath to be taken, and
the manner and form of transfer and discharge of enlisted personnel of
the national guard shall be those prescribed by the applicable laws of
the United States and of this state and by the regulations issued
thereunder.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:26

 **110-B:26 Non-Commissioned Officer. –** All non-commissioned
officers of the national guard shall be appointed in the discretion of
the appointing officer upon the nomination of the officer under whose
immediate command they are to serve. Appointing officers shall be
designated in regulations issued pursuant to this chapter. The
appointment of a non-commissioned officer may be terminated as
prescribed by regulations issued pursuant to this chapter.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:27

 **110-B:27 Discharge of Enlisted Persons. –**
                                             
 I. An enlisted person may be discharged from the national guard
prior to the expiration of his term of enlistment under such conditions
as may be prescribed by applicable laws of the United States and of this
state and by regulations issued thereunder.
                                             
 II. An enlisted person discharged from the national guard shall
receive a discharge in writing in such form and of such type or
classification as may be prescribed by applicable laws of the United
States and of this state and by regulations issued thereunder.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

Public Property
---------------

### Section 110-B:28

 **110-B:28 National Guard Facilities. –**
                                             
 I. All armories, arsenals, camps, ranges, bases, airports, and other
facilities owned, leased, licensed, or maintained by the state or by the
United States for the use of the New Hampshire national guard and all
activities conducted therein shall be under the general charge, control
of, and regulated by the adjutant general and no political subdivision
of the state shall interfere with or regulate such activities. The
adjutant general may use the means necessary and required, including the
arming of trained personnel, to protect, guard, secure and defend and
maintain all such facilities. Use of force by any member of the New
Hampshire national guard in duty status, shall be in accordance with the
applicable Department of Defense, United States Army, and United States
Air Force directives and instructions on rules of engagement and use of
force. If mission specific rules of engagement are issued, the specific
rules shall be followed, to the degree they deviate from the existing
rules, for as long as military members are carrying out duties related
to the mission for which the specific rules were issued.
                                             
 II. Unless the same shall be furnished by the United States, the
state shall provide adequate armory accommodations, bases, camps, target
ranges, and other facilities and shall maintain the same for units of
the army national guard and of the air national guard allotted to the
state under the laws of the United States, accepted by the governor and
organized under the authority of this chapter.
                                             
 III. The adjutant general may designate an officer to be in direct
charge of each armory, arsenal, camp, base, or other facility.
                                             
 IV. (a) The adjutant general may cooperate with and enter into
contracts or agreements with the federal government, or any agency
thereof, as he or she deems desirable to secure the participation of the
United States government, through the allotment of federal funds, in the
costs of constructing, enlarging, or altering armories, the state
veterans cemetery, or other military facilities. The adjutant general
may contract with the federal government to perform construction for
building renovations or site improvements to existing state-owned
facilities or land, subject to the approval of the capital budget
overview committee established in RSA 17-J. Any affected municipalities
shall receive notice at least 14 days prior to the capital budget
overview committee meeting at which such projects are slated to be
approved. Such federally contracted and completely federally funded
projects shall either:
                                             
 (1) Within 90 days prior to the end of the federal fiscal
year, be designed and ready for bidding; or
                                             
 (2) Where such project design is incomplete and not ready for
bid, a contract may be entered into within 210 days prior to the end of
the federal fiscal year.
                                             
 (b) The adjutant general may adopt procedures relative to this
section to ensure the best interest of the federal and state of New
Hampshire governments and the national guard, including notice
procedures that simultaneously provide project details to all interested
parties.
                                             
 V. Any military facilities which are the responsibility of the state
shall be accepted by the adjutant general, after the approval of the
governor and council in accordance with the provisions of RSA 4:29.
                                             
 VI. For purposes of morale and unit cohesiveness and to assist in
esprit de corps, units may have a social club composed of members
located within national guard facilities. Any such club shall be subject
to regulations issued by the adjutant general, shall be under the
control of the assistant adjutant general for the air or army national
guard, and shall be licensed and subject to inspection by the New
Hampshire state liquor commission.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1985, 25:2. 1986, 228:2. 2002, 248:7, eff. May
17, 2002. 2013, 255:1, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 110-B:29

 **110-B:29 Use of Armories or Other National Guard Facilities. –**
                                             
 I. All New Hampshire national guard facilities shall be primarily
for the military duty, instruction, and training of the national and
state guard and for the storage and maintenance of military property.
Other use of national guard facilities may be authorized by the adjutant
general and shall be governed by rules and regulations promulgated under
this section.
                                             
 II. Rental fees for the use of national guard facilities shall be
fixed by the adjutant general and shall be declared as revenue and paid
to the adjutant general subject to the provisions of RSA 110-B:61.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 2002, 248:8, eff. May 17, 2002.

### Section 110-B:30

 **110-B:30 Use of Armories by Veterans. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2002, 248:12,
I, eff. May 17, 2002.
                                             ]

### Section 110-B:31

 **110-B:31 Use of Armories for Public Meetings, Etc. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2002, 248:12, II, eff. May 17, 2002.
                                             ]

### Section 110-B:32

 **110-B:32 Rent for Use of Armory. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2002, 248:12, III,
eff. May 17, 2002.
                                             ]

### Section 110-B:32-a

 **110-B:32-a New Hampshire National Guard Training Center Funds.
–**
                                             
 I. For the purpose of supporting morale and maintaining training
abilities, 2 funds are created. Both funds shall be nonlapsing interest
bearing funds.
                                             
 II. One fund shall be known as the chargeable transient quarters
(QTC) and billeting fund. Revenue for this fund shall be
non-appropriated funds obtained from the proceeds of room service
charges at the army national guard state training center. These funds
shall be used for non-appropriated fund services at the state training
center. Funds will be released for their stated purpose at the
discretion of the adjutant general.
                                             
 III. The second fund shall be known as the army national guard state
training center program management fund, into which operating costs
billed to and collected from non-army national guard users shall be
deposited. This fund shall be used to supplement federal funds provided
to manage and operate the army national guard state training center.
Funds may be released for their stated purpose at the discretion of the
adjutant general.

**Source.** 2002, 248:9, eff. May 17, 2002.

Supplies and Equipment
----------------------

### Section 110-B:33

 **110-B:33 Issue of Military Property. –** The adjutant general
shall issue such military property as may be prescribed by regulations.
Obsolete ordinance property belonging to the state may be issued by the
adjutant general with the approval of the governor to municipalities and
to educational, patriotic and charitable organizations under such
conditions as may be prescribed by regulations issued pursuant to this
chapter.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:34

 **110-B:34 Storage and Accountability for Property. –**
                                             
 I. When not in use, all public property received by commanding
officers and officers in charge shall be kept and stored in the armories
or other military facilities provided for that purpose.
                                             
 II. Commanding officers and officers in charge shall render such
reports with respect to such property as shall be required in
regulations issued in accordance with this chapter.
                                             
 III. Every officer in charge of an armory shall be personally
responsible for the care and maintenance thereof; and every officer in
charge and every officer shall be personally responsible for all public
property in his custody. No such officer shall be relieved of such
responsibility, except that the adjutant general, upon satisfactory
proof of the proper expenditure of such property or the unavoidable loss
or destruction thereof, may relieve such officer from such
responsibility.
                                             
 IV. If in the adjutant general's judgment the same shall be
necessary to protect the interests of the state, the adjutant general
with the approval of the governor may direct that any or all of the
officers in charge of armories, or commanding officers, shall be
required to give bond with respect to the public property in his or
their custody. Such bond shall be in such form as the adjutant general
shall prescribe. The premium thereon shall be paid from the
appropriation for the adjutant general's department. Provided, however,
that the adjutant general may obtain an adequate indemnity bond covering
all or any of such officers; in which case, the officers so covered
shall not be required to furnish individual bonds as hereinabove
provided.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:35

 **110-B:35 Responsibility for Public Property. –**
                                             
 I. Public property of the state and of the United States shall be
issued, safeguarded, maintained, accounted for, inventoried, inspected,
surveyed and disposed of as provided in applicable laws of the United
States, regulations issued thereunder and regulations issued pursuant to
this chapter.
                                             
 II. When public property is lost, damaged or destroyed through the
negligence or fault of a member of the national guard, the amount
determined as the value of such property or the cost of repairing the
same may be collected from any pay or allowance due or to become due the
member from the state.
                                             
 III. An action may be maintained by the state in any court having
jurisdiction thereof by the attorney general upon the request of the
adjutant general to recover from a member or former member of the
national guard found responsible for public property lost, damaged or
destroyed through his negligence or fault the amount determined as the
value of such property or the cost of repairing the same.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:36

 **110-B:36 Insurance. –** The adjutant general is authorized to
effect such insurance upon property of the United States, in the hands
of the state for the use of the national guard, as may be deemed
advisable. The governor, with the advice and consent of the council, is
authorized to draw a warrant upon any money in the treasury available
for military purposes, or not otherwise appropriated, for such sums as
may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

Pay and Allowances; State Active Duty Death Benefit
---------------------------------------------------

### Section 110-B:37

 **110-B:37 Pay and Allowances. –**
                                             
 I. For each calendar day's service when ordered into the active
service of the state, each commissioned officer, warrant officer,
non-commissioned officer and enlisted person of the national guard shall
be paid at the same rate of pay and allowances as that designated in the
pay tables of the armed forces of the United States for officers,
warrant officers, non-commissioned officers and enlisted persons of
corresponding rank and grade and length of service; except that no
person called to active state service shall receive less than the
current federal per diem rate.
                                             
 II. Members of the national guard shall not receive from state funds
the pay provided for in paragraphs I and III to the extent such pay is
paid from federal funds.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the
contrary, members of the national guard may with their consent perform
without pay any type of military duty authorized by this chapter
pursuant to orders issued by competent military authority, provided that
necessary traveling expenses, subsistence and per diem allowances may be
furnished such members within the discretion of the adjutant general and
within the appropriation made therefor.
                                             
 IV. In addition to the pay authorized under paragraphs I and III of
this section, any state employee who is a member of a reserve or the
national guard and who is called to full-time active duty by the
President of the United States, under the authority of the governor, or
under the authority of another governor who participates in the
Emergency Management Assistance Compact, shall, for the duration of such
full-time active duty, be entitled to special leave with partial pay and
continuation of benefits as follows:
                                             
 (a) Partial pay shall be the difference between the employee's
regular state compensation and the employee's full-time military basic
pay and allowances, if the full-time military basic pay and allowances
total less than the regular state pay.
                                             
 (b) Continuation of health and dental insurance benefits for
which the employee and/or the employee's legal dependents are otherwise
eligible but for the employee's special leave; provided, however, that
in the event of a deployment for which federal health and dental
benefits are provided, the federal health and dental benefits shall be
primary for the employee.
                                             
 (c) Retirement benefits shall continue to be provided in
accordance with RSA 100-A and RSA 100-C.
                                             
 (d) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the
contrary, this section does not apply to inactive duty for training or
annual training.
                                             
 (e) Upon the employee's return to state employment after active
duty service, he or she may use up to 15 days of his or her available
annual leave balance prior to reporting back to work.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 2006, 272:1. 2007, 132:1. 2008, 88:1. 2010,
176:2, eff. Aug. 17, 2010. 2013, 255:7, eff. Sept. 22, 2013. 2014,
118:2, eff. Aug. 15, 2014.

### Section 110-B:37-a

 **110-B:37-a State Active Duty Death Benefit. –** There is
established a death benefit in the amount of 
                                             $100,000 for each
activated New Hampshire army national guard or New Hampshire air
national guard member who dies while on state active duty or as the
result of injuries incurred on state active duty. This death benefit
shall be paid by the adjutant general, with the approval of the fiscal
committee of the general court, on the warrant of the governor, out of
any money in the treasury not otherwise appropriated.

**Source.** 2006, 138:3, eff. May 22, 2006.

### Section 110-B:38

 **110-B:38 Uniform Allowance for Officers. –**
                                             
 I. Every commissioned officer and warrant officer of the national
guard shall provide himself with a complete uniform.
                                             
 II. Every officer and warrant officer so uniformed and in the
service on June 1 each year shall then be paid by the adjutant general

                                             $25 from the appropriation made therefor.
                                             
 III. Every newly commissioned second lieutenant and newly appointed
warrant officer shall be paid an initial uniform allowance of 
                                             $100 from
the appropriation made therefor.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1987, 92:1, eff. July 1, 1987.

Military Justice
----------------

### Section 110-B:39

 **110-B:39 Military Discipline. –** The system of discipline of the
national guard shall conform generally to that of the armed forces of
the United States, and all personnel on duty or in active state service
shall be subject to the punitive and disciplinary provisions of this
chapter. Trial and punishment by civil authorities shall not bar trial
and punishment or dismissal from the service by court-martial for any
military offense involved. Reductions in rank and pay grade for judicial
punishment shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform
Code of Military Justice.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1987, 144:1. 2012, 188:1, eff. June 11, 2012.

### Section 110-B:40

 **110-B:40 Nonjudicial Punishment. –** Under such regulations as the
adjutant general may prescribe, the commanding officer of any
detachment, company, or higher command may, for minor offenses, impose
disciplinary punishment upon officers, warrant officers, and enlisted
personnel of the command without intervention of a court-martial. "Minor
offenses'' mean acts or omissions that are minor offenses under the
punitive articles of the Manual for Courts-Martial (MCM) and under the
criminal statutes of the state of New Hampshire. Whether an offense is
minor depends on several factors: the nature of the offense and the
circumstances surrounding its commission; the offender's age, rank, duty
assignment, record, and experience; the maximum sentence imposable for
the offense if tried by general court-martial, and whether the offense
is a felony under state law. Ordinarily, a minor offense is an offense
for which the maximum sentence imposable would not include a
dishonorable discharge or confinement in excess of 5 years. The decision
whether an offense is "minor'' is a matter of discretion for the
commander imposing nonjudicial punishment, but nonjudicial punishment
for an offense other than a minor offense even though thought by the
commander to be minor is not a bar to trial by court-martial for the
same offense. However, the accused may show at trial that nonjudicial
punishment was imposed, and if the accused does so, this fact shall be
considered in determining an appropriate sentence.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 2009, 268:1, eff. Sept. 14, 2009.

### Section 110-B:41

 **110-B:41 Military Offenses. –** The delinquencies defined in the
Uniform Code of Military Justice of the United States are hereby
declared to be military offenses for which an offender will be punished
according to law as a court-martial may direct within the limitations
imposed upon courts-martial of the national guard by the laws of the
United States.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:42

 **110-B:42 Preferral of Charges. –** Any member of the national
guard may prefer charges against any other person subject to the
provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:43

 **110-B:43 Apprehension. –** "Apprehension'' is the taking into
custody of a person. Any person authorized under the regulations
governing the national guard to apprehend persons subject to this
chapter may do so upon reasonable belief that an offense has been
committed and that the person apprehended committed it.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:44

 **110-B:44 Arrest and Confinement. –**
                                             
 I. "Arrest'' is the restraint of a person by an order, not imposed
as punishment for an offense, directing the person to remain within
certain specified limits. "Confinement'' is the physical restraint of a
person.
                                             
 II. An enlisted person may be ordered into arrest or confinement by
any commissioned officer by an order, oral or written, delivered in
person or through another member of the national guard. A commanding
officer may authorize warrant officers or non-commissioned officers to
order enlisted personnel of the command or subject to the officer's
authority, into arrest or confinement.
                                             
 III. The officer who is subject to this chapter may be ordered into
arrest or confinement only by a commanding officer to whose authority
the person is subject, by an order, oral or written, delivered in person
or by another officer. The authority to order officers into arrest or
confinement may not be delegated.
                                             
 IV. No person shall be ordered into arrest or confinement except for
probable cause.
                                             
 V. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority
of persons authorized to apprehend offenders to secure the custody of an
alleged offender until the proper authority may be notified.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:45

 **110-B:45 Order into Arrest. –** Any person subject to RSA 110-B
charged with an offense hereunder shall be ordered into arrest or
confinement as circumstances may require; but, when charged only with an
offense normally tried by summary court-martial, such person shall not
ordinarily be placed in confinement. When any person subject to this
chapter is placed in arrest or confinement prior to trial, immediate
steps shall be taken to inform the person of the specific wrong of which
the person is accused and to try the person or dismiss the charges and
release the person.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:46

 **110-B:46 Commitment. –**
                                             
 I. No provost marshal or commander of a guard shall refuse to
receive or keep any prisoner committed to his charge by an officer of
the national guard when the committing officer furnishes a statement
signed by the officer of the offense charged against the prisoner.
                                             
 II. Every provost marshal or commander of a guard to whose charge a
prisoner is committed shall, within 24 hours after such commitment,
report to the commanding officer the name of such prisoner, the offense
charged and the name of the person who ordered or authorized the
commitment.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:47

 **110-B:47 Military Court. –** The military courts of the national
guard shall be courts of inquiry, general courts-martial, special
courts-martial and summary courts-martial. Such courts shall be
constituted like, and have cognizance of the same subjects and possess
like powers except as to punishment as similar courts provided for by
the laws and regulations governing the armed forces of the United
States. The proceedings of courts-martial of the national guard shall
follow the forms and modes of procedure prescribed for said similar
courts except as expressly modified by this chapter.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:48

 **110-B:48 Courts of Inquiry. –** A court of inquiry to investigate
any matter may be convened by the governor whether or not the persons
involved have requested such investigation. Such court shall be composed
of one or more officers. A court of inquiry shall, without delay, report
to the governor a statement of the facts of the matter under
investigation and, when required, the evidence adduced and an opinion
with recommendations thereon. The procedure to be followed by such
courts shall be as nearly as may be that prescribed for courts of
inquiry of the armed forces of the United States, as directed by
regulations issued under the authority of this chapter.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:49

 **110-B:49 General Courts-Martial. –** General courts-martial may be
convened by orders of the president of the United States or of the
governor, and such courts shall have power to impose fines not exceeding

                                             $500; to sentence to forfeiture of pay and allowances; to a reprimand;
to dismissal or dishonorable discharge from the service; to reduction of
non-commissioned officers to the ranks; or any 2 or more of such
punishments may be combined in the sentence.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:50

 **110-B:50 Special Courts-Martial. –** The commanding officer of
each post, camp or other place, brigade, group, regiment, detached
battalion or other detached command may appoint special courts-martial
for the command; but such special courts-martial may in any case be
appointed by superior authority when by the latter deemed desirable.
Special courts-martial shall have the power to try any person subject to
this chapter, except a commissioned officer, for any crime or offense
made punishable by the military laws of the United States and of this
state. Such special courts-martial shall have the same powers of
punishment as general courts-martial, except that fines imposed by such
courts shall not exceed 
                                             $300.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:51

 **110-B:51 Summary Courts-Martial. –** The commanding officer of
each camp or other place, regiment, group, corps, detached battalion,
company or other detachment of the national guard may appoint for such
place or command a summary court-martial to consist of one officer who
shall have power to administer oaths and to try the enlisted persons of
such place or command for breaches of discipline and violations of laws
governing such organizations; and said court, when satisfied of the
guilt of such enlisted person, may impose fines not exceeding 
                                             $100 for
any single offense; may sentence non-commissioned officers to reduction
to the ranks; and may sentence to forfeiture of pay and allowances. The
proceedings of such courts shall be informal and the minutes thereof
shall be the same as prescribed for summary courts of the armed forces
of the United States.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:52

 **110-B:52 Confinement in Lieu of Fine. –** All courts-martial of
the national guard, including summary courts-martial, shall have the
power to sentence to confinement in lieu of fines authorized to be
imposed; provided, that such sentences of confinement shall not exceed
one day for each 
                                             $10 of fine authorized.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:53

 **110-B:53 Review. –**
                                             
 I. No sentence imposed by a general court-martial shall be ordered
into execution until approved by the governor.
                                             
 II. No sentence imposed by a special court-martial or by a summary
court-martial shall be ordered into execution until approved by the
authority appointing the court.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:54

 **110-B:54 Powers of Officers. –**
                                             
 I. Military judges and summary court officers shall have power to
issue warrants to arrest accused persons and to bring them before the
courts for trial whenever such persons shall have disobeyed an order in
writing from the convening authority to appear before such court, a copy
of the charge or charges having been delivered to the accused with such
order, and to issue subpoenas duces tecum and to enforce by attachment
attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers and to
sentence for a refusal to be sworn or to answer as provided in actions
before the superior court.
                                             
 II. Such officers, in addition, are authorized and empowered to
issue all other process, including writs and warrants, necessary and
proper to carry into full effect the powers vested in said courts.
                                             
 III. The process herein authorized shall be directed to an officer
qualified by the laws of this state to serve criminal process; and such
process shall be in such form as may from time to time be prescribed by
regulations issued under this chapter.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1983, 276:2, eff. Aug. 17, 1983.

### Section 110-B:55

 **110-B:55 Execution of Sentences. –**
                                             
 I. Fines may be paid to a military court or to an officer executing
its process. The amount of any fine imposed may be noted upon any state
roll or account for pay of the delinquent and deducted from any pay or
allowance due or thereafter to become due them, until said fine is
liquidated; or the same may be collected with lawful costs of
collection, as in the case of executions issued in action founded upon
torts. Fines shall be paid over to the state treasurer and credited to
the New Hampshire national guard recruitment and retention scholarship
fund under RSA 110-B:60.
                                             
 II. A person sentenced to confinement or ordered held prior to or
during trial may be committed by appropriate process under the hand of
the military judge or summary court officer to any jail or house of
correction within the state. The jailer or keeper of the jail or house
of correction to which such process is directed shall receive and detain
the prisoner in the same manner as if the prisoner had been sentenced by
the superior court sitting in the county where such jail or house of
correction is located. The adjutant general is authorized to enter into
contracts with the counties for the keeping of military prisoners.
Expenses shall be borne out of funds not otherwise appropriated.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1983, 276:3. 1985, 25:3. 1987, 144:2. 2011,
30:1, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 110-B:56

 **110-B:56 Witnesses. –**
                                             
 I. Witnesses may be summoned before courts-martial and courts of
inquiry, and they shall receive the fees allowed in the superior court.
Witnesses shall be subject to the penalties for non-appearance that are
prescribed in the case of witnesses before said superior court, and
depositions taken according to law may be used.
                                             
 II. The accused shall be entitled to subpoenas for witnesses in his
behalf, and their fees shall be paid by the state.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:57

 **110-B:57 Stenographer. –** The convening authority of a
court-martial or of a court of inquiry is authorized at his discretion,
in any case, to employ a stenographer to report the proceedings of said
court, who shall be paid the same as stenographers employed in the
superior court, or to utilize a tape recorder to record the proceedings.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1983, 276:4, eff. Aug. 17, 1983.

### Section 110-B:58

 **110-B:58 Jurisdiction; Exemption. –**
                                             
 I. No action or proceeding shall be prosecuted or maintained against
a member of military court, or officer or person acting under its
authority or reviewing its proceedings, on account of the approval or
imposition or execution of any sentence or on account of the imposition
or collection of a fine or penalty or on account of the execution of any
warrant, writ, process or mandate of a military court.
                                             
 II. The jurisdiction of the courts and boards established by this
chapter shall be presumed, and the burden of proof shall rest on any
person seeking to oust such courts or boards of jurisdiction in any
action or proceeding.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:59

 **110-B:59 Short Title. –** This subdivision shall be known and may
be referred to in papers and other documents as "The New Hampshire Code
of Military Justice''.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

National Guard Scholarship Fund
-------------------------------

### Section 110-B:60

 **110-B:60 National Guard Scholarship Fund Established. –** For the
purposes of encouraging enlistment and retention in the national guard
and to provide for education benefits for members of the national guard
in the state, there is hereby established in the state treasury a
separate fund to be known as the New Hampshire national guard
scholarship fund from which the state treasurer shall make payments as
may be authorized by the scholarship committee. The fund shall be a
non-lapsing fund.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981. 2013, 255:2, eff. Sept. 22,
2013.

### Section 110-B:61

 **110-B:61 Revenue for Scholarship Fund. –** All revenue received
from sources other than governmental agencies during any fiscal year
from the rental of all national guard armories in this state shall be
credited by the state treasurer to the New Hampshire national guard
scholarship fund as established in RSA 110-B:60.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1985, 27:1, eff. June 8, 1985. 2013, 255:3,
eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 110-B:62

 **110-B:62 Scholarship Fund Committee. –** Under such regulations as
the adjutant general may prescribe, the fund established pursuant to RSA
110-B:60 shall be administered by a scholarship committee consisting of
the adjutant general or his or her designee, the commissioner of
education or his or her designee, one person appointed by the governor,
one member of the house of representatives committee on state-federal
relations and veterans affairs appointed by the speaker of the house and
one member of the senate appointed by the president of the senate. The
appointed members shall serve a 2-year term and may be reappointed for
an additional term. The committee shall make the final determination of
the recipients of the scholarships offered in any fiscal year.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981. 2013, 255:4, eff. Sept. 22,
2013.

### Section 110-B:63

 **110-B:63 Eligible Recipients. –** The scholarships shall be
awarded to members in good standing of the New Hampshire national guard
for the purpose of assisting in tuition payments at institutions of
higher learning or postsecondary education located within the state.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1983, 276:5. 1985, 27:2. 2008, 51:1, eff. July
11, 2008. 2013, 255:5, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

Postsecondary Educational Assistance
------------------------------------

### Section 110-B:63-a

 **110-B:63-a Title. –** This subdivision shall be known as the New
Hampshire National Guard Education Assistance Act.

**Source.** 1996, 237:1, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 110-B:63-b

 **110-B:63-b Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Active member'' means a member of a federally-recognized unit of
the New Hampshire national guard who meets the minimum requirements for
satisfactory membership as defined in Department of the Army and
Department of the Air Force regulations.
                                             
 II. "Degree-enhancing curriculum'' means a series of courses
programmed to culminate in a specific degree when successfully
completed.
                                             
 III. "Educational assistance'' means the waiver of the tuition cost
of a course at a state-supported postsecondary institution, provided
that there is space available in that course.
                                             
 IV. "New Hampshire national guard'' means federally-recognized units
of the New Hampshire national guard.
                                             
 V. "Space available'' means any allocated seating in a course not
filled by paying students.
                                             
 VI. "Tuition'' means the total semester, quarter, or classroom hour
cost of instruction to the student as established by the university
system board of trustees or the board of trustees of the community
college system of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1996, 237:1. 2007, 361:5, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 110-B:63-c

 **110-B:63-c Educational Assistance Authorized; Minimum
Requirements. –** Members of the New Hampshire national guard may take
courses tuition-free on a space available basis in state-supported
postsecondary institutions. In order to be eligible to receive
educational assistance under this subdivision, a member of the New
Hampshire national guard shall:
                                             
 I. Be an active member of the New Hampshire national guard residing
either in-state or out-of-state who has completed advanced individual
training or commissioning.
                                             
 II. Be enrolled in a degree-enhancing curriculum in any college that
is under the authority of the chancellor of the community college system
of New Hampshire, or enrolled in any degree-enhancing curriculum in any
public college or university within the state.
                                             
 III. Have first utilized any post-September 11, 2001 tuition benefit
and other federally funded military tuition assistance. Montgomery GI
bill benefits, post-September 11, 2001 educational program housing,
allowance, federal educational entitlements, national guard scholarship
grants, and other non-tuition benefits shall be excluded from
consideration when determining eligibility for a tuition waiver under
this section.

**Source.** 1996, 237:1. 2004, 6:1. 2007, 361:6. 2009, 32:1, eff. July
14, 2009. 2013, 255:6, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 110-B:63-d

 **110-B:63-d Eligibility and Space Availability Determinations. –**
                                             
 I. Eligibility for educational assistance provided by this
subdivision shall be determined and monitored by the adjutant general,
who shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, and procedures deemed by
the adjutant general to be necessary to carry out and monitor the
educational assistance provided by this subdivision.
                                             
 II. The chancellor of the university system for the university
system and the chancellor of the community college system of New
Hampshire for the community college system of New Hampshire shall
establish policies for determining when a course has space available.

**Source.** 1996, 237:1. 2007, 361:7, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 110-B:63-e

 **110-B:63-e Termination of Educational Assistance. –**
                                             
 I. Educational assistance may be terminated for the following
reasons:
                                             
 (a) Failure to complete the New Hampshire national guard military
obligation.
                                             
 (b) Failure to maintain a 90 percent rate of attendance at annual
training and drill assemblies as required by the New Hampshire national
guard.
                                             
 (c) Nine unsatisfactory drill period performances in a calendar
year while enrolled in the educational assistance program.
                                             
 II. In the event the individual's service in the New Hampshire
national guard is terminated or service becomes unsatisfactory while
receiving educational assistance, the individual shall be required to
pay for the remainder of the tuition for the course on a pro rata basis.
Once terminated for the above causes, an individual shall be ineligible
for any further educational assistance under this subdivision.
                                             
 III. If for any reason an individual is dismissed from any school
for academic or disciplinary reasons, the individual shall be ineligible
for further educational assistance under this subdivision.

**Source.** 1996, 237:1, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 110-B:63-f

 **110-B:63-f In-State Tuition for New Hampshire National Guard
Nonresidents. –** Any member of the New Hampshire national guard who is
an otherwise eligible out-of-state resident who cannot qualify for
educational assistance under this subdivision, due to unavailability of
space for members attending tuition free, may take such course at the
in-state tuition rate.

**Source.** 1996, 237:1, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 110-B:63-g

 **110-B:63-g Report. –** The chancellor of the university system on
behalf of the university system and the chancellor of the community
college system of New Hampshire on behalf of the community college
system of New Hampshire shall, no later than November 1 of each year,
submit a report to the speaker of the house, the senate president, and
the governor detailing the number of national guard members enrolled at
postsecondary institutions for the prior fiscal year under this
subdivision and the specific courses or curriculum in which such members
are enrolled.

**Source.** 1999, 211:2. 2007, 361:8, eff. July 17, 2007.

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 110-B:64

 **110-B:64 Administration of Oaths and Notarial Acts. –**
                                             
 I. All commissioned and warrant officers of the New Hampshire
national guard and state guard as well as other personnel authorized to
administer oaths under the laws of this state shall have the power to
administer oaths for the purpose of the administration of military
justice and for other purposes of military administration. All
commissioned and warrant officers of the armed forces of the United
States, in addition to those named above may administer enlistment oaths
to those enlisting or re-enlisting in the New Hampshire national guard.
                                             
 II. All judge advocates and paralegals serving in the militia shall,
by virtue of their office and service, have the general powers of a
notary public as described in RSA 455 in the performance of all notarial
acts to be executed by any member of the militia or United States armed
forces and other persons eligible for legal assistance services by law
or regulation. No fee may be paid to or received by any person for the
performance of a notarial act authorized in this section. The signature
of any such person acting as a notary, together with the title of that
person's office, is prima facie evidence that the signature is genuine,
that the person holds the designated title, and that the person is
authorized to perform a notarial act. Any notarizations or
acknowledgments accomplished under the authority of this chapter shall
generally follow the form below but are not required to be under
official seal:
                                             
 I, (name of notary public), certify that the foregoing instrument
was subscribed and (sworn)(affirmed) before me this (day of the month)
day of (month), (year) by (name of person making statement), (Armed
Forces service number/SSN), and who is known to me to be (a member of
the New Hampshire national guard) (the spouse of a national guard
member).

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1986, 87:4. 2002, 248:10, eff. May 17, 2002.

### Section 110-B:65

 **110-B:65 Discrimination Forbidden. –**
                                             
 I. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the state that there
shall be equality of treatment and opportunity for all persons in the
national guard without regard to race, creed, color, national origin,
age or sex, to the full extent required by federal law or regulations.
                                             
 II. No private person, corporation, partnership or unit or official
of state, county or local government shall deprive members of the
national guard of their employment, or deny them employment, or
discriminate against them with respect to the terms and conditions of
their employment, or prevent their being employed by another, or
obstruct or annoy them or their employer in respect of their trade,
business or employment because of their connection with the national
guard, or because of their absence from business in performance of their
duty as such; and no person shall dissuade any persons from enlisting in
said national guard by threat of injury to them in respect of their
employment, trade or business, or of other injury if they shall so
enlist. Any person violating the provisions of this paragraph shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person or guilty of a felony if any
other person.
                                             
 III. Any member discriminated against shall have a private cause of
action for money damages and injunctive relief against any person or
entity discriminating in violation of this section. If relief is
granted, the prevailing member of the national guard shall recover
reasonable attorneys' fees and costs.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1985, 25:4. 1987, 144:3, eff. July 6, 1987.

### Section 110-B:66

 **110-B:66 Compensation for Injuries and Illness. –**
                                             
 I. Any member of the national guard serving on state active duty
pursuant to this chapter, within or without the state, who, while
serving on state active duty, sustains an "injury'' or "personal
injury,'' as defined in RSA 281-A, shall be entitled to receive benefits
pursuant to RSA 281-A.
                                             
 II. Members of the national guard on state active duty who become
ill or whose injuries do not fall within the definition of RSA 281-A
shall receive appropriate medical attention and treatment. If the member
does not have health insurance, the state shall pay the cost of
necessary medical treatment during the period of state active duty. In
the event that the individual has health insurance, the state shall
reimburse the individual for all expenses that are the responsibility of
the individual incurred in the treatment of the condition during the
period of state active duty.
                                             
 III. Members unable to return to their civilian employment by reason
of an injury or illness that occurred on state active duty may be
retained on state active duty for a period of time, which shall normally
not exceed 30 days.
                                             
 IV. The governor is hereby authorized to draw a warrant for sums
sufficient to pay for awards made under this section out of any money in
the treasury not otherwise appropriated, and said sums are hereby
appropriated.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1985, 25:5. 1994, 158:16. 2007, 231:1, eff.
Aug. 24, 2007.

### Section 110-B:67

 **110-B:67 Right-of-Way. –** The commanding officer of any unit of
the national guard parading or performing any military duty in any
street or highway may require any or all persons in such street or
highway to yield the right-of-way to said national guard; provided that
the carriage of the United States mail, the legitimate functions of the
police and the progress and operations of the hospital ambulances, fire
engines and fire departments shall not be unduly interfered with
thereby. All others who shall hinder, delay or obstruct any unit of the
national guard wherever parading or performing any military duty, or who
shall attempt to do so, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:68

 **110-B:68 Trespassers and Disturbers; Camp Regulations. –**
                                             
 I. The commanding officer of any armory, arsenal, camp, range, base,
or other facility of the New Hampshire national guard, or other place
where military duties are being performed shall have the authority to
arrest and hold under arrest during the continuance of the performance
of such military duty any one who trespasses, or in any way interrupts
or interferes with the performance of the duties of members of the
national guard or the armed forces of the United States. This arrest
authority shall extend to anyone who prevents or attempts to prevent the
passage of troops of the New Hampshire national guard or of the armed
forces of the United States in the performance of their military
duties.
                                             
 II. The adjutant general or commanding officer of any armory,
arsenal, camp, range, base, or other facility of the New Hampshire
national guard, or any place where any unit is performing military duty,
has the authority to limit access and activities in that place. This
includes the authority to take action necessary to protect, guard,
secure, and defend the armory, arsenal, camp, range, base, or other
facility in accordance with RSA 110-B:28.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 2002, 248:11, eff. May 17, 2002.

### Section 110-B:69

 **110-B:69 Medals and Decorations. –** The governor shall have
authority to prescribe by regulation state decorations, medals, ribbons,
badges or other awards for honorable service in the national guard or
for meritorious support of the national guard.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1983, 276:9, eff. Aug. 17, 1983.

### Section 110-B:70

 **110-B:70 Motor Vehicles of the National Guard. –** The adjutant
general shall have authority to prescribe and issue, subject to the
approval of the commissioner of motor vehicles, permanent number plates
for use on motor vehicles issued to and used for the national guard.
Said vehicles displaying said number plates shall be deemed to be
properly registered under the provisions of the motor vehicle laws and
may be operated upon the highways of the state without further
registration or other number plates.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:71

 **110-B:71 Relief, Privileges and Immunities. –**
                                             
 I. No officer, warrant officer or enlisted person shall be
personally liable, either civilly or criminally, for any damage to
property or injury to any person, including death resulting therefrom,
caused by them or by their order, while performing a military duty
lawfully ordered under the provisions of this chapter, unless the act or
order causing such damage or injury was manifestly beyond the scope of
the authority of such officer, warrant officer or enlisted person.
                                             
 II. Members of the national guard shall, except for treason, felony
or breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest and imprisonment while
under orders in the active service of the state from the date of the
issuing of such orders to the time when such service shall cease, or
while going to, remaining at or returning from, any place at which the
individual may be required to attend any military duty.
                                             
 III. The reports and communications of all officers, warrant
officers and members of the national guard in the line of their military
duty addressed to their superiors shall be privileged communications and
shall not be competent evidence against the writer in any civil or
criminal action in the courts of the state.
                                             
 IV. No persons belonging to the national guard of the state shall be
arrested or detained on any civil process while going to, remaining at,
or returning from any place at which they may be required to attend for
any military duty.
                                             
 V. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the
contrary, any police officer may arrest or be requested by the adjutant
general to arrest any member of the national guard who is absent without
leave from any training assembly, drill, period of annual training or
any other duty time and shall keep said member in custody for not more
than 24 hours until turned over to military authority.
                                             
 VI. Notwithstanding any other law, a member of the New Hampshire
national guard shall be treated as a resident and citizen of the state
of New Hampshire for the purpose of entitlement to benefits, privileges,
and immunities provided under state law to members of the New Hampshire
national guard.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1. 1983, 276:6. 2007, 125:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 110-B:72

 **110-B:72 Unauthorized Wearing of Official Uniforms. –** Any person
who, without authority under the laws of the United States or this
state, wears the uniform or a distinctive part thereof, or a uniform or
a part thereof similar to the uniform of the national guard of this
state, or of another state, or of the United States army, navy, marine
corps, coast guard or air force, or any auxiliary thereof, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. As used in this section the terms "uniform'' or
"part'' or "distinctive part'' of a uniform shall not include such
articles of wearing apparel as shoes, socks, shirts, ties, scarves,
trousers, overalls, raincoats, field jackets and headgear, from which
the service buttons, insignia, or other distinctive marking have been
removed.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 110-B:73

 **110-B:73 Payment of Claims. –** The governor and council, upon the
recommendation of the adjutant general, may pay claims against the state
arising out of accidents occasioned by the activities of the national
guard. No claim in excess of 
                                             $500 shall be paid to any one person, nor
shall any claim be paid hereunder which is payable in whole or in part
by the United States. Persons making claims hereunder shall file their
applications with the adjutant general who shall investigate the
circumstances and shall make a recommendation thereon to the governor
and council. Any claims paid hereunder shall be a charge upon the
appropriation therefor in the department of the adjutant general.

**Source.** 1981, 434:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

New Hampshire State Veterans Cemetery
-------------------------------------

### Section 110-B:74

 **110-B:74 Operation and Maintenance. –** The adjutant general shall
administer the operation and maintenance of the New Hampshire state
veterans cemetery which shall be located in Boscawen, New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1997, 182:1, eff. July 1, 1997.

### Section 110-B:75

 **110-B:75 Acceptance of Gifts. –** The adjutant general may accept,
on behalf of the state, conditional and unconditional gifts including
grants of money, material, equipment, services, and facilities from any
source, public or private, for the operation, maintenance, and
improvement of the cemetery, with the concurrence of the governor in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 4:8.

**Source.** 1997, 182:1, eff. July 1, 1997.

### Section 110-B:76

 **110-B:76 Cemetery Superintendent. –** The adjutant general shall
designate a cemetery superintendent who shall arrange for personnel,
material, and equipment within the limits of appropriated funds and in
accordance with the regulations and procedures adopted in accordance
with RSA 110-B:8-a, and approved by the governor and council.

**Source.** 1997, 182:1, eff. July 1, 1997.

### Section 110-B:77

 **110-B:77 Cemetery Operations. –**
                                             
 I. Remains of eligible veterans previously buried in other locations
may be reinterred in the cemetery, provided that no cost other than that
which would be incurred in the original burial is borne by the state.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to obligate the state
beyond the furnishing of a grave site, opening and closing of the grave,
and maintenance of the cemetery.
                                             
 III. A veteran shall be entitled to burial within a reasonable time
after notification to appropriate cemetery personnel by a funeral
director or a family member of the veteran, provided that weather
conditions permit the burial. The family of the deceased veteran shall
have the option of a chapel service or graveside service. The service
may contain any or all customs and practices usual at a military
funeral, including but not limited to, gun salutes, honor guards, and
the playing of taps. The state shall not be responsible for any costs
associated with a funeral service that is not offered by any federal
cemetery.

**Source.** 1997, 182:1. 1999, 196:1, eff. July 6, 1999.

### Section 110-B:78

 **110-B:78 Regulations. –** The adjutant general shall adopt
regulations, subject to the approval of the governor and council,
relative to:
                                             
 I. Standards and procedures for application and determination of
eligibility for interment in the veterans cemetery.
                                             
 II. Operating policies and procedures of the veterans cemetery.
                                             
 III. The type of grave markers permitted in each area of the
cemetery.
                                             
 IV. The requirement and location of permanent vaults and grave
liners for burials in the cemetery.
                                             
 V. Fees for interment.

**Source.** 1997, 182:1, eff. July 1, 1997.

### Section 110-B:79

 **110-B:79 Annual Report. –** The adjutant general shall file with
the governor, the senate president, and the speaker of the house on or
before October 1 of each year a report to the legislature, setting forth
the operations and condition of the cemetery, a detailed account of all
moneys received and expended on its behalf since the last report, any
recommendations for additional legislation, and such other relevant
matters as the adjutant general shall determine.

**Source.** 1997, 182:1, eff. July 1, 1997.

New Hampshire Civil War Cannon Restoration Fund
-----------------------------------------------

### Section 110-B:80

 **110-B:80 Civil War Cannon Restoration Fund. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2006,
244:3, I, eff. July 1, 2010.
                                             ]

New Hampshire Medal of Honor
----------------------------

### Section 110-B:81

 **110-B:81 New Hampshire Medal of Honor. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a New Hampshire medal of honor, which may be
awarded on behalf of the people of the state of New Hampshire to any New
Hampshire citizen who has given his or her life while in military
service to protect and preserve the rights and freedoms of the people of
New Hampshire on or after November 4, 1979, and while:
                                             
 (a) Engaged in an action against an enemy of the United States.
                                             
 (b) Engaged in military operations involving conflict with an
opposing foreign force.
                                             
 (c) Assigned as military personnel to friendly foreign forces
engaged in an armed conflict against an opposing armed force in which
the United States is not a belligerent party.
                                             
 (d) Serving in a combat zone as designated by Presidential order
and killed in action.
                                             
 (e) Serving in the military and killed as a result of a terrorist
act.
                                             
 II. In addition to the individuals described in paragraph I,
individuals eligible to receive the New Hampshire medal of honor are
limited to:
                                             
 (a) Members of the New Hampshire national guard at the time they
were killed in action.
                                             
 (b) Members of the United States military reserves who were legal
residents of New Hampshire at the time they were killed in action.
                                             
 (c) Members of the United States armed forces who were:
                                             
 (1) Legal residents of New Hampshire at the time they were
killed in action; or
                                             
 (2) Stationed in New Hampshire by a proper order of the United
States Department of Defense at the time they were killed in action.
                                             
 III. Satisfying the requirements of paragraphs I and II shall not
result in the automatic award of the New Hampshire medal of honor. The
totality of the circumstances of the death shall also be considered in
awarding the medal of honor.
                                             
 IV. The New Hampshire medal of honor shall be awarded, with the
recommendation of the adjutant general, by a joint resolution introduced
by the president of the senate, the speaker of the house of
representatives, or the senator or a member of the house of
representatives representing the town or city of residence of the
individual killed.
                                             
 V. The adjutant general, with the approval of the governor and
council, shall design and provide for the manufacture of the New
Hampshire medal of honor. The adjutant general shall design and maintain
a New Hampshire medal of honor roll, which shall be available for public
viewing.
                                             
 VI. The governor shall present the New Hampshire medal of honor
awarded under this section to the family members of the recipient.
                                             
 VII. The adjutant general shall cause the name of a recipient of the
New Hampshire medal of honor to be entered on the New Hampshire medal of
honor roll.

**Source.** 2007, 370:1, eff. Sept. 15, 2007. 2013, 245:1, eff. July 24,
2013.

### Section 110-B:81-a

 **110-B:81-a Gifts, Grants, and Donations. –** Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, the adjutant general may solicit and receive
monetary gifts, grants, or donations for the purpose of paying costs of
the design, manufacture or production, and distribution of the New
Hampshire medal of honor as provided in RSA 110-B:81.

**Source.** 2010, 197:1, eff. June 30, 2010.

### Section 110-B:81-b

 **110-B:81-b New Hampshire Medal of Honor Fund. –** There is
established in the office of the state treasurer a fund to be known as
the New Hampshire medal of honor fund. All monetary gifts, grants, and
donations received by the adjutant general pursuant to RSA 110-B:81-a
shall be deposited in such fund. The fund is established to pay the
costs of the design, manufacture or production, and distribution of the
New Hampshire medal of honor under this subdivision. The money in this
fund shall be nonlapsing and shall be continually appropriated to the
adjutant general.

**Source.** 2010, 197:1, eff. June 30, 2010.

Prisoner of War and Missing in Action Designations
--------------------------------------------------

### Section 110-B:82

 **110-B:82 Prisoner of War and Missing in Action Designations. –**
The state of New Hampshire hereby recognizes the designations of
Prisoner of War (POW) and Missing in Action (MIA) as valid descriptions
of casualty status and category classification for military personnel.

**Source.** 2009, 87:1, eff. June 11, 2009.
