---
title: 'CHAPTER 113-A FIRST LIGHT BATTERY, NEW HAMPSHIRE VOLUNTEERS'
---

TITLE VIII
                                             
PUBLIC DEFENSE AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS
====================================

CHAPTER 113-A
                                             
FIRST LIGHT BATTERY, NEW HAMPSHIRE VOLUNTEERS
---------------------------------------------

### Section 113-A:1

 **113-A:1 First Light Battery. –** The adjutant general, acting
under the direction of the governor as commander-in-chief of the
militia, is hereby authorized to organize and establish a ceremonial
military organization to be designated the First Light Battery, New
Hampshire Volunteers, said organization to be deemed, for the purposes
hereof, to be the lineal successor of the military organization of the
same designation which served with honor and distinction in the Civil
War. Upon establishment, such organization shall be a corporation, and
as such shall have perpetual existence, the authority to hold property,
real and personal, and such other powers as are set forth hereinafter.

**Source.** 1959, 201:1, eff. Sept. 21, 1959.

### Section 113-A:2

 **113-A:2 Internal Organization. –** The adjutant general shall
establish rules and regulations governing the internal organization and
membership in the First Light Battery, New Hampshire Volunteers; and
such rules and regulations may be altered and amended from time to time
by the membership, with the approval of the adjutant general.

**Source.** 1959, 201:1, eff. Sept. 21, 1959.

### Section 113-A:3

 **113-A:3 Uniforms and Insignia. –** The First Light Battery, New
Hampshire Volunteers, may adopt and use as its own such of the insignia,
uniforms, flags, banners, arms and accoutrements, and the traditional
forms and ceremonies, of its lineal predecessor as designated in RSA
113-A:1, as shall be deemed appropriate; and the adjutant general is
hereby authorized to place in the custody of said battery, under
appropriate restrictions as to use, storage and preservation, authentic
relics of the Civil War period owned by the state, including, but not
limited to, small arms and artillery pieces. The First Light Battery,
New Hampshire Volunteers, is authorized to accept, from any sources
whatsoever, gifts and contributions of funds and articles of personal
property, whether outright or in trust, and may execute, with the
approval of the adjutant general, instruments necessary to carry out the
purposes of any gifts made in trust.

**Source.** 1959, 201:1, eff. Sept. 21, 1959.

### Section 113-A:4

 **113-A:4 Drills and Ceremonies. –** The First Light Battery, New
Hampshire Volunteers, may conduct and participate in drills, ceremonies
and parades both within the state and elsewhere. It may be authorized by
the governor officially to represent the state in any place and for any
purpose consistent with the nature of the organization.

**Source.** 1959, 201:1, eff. Sept. 21, 1959.
