---
title: CHAPTER 113 FIDUCIARIES ENTERING MILITARY SERVICE
---

TITLE VIII
                                             
PUBLIC DEFENSE AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS
====================================

CHAPTER 113
                                             
FIDUCIARIES ENTERING MILITARY SERVICE
-------------------------------------

### Section 113:1

 **113:1 Definitions. –** When used in this chapter the following
terms shall be construed as follows:
                                             
 I. The term "fiduciary'' shall include an executor, administrator,
trustee under a will, trustee, conservator or guardian appointed by any
court.
                                             
 II. The term "fiduciary in military service'' shall include
fiduciaries who are members of the military forces of the United States
or of any allied or associated power or who are detailed by proper
authority for duty with such military forces.
                                             
 III. The term "trustee in military service'' shall include trustees
under deeds, agreements or declarations of trust who are members of the
military forces of the United States or of any allied or associated
power or who are detailed by proper authority for duty with such
military forces.
                                             
 IV. The term "military'' shall include the army, navy, marine corps,
coast guard or other branches of the armed forces.

**Source.** 1943, 196:1, eff. May 18, 1943.

### Section 113:2

 **113:2 Power of Courts. –** During the period when any fiduciary is
or shall be in military service the court having jurisdiction of the
accounts of such fiduciary shall have the power to authorize the
co-fiduciary or co-fiduciaries, if any, to exercise all of the powers of
such fiduciary that can be transferred to the co-fiduciary or
co-fiduciaries, or to appoint a substituted fiduciary *pro tem* to act
in place of such fiduciary and to authorize such substituted fiduciary
*pro tem* to exercise all of the powers of the fiduciary in military
service that can be transferred to the substituted fiduciary *pro tem.*

**Source.** 1943, 196:2, eff. May 18, 1943.

### Section 113:3

 **113:3 Extent. –** Any decree entered pursuant to the provisions of
RSA 113:2 shall remain in force until revoked by the court upon cause
shown and no act done by any substituted fiduciary *pro tem* or
co-fiduciary or co-fiduciaries while such decree is in force shall be
impeached on the ground that a fiduciary was not in or had ceased to be
in military service.

**Source.** 1943, 196:5, eff. May 18, 1943.

### Section 113:4

 **113:4 Procedure. –** The relief authorized by RSA 113:2 hereof may
be granted upon petition of any party in interest, the fiduciary in
military service or any co-fiduciary or surety. It shall not be
necessary to secure the joinder of any other party in interest in such
petition, but notice of the presentation of the petition shall be given
to all parties in interest who are *sui juris* at such time and in such
manner as the court may direct by general rule or special order.

**Source.** 1943, 196:3, eff. May 18, 1943.

### Section 113:5

 **113:5 Security for Substituted Fiduciaries. –** Any substituted
fiduciary *pro tem* appointed under the provisions of RSA 113:2 shall
furnish such security, if any, as the court may direct and shall receive
such compensation as the court may allow. Such substituted fiduciary
*pro tem* shall have the same duties and responsibilities with respect
to accounting, and otherwise, during the period that he holds office as
the fiduciary in military service would have had if not in such service.

**Source.** 1943, 196:4, eff. May 18, 1945.

### Section 113:6

 **113:6 Fiduciary in Service Relieved From Duties. –** So long as
any decree entered pursuant to the provisions of RSA 113:2 remains in
force the fiduciary named therein as being in military service shall
exercise none of his fiduciary powers or discretion and shall be under
no liability for any acts or omissions of the substituted fiduciary *pro
tem* or of any cofiduciary or co-fiduciaries during that period,
provided, that nothing contained in this act shall relieve a fiduciary
who enters military service from liability for the administration of the
estate before the entry of a decree under the provisions hereof. If the
court shall find that because of the military service of the fiduciary,
the stating of an account at that time is not possible, an accounting by
such fiduciary in military service shall not be a prerequisite to the
appointment of a substituted fiduciary *pro tem* and upon the
reinstatement of such fiduciary or at such time as the said court deems
meet such fiduciary may be required by said court to file an accounting
of his administration of said estate.

**Source.** 1943, 196:6, eff. May 18, 1943.

### Section 113:7

 **113:7 Power of Removal. –** The court appointing a substituted
fiduciary *pro tem* under the provisions of RSA 113:2 shall have the
same powers of control, removal, discharge and settlement of the
accounts of such substituted fiduciary as are conferred upon it by
existing law with respect to other fiduciaries.

**Source.** 1943, 196:7, eff. May 18, 1943.

### Section 113:8

 **113:8 Trustees Under Deeds, Agreements and Declarations of Trust.
–** In the case of any trustee in military service who is trustee under
a deed, agreement or declaration of trust, and not under the
jurisdiction of the probate court, the superior court, upon petition by
any party in interest, may proceed as provided in this act as to
fiduciaries in military service.

**Source.** 1943, 196:8, eff. May 18, 1943.
