---
title: 'CHAPTER 115-A AID FOR VETERANS'' PROGRAMS'
---

TITLE VIII
                                             
PUBLIC DEFENSE AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS
====================================

CHAPTER 115-A
                                             
AID FOR VETERANS' PROGRAMS
--------------------------

### Section 115-A:1

 **115-A:1 Purpose. –** To address the needs of the veterans and
their dependents or survivors in the state and to continue, when
required, bonuses previously paid from the Vietnam veterans' bonus fund,
the general court deems it in the best interest of the state to
establish a program for these causes.

**Source.** 1985, 321:1. 1994, 41:5, eff. June 27, 1994.

### Section 115-A:2

 **115-A:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Adjutant general'' means the adjutant general of New Hampshire
as defined in RSA 110-B.
                                             
 II. "Uniformed forces of the United States'' means the army, navy,
air force, marine corps, coast guard, and any women's auxiliary services
to such forces, the members of which are subject to and under military
law.
                                             
 III. "Child'' means a legitimate child or a legally adopted child or
a stepchild.
                                             
 IV. "Parent'' includes natural mother or father, stepmother or
stepfather, mother or father through legal adoption, or any person who
stood in loco parentis.
                                             
 V. "Spouse'' means a lawful wife or husband.
                                             
 VI. "State veterans' advisory committee'' means a committee
consisting of the following:
                                             
 (a) Two members of the house of representatives, one of whom
shall be from the state-federal relations and veterans affairs
committee, appointed by the speaker.
                                             
 (b) Two members of the senate, appointed by the senate
president.
                                             
 (c) Twenty representatives of the various veterans' organizations
in the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 VII. "Office of veterans services'' means the state office of
veterans services established pursuant to RSA 115.
                                             
 VIII. "Veterans' program'' means any legitimate veterans' program
which may, from time to time, be established in the state, as determined
by the state veterans' advisory committee and approved by the
legislative fiscal committee.

**Source.** 1985, 321:1. 1994, 41:6, 7. 2002, 76:2, 3. 2007, 109:1.
2009, 89:1, 2. 2010, 119:7, eff. July 31, 2010.

### Section 115-A:3

 **115-A:3 Qualifications for Bonus. –** Each person who actively
served for a total period of 90 days or more in any capacity as a member
of the uniformed forces of the United States between August 5, 1964, and
August 15, 1973, or who served in the Vietnam area at any time between
July 1, 1958, and August 5, 1964, and earned the Vietnam service medal
or the armed forces expeditionary medal; and who was discharged,
released or has a certificate of service therefrom, under honorable
conditions, or who is missing in action; and who at the time he entered
such active military service was a bona fide resident of New Hampshire
shall be entitled to the benefits of the bonus payable under RSA
115-A:5.

**Source.** 1985, 321:1. 2002, 76:4, eff. June 30, 2002.

### Section 115-A:4

 **115-A:4 Roster. –** The adjutant general shall from time to time
prepare a roster of the names of residents of the state who have
qualified for bonus payments under RSA 115-A:3, and shall certify the
same and prepare a manifest to authorize the state treasurer to make
payment from funds not otherwise appropriated. The governor is
authorized to draw his warrant for said sums out of any money in the
treasury not otherwise appropriated.

**Source.** 1985, 321:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 115-A:5

 **115-A:5 Bonus Payment. –** In recognition of the services
preformed by the persons designated as eligible under RSA 115-A:3,
hereinafter referred to as residents, the state treasurer, when such
names are certified to him as provided under RSA 115-A:4, and when
application is made therefor, shall pay to each such qualified resident
the sum of 
                                             $100. The state treasurer shall take such formal receipt as
he shall prescribe.

**Source.** 1985, 321:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 115-A:6

 **115-A:6 Payment of Cases of Incompetence or Death. –** If an
eligible person is legally incompetent, payment shall be made to his
legally appointed representative. If an eligible person dies before
payment has been made to him, payment shall be made to such person's
surviving spouse or if none, to his child or children in equal shares;
and if he has no surviving spouse or children, then in equal shares to
his surviving parents. Payment shall not be made to more than 2 parents.
Preference shall be given to the parent or parents who actually
exercised parental control at the time of or most nearly prior to date
of resident's entry into service. Proof of relationship in loco parentis
shall be established by sworn statement of the applicant, together with
supporting affidavits of 2 disinterested persons.

**Source.** 1985, 321:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 115-A:7

 **115-A:7 Written Evidence Required in Certain Circumstances. –** No
application for a bonus shall be certified for payment unless written
evidence is presented indicating that any person or persons described in
this chapter as having a prior right to benefits shall have deceased;
and provided further that if, prior to August 22, 1975, benefits have
been paid to the father or mother of a resident, who at the time had a
child or children, the rights or benefits shall not in addition accrue
to said child or children as a result of the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1985, 321:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 115-A:8

 **115-A:8 State Veterans' Advisory Committee. –** Each
non-legislative member of the state veterans' advisory committee shall
serve a 2-year term of office from the date of the member's appointment,
and may be reappointed. Legislative members of the committee shall serve
a term coterminous with their term in office. The committee members
shall choose a chairman, vice-chairman, and a secretary from their
committee membership. The committee may, by a majority vote of the
committee members, adopt bylaws governing the management and operation
of the committee. The committee shall issue biannual reports of its
actions, findings, and recommendations on May 1 and November 1 of each
year to the speaker of the house, the president of the senate, the
governor and council, and all veterans' organizations in the state.

**Source.** 1985, 321:1. 1987, 103:1. 1994, 41:8. 2002, 76:5. 2004,
170:1, eff. July 23, 2004.

Persian Gulf War Service Bonus Payments
---------------------------------------

### Section 115-A:9

 **115-A:9 Qualifications for Bonus. –** Each person who actively
served in any capacity as a member of the uniformed forces of the United
States on or after August 2, 1990 and on or before November 30, 1995,
and who earned the Southwest Asia Service Medal (SASM); and who was
discharged, released or has a certificate of service therefrom, under
honorable conditions, or who is missing in action or who was killed in
action; and who at the time of entry on such active service, and at the
time of such service was a bona fide resident of this state shall be
entitled to the benefits provided under this subdivision. A person shall
demonstrate bona fide residency under this section through such person's
home of record at time of entry as listed on a DD Form 214 or a written
verification from a town or city clerk that such person was a resident
of a New Hampshire town or city at the time of active service. No
individual who has received a Persian Gulf War bonus payment from
another state shall be qualified to receive the benefits provided under
this subdivision.

**Source.** 1992, 204:1. 1997, 133:2. 2002, 76:6, eff. June 30, 2002.

### Section 115-A:10

 **115-A:10 Roster. –** The director of the office of veterans
services shall from time to time prepare a roster of the names of
persons who have qualified for the bonus under RSA 115-A:9, and shall
certify the same to the state treasurer, and prepare a manifest to
authorize the state treasurer to make payments from funds not otherwise
appropriated. The governor is authorized to draw a warrant for said sums
out of any money in the treasury not otherwise appropriated.

**Source.** 1992, 204:1. 1998, 273:2. 2010, 119:7, eff. July 31, 2010.

### Section 115-A:11

 **115-A:11 Bonus Payment. –** In recognition of the services
performed by the persons designated as eligible under RSA 115-A:9, the
state treasurer, when such names are certified to the state treasurer as
provided in RSA 115-A:10, and when application is made therefor, shall
pay to each such qualified person the sum of 
                                             $100; and shall take such
formal receipt as the state treasurer shall prescribe.

**Source.** 1992, 204:1.

### Section 115-A:12

 **115-A:12 Payment in Cases of Incompetence or Death. –** If an
eligible person is legally incompetent, payment shall be made to his
legally appointed representative. If an eligible person dies before
payment has been made to him, payment shall be made to such person's
surviving spouse or, if none, to his child or children in equal shares;
and if he has no surviving spouse or children, then in equal shares to
his surviving parents. Payment shall not be made to more than 2 parents.
Preference shall be given to the parent or parents who actually
exercised parental control at the time of or most nearly prior to date
of the qualified person's entry into service. Proof of relationship in
loco parentis shall be established by sworn statement of the applicant,
together with supporting affidavits of 2 disinterested persons.

**Source.** 1992, 204:1.

### Section 115-A:13

 **115-A:13 Written Evidence Required in Certain Circumstances. –**
No applications shall be certified for payment unless written evidence
is presented indicating that any person or persons herein described as
having a prior right to benefits shall have deceased; and provided
further that if, prior to the date upon which this subdivision takes
effect, benefits have been paid to the father or mother of a qualified
person, who at the time had a child or children, the rights or benefits
shall not in addition accrue to said child or children as a result of
the provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1992, 204:1.

### Section 115-A:14

 **115-A:14 Time Limit; Late Applications. –** No bonus payment shall
be made under this subdivision unless application therefor is submitted
within 5 years after the effective date of this subdivision. Any claim
for bonus payment after such 5-year period shall be made to the director
of the office of veterans services, and if approved by the director
shall be submitted to the state treasurer, and it shall be a charge upon
the general fund.

**Source.** 1992, 204:1. 2010, 119:7, eff. July 31, 2010.

### Section 115-A:15

 **115-A:15 Forfeiture of Bonus. –** Any person who obtains a bonus
payment under this subdivision by fraud shall forfeit such bonus to the
state.

**Source.** 1997, 133:3, eff. Aug. 8, 1997.

Global War on Terrorism Operations Service Bonus Payments
---------------------------------------------------------

### Section 115-A:16

 **115-A:16 Qualifications for Bonus. –** Each person who actively
served in any capacity as a member of the uniformed forces of the United
States on or after September 11, 2001 and on or before a date to be
determined by the Secretary of Defense, and who earned the expeditionary
medal for Global War on Terrorism operations or the Iraqi Campaign Medal
or the Afghanistan Campaign Medal; and who was discharged, released or
has a certificate of service therefrom, with an honorable discharge, or
who is missing in action or who was killed in action; and who at the
time of entry on such active service, and at the time of such service
was a bona fide resident of this state shall be entitled to the benefits
provided under this subdivision. A person shall demonstrate bona fide
residency under this section through such person's home of record at
time of entry as listed on a DD Form 214 or a written verification from
a town or city clerk that such person was a resident of a New Hampshire
town or city at the time of active service. No individual who has
received a Global War on Terrorism operations bonus payment from another
state shall be qualified to receive the benefits provided under this
subdivision. Only one bonus payment is authorized for each person,
regardless of number of deployments.

**Source.** 2004, 207:1. 2006, 52:1, eff. April 24, 2006.

### Section 115-A:17

 **115-A:17 Roster. –** The director of the office of veterans
services shall from time to time prepare a roster of the names of
persons who have qualified for the bonus under RSA 115-A:16, and shall
certify the same to the state treasurer, and prepare a manifest to
authorize the state treasurer to make payments from funds not otherwise
appropriated. The governor is authorized to draw a warrant for said sums
out of any money in the treasury not otherwise appropriated.

**Source.** 2004, 207:1. 2010, 119:7, eff. July 31, 2010.

### Section 115-A:18

 **115-A:18 Bonus Payment. –** In recognition of the services
performed by the persons designated as eligible under RSA 115-A:16, the
state treasurer, when such names are certified to the state treasurer as
provided in RSA 115-A:17, and when application is made therefor, shall
pay to each such qualified person the sum of 
                                             $100; and shall take such
formal receipt as the state treasurer shall prescribe.

**Source.** 2004, 207:1, eff. June 11, 2004.

### Section 115-A:19

 **115-A:19 Payment in Cases of Incompetence or Death. –** If an
eligible person is legally incompetent, payment shall be made to his or
her legally appointed representative. If an eligible person dies before
payment has been made to him or her, payment shall be made to such
person's surviving spouse or, if none, to his or her child or children
in equal shares; and if he or she has no surviving spouse or children,
then in equal shares to his or her surviving parents. Payment shall not
be made to more than 2 parents. Preference shall be given to the parent
or parents who actually exercised parental control at the time of or
most nearly prior to the date of the qualified person's entry into
service. Proof of relationship in loco parentis shall be established by
sworn statement of the applicant, together with supporting affidavits of
2 disinterested persons.

**Source.** 2004, 207:1, eff. June 11, 2004.

### Section 115-A:20

 **115-A:20 Written Evidence Required in Certain Circumstances. –**
No applications shall be certified for payment unless written evidence
is presented indicating that any person or persons herein described as
having a prior right to benefits has died; and provided further that if,
prior to the date upon which this subdivision takes effect, benefits
have been paid to the father or mother of a qualified person, who at the
time had a child or children, the rights or benefits shall not in
addition accrue to said child or children as a result of the provisions
of this subdivision.

**Source.** 2004, 207:1, eff. June 11, 2004.

### Section 115-A:21

 **115-A:21 Time Limit; Late Applications. –** No bonus payment shall
be made under this subdivision unless application for the bonus payment
is submitted within 5 years after the effective date of this
subdivision. Any claim for bonus payment after such 5-year period shall
be made to the director of the office of veterans services, and if
approved by the director shall be submitted to the state treasurer and
shall be a charge upon the general fund.

**Source.** 2004, 207:1. 2010, 119:7, eff. July 31, 2010.

### Section 115-A:22

 **115-A:22 Forfeiture of Bonus. –** Any person who obtains a bonus
payment under this subdivision by fraud shall forfeit such bonus to the
state.

**Source.** 2004, 207:1, eff. June 11, 2004.

New Hampshire Service Awards
----------------------------

### Section 115-A:23-28

 **115-A:23 to 115-A:28 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 197:4, eff.
June 30, 2010.
                                             ]

Veteran Holidays
----------------

### Section 115-A:29

 **115-A:29 Veteran Holidays. –**
                                             
 I. Any veteran who has received an honorable discharge from the
United States armed forces shall have a preference not to work during
the 24 hours comprising Veterans Day without penalty provided that the
employee gives advance notice in accordance with the employer's policies
and procedures. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to
require the employer to pay the veteran for wages on Veterans Day if the
veteran chooses not to work in accordance with this subdivision.
                                             
 II. Any emergency responder such as a police officer, firefighter,
emergency medical technician, 911 operator, and medical personnel who is
a veteran and has received an honorable discharge from the United States
armed forces and whose offices or supervisors require minimal staffing
shall have the holiday preference described in paragraph I so long as
there is another qualified emergency responder available.

**Source.** 2009, 116:1, eff. Aug. 21, 2009.
