---
title: |
    CHAPTER 115-D COMMISSION ON POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER AND TRAUMATIC
    BRAIN INJURY
---

TITLE VIII
                                             
PUBLIC DEFENSE AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS
====================================

CHAPTER 115-D
                                             
COMMISSION ON POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER AND TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 115-D:1

 **115-D:1 Commission Established. –** There is established the New
Hampshire commission on post-traumatic stress disorder and traumatic
brain injury to develop, coordinate, and oversee the recommendations
identified in the report submitted by the commission to study the
effects of service-connected post-traumatic stress disorder and
traumatic brain injury suffered in the line of duty by members of the
armed forces and veterans.

**Source.** 2011, 84:1, eff. May 16, 2011. 2014, 135:2, eff. June 16,
2014.

### Section 115-D:2

 **115-D:2 Membership and Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. The members of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) One member of the senate, who is a member of the health and
human services committee, appointed by the president of the senate.
                                             
 (b) Two members of the house of representatives, one of whom is a
member of the health, human services and elderly affairs committee and
one of whom is a member of the state-federal relations and veterans
affairs committee, with consideration that one of the appointed members
may represent the northern area of New Hampshire, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (d) The commissioner of the department of employment security, or
designee.
                                             
 (e) The director of the state office of veterans services, or
designee.
                                             
 (f) A representative of the National Alliance on Mental Illness,
appointed by the alliance.
                                             
 (g) The chairperson of the governor's commission on alcohol and
drug abuse prevention, treatment, and recovery, or designee.
                                             
 (h) A representative of the governor's commission on
disabilities, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (i) A hospital administrator, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (j) The director of the White River Junction VA Medical Center,
or designee.
                                             
 (k) The director of the Manchester VA Medical Center, or
designee.
                                             
 (l) A representative of the New Hampshire Medical Society,
appointed by the society.
                                             
 (m) One representative of the New Hampshire Psychological
Association, appointed by the executive director of the association.
                                             
 (n) One representative of the Brain Injury Association of New
Hampshire, appointed by such association.
                                             
 (o) One representative of the Disabilities Rights Center,
appointed by the executive director of the center.
                                             
 (p) Two representatives of veterans organizations who serve on
the state veterans' advisory committee, appointed by the chairman of the
state veterans' advisory committee.
                                             
 (q) A representative of Disabled American Veterans, appointed by
the adjutant general of the office of Disabled American Veterans.
                                             
 (r) The commandant of the New Hampshire veterans' home, or
designee.
                                             
 (s) The adjutant general of the New Hampshire national guard, or
2 designees representing the air and army branches of the New Hampshire
National Guard, appointed by the adjutant general.
                                             
 (t) A representative of the Community Behavioral Health
Association, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (u) A representative of the Care Coordination Program of New
Hampshire, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (v) A VA veterans center team leader, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (w) A member of the peer support unit of the New Hampshire state
police, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (x) A representative of the university system of New Hampshire,
appointed by the chancellor of the university system.
                                             
 (y) A representative of Easter Seals Military and Veterans
Services, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (z) A representative of a traumatic brain injury provider's
organization, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 II. Except for the members in subparagraphs (a)-(e), the term of
office for members shall be 2 years or until a successor is appointed
and qualified. The members in subparagraphs (a)-(e) shall serve terms
coterminous with their terms of office.
                                             
 III. In appointing members to the commission, the appointing
authorities shall give priority to persons who served on the commission
to study the effects of service-connected post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) and traumatic brain injury (TBI).
                                             
 IV. Legislative members of the commission shall receive mileage at
the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the commission.

**Source.** 2011, 84:1. 2012, 81:1, eff. May 23, 2012. 2014, 135:2, eff.
June 16, 2014. 2016, 51:1, 2, eff. July 2, 2016; 330:8, eff. June 24,
2016.

### Section 115-D:3

 **115-D:3 Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall ensure the continued effectiveness of the
report issued by the commission to study the effects of post-traumatic
stress disorders (PTSD) and traumatic brain injury (TBI) by evaluating
its implementation, producing progress reports, and recommending program
changes, initiatives, funding opportunities, and new priorities to
update the report. The commission shall be a proponent for improving the
access to care and quality of care for veterans and service members who
suffer with PTSD and TBI.
                                             
 II. To assist the commission in the performance of its duties, the
chairperson shall create committees. The chairperson shall initially
create committees to address the following issues:
                                             
 (a) Stigma reduction.
                                             
 (b) Community education and training.
                                             
 (c) Continuum of care development.
                                             
 (d) Other special projects or areas of concern.
                                             
 III. The chairperson shall appoint at least 2 commission members to
serve on each committee and shall designate a chairperson or
co-chairpersons for each.
                                             
 IV. Based upon recommendations from each committee, the commission
chairperson may appoint as many individuals as necessary to serve as
adjunct members of each for a term of one year.
                                             
 V. Each committee shall:
                                             
 (a) Develop its goals and objectives based on the report.
                                             
 (b) Identify program areas where improved military and civilian
coordination is needed.
                                             
 (c) Focus on improving access to care and quality of care for
veterans and service members.

**Source.** 2011, 84:1, eff. May 16, 2011. 2014, 135:2, eff. June 16,
2014.

### Section 115-D:4

 **115-D:4 Chairperson; Quorum. –** The members of the commission
shall elect a chairperson from among the members. The first meeting of
the commission shall be called by the senate member. The first meeting
of the commission shall be held within 45 days of the effective date of
this section. Fourteen members of the commission shall constitute a
quorum.

**Source.** 2011, 84:1. 2012, 81:2, eff. May 23, 2012. 2014, 135:2, eff.
June 16, 2014.

### Section 115-D:5

 **115-D:5 Report. –** Beginning on November 1, 2014, and every
November 1, thereafter, the commission shall submit an annual report of
its activities and any proposed legislation to the president of the
senate, the speaker of the house of representatives, the chairpersons of
the senate and house committees having jurisdiction over health and
human services issues, the senate and house committees having
jurisdiction over veterans affairs, the chairperson of the oversight
committee on health and human services, the chairperson of the fiscal
committee of the general court, the senate clerk, the house clerk, the
governor, the members of the New Hampshire congressional delegation, and
the state library.

**Source.** 2011, 84:1. 2012, 81:3, eff. May 23, 2012. 2013, 229:6, eff.
July 15, 2013. 2014, 135:2, eff. June 16, 2014.
