---
title: 'CHAPTER 115-B VETERANS PRIORITY FOR TRAINING PROGRAMS'
---

TITLE VIII
                                             
PUBLIC DEFENSE AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS
====================================

CHAPTER 115-B
                                             
VETERANS PRIORITY FOR TRAINING PROGRAMS
---------------------------------------

### Section 115-B:1

 **115-B:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Discrimination'' means any act which results in the exclusion of
an eligible veteran from entering a training program on the basis of
veteran status.
                                             
 II. "Eligible veteran'' means a person who:
                                             
 (a) Served on active duty and was discharged or released from
active duty with an honorable discharge;
                                             
 (b) Was discharged or released from active duty because of a
service-connected disability; or
                                             
 (c) As a member of a reserve component under an order to active
duty, served on active duty during a period of war or in a campaign or
expedition for which a campaign badge or ribbon is authorized and was
discharged or released from such duty with an honorable discharge.
                                             
 III. "Priority of service'' means the priority of service to
participate in a training program offered an eligible veteran, as
defined in paragraph II, who meets the basic eligibility requirements of
a training program, as defined in paragraph V.
                                             
 IV. "Reserve component'' includes any branch of the military which
is called up to active duty, including any military defense forces.
                                             
 V. "Training program'' means any program which offers citizens of
New Hampshire training opportunities and is funded in whole or in part
by the state of New Hampshire or the federal government.
                                             
 VI. "Training provider'' means any state agency or nonprofit or
for-profit entity which administers or provides direct or indirect
training that is funded in whole or part by the federal government or
the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1997, 80:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1997.

### Section 115-B:2

 **115-B:2 Program Eligibility. –** For a veteran to be given
priority of service for a specific training program, the veteran shall
first meet the eligibility criteria and qualification requirements of
the specific training program.

**Source.** 1997, 80:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1997.

### Section 115-B:3

 **115-B:3 Application for Priority of Service. –** A veteran shall
apply for veterans priority of service with the training provider. The
veteran is responsible for furnishing proof of service in the form of a
copy of such veteran's DD214 certificate of release or discharge from
active duty prior to the beginning of training.

**Source.** 1997, 80:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1997.

### Section 115-B:4

 **115-B:4 Priority Placement. –** Any eligible veteran who has
applied for priority of service in a training program, has provided
proof of veterans status, and has met all basic criteria for the program
shall be given priority placement into the program.

**Source.** 1997, 80:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1997.

### Section 115-B:5

 **115-B:5 Discrimination Complaints. –** Complaints of
discrimination arising under this chapter shall be investigated and
remedied to the extent allowed by law. Complaints shall be made to the
state office of veterans services by the veteran or such veteran's
authorized representative.

**Source.** 1997, 80:2. 2010, 119:7, eff. July 31, 2010.

### Section 115-B:6

 **115-B:6 Federal Law. –** Provisions of this chapter shall be
superseded by federal laws and regulations which are more stringent or
provide specific veterans preference or priority of service relative to
administering training programs or training program grants to the
states.

**Source.** 1997, 80:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1997.
