---
title: 'CHAPTER 115-C VETERANS'' LEGAL AID ADVOCACY PROJECT'
---

TITLE VIII
                                             
PUBLIC DEFENSE AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS
====================================

CHAPTER 115-C
                                             
VETERANS' LEGAL AID ADVOCACY PROJECT
------------------------------------

### Section 115-C:1

 **115-C:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to address the
unmet, dire civil legal needs of New Hampshire's veterans, and to
advocate and safeguard veterans' benefits or preferences to which they
may be entitled under any state or federal laws or regulations,
particularly in the areas of housing, employment and unemployment, and
veterans' disability and pension claims.

**Source.** 2010, 225:2, eff. July 1, 2010.

### Section 115-C:2

 **115-C:2 Eligibility. –** Persons eligible for services from the
veterans' legal aid advocacy project shall:
                                             
 I. Meet the definition of "veteran'' as provided in RSA 21:50;
                                             
 II. Be ordered to active duty resulting from action by Congress or
the President, under any law, for an expansion of the active armed
forces in accordance with 10 U.S.C. sections 12301, 12302, 12304, 12305,
or successor statutes; or
                                             
 III. Be discharged under other than dishonorable conditions, as long
as the discharge was caused, in some way, by traumatic brain injury,
post-traumatic stress disorder, sexual trauma, a combat related injury
or illness, or other traumatic injuries or illnesses.

**Source.** 2010, 225:2, eff. July 1, 2010.

### Section 115-C:3

 **115-C:3 Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The veterans' legal aid advocacy project shall work to improve
the lives of New Hampshire veterans through legal aid advocacy on behalf
of veterans in civil matters.
                                             
 II. The state veterans council shall serve as the veterans intake
coordinator for the veterans' legal aid advocacy project.
                                             
 III. New Hampshire Legal Assistance shall provide legal
representation to veterans in a manner consistent with the purpose
outlined in RSA 115-C:1 and the New Hampshire Rules of Professional
Conduct.
                                             
 IV. The state veterans council and New Hampshire Legal Assistance
shall do outreach with veterans' service organizations and homeless
shelters to reach the veteran homeless population that may need legal
aid advocacy services.
                                             
 V. The state veterans council, New Hampshire Legal Assistance, and
the pro bono section of the New Hampshire Bar Association shall
coordinate with the veterans' service organizations, the New Hampshire
National Guard, and other veterans' service providers, in the efficient
provision of veterans' legal aid advocacy services. The state veterans
council and New Hampshire Legal Assistance shall create general
guidelines on case acceptance and priorities, reviewing those guidelines
and priorities every 2 years.
                                             
 VI. The state veterans council, New Hampshire Legal Assistance, and
the Pro Bono Section of the New Hampshire Bar Association shall work to
increase the number of private attorneys for referrals of veterans'
cases, including, but not limited to, veterans' family law cases.
                                             
 VII. The state veterans council, New Hampshire Legal Assistance, and
the Pro Bono Section of the New Hampshire Bar Association shall work to
provide information sessions and legal advice for veterans and their
families.
                                             
 VIII. The veterans' legal aid advocacy project shall provide legal
aid training to veterans' advocates.
                                             
 IX. The veterans' legal aid advocacy project shall report annually
to the governor, the general court, and the state veterans council on
the number of veterans served, the results, and the number of veterans
that could not be served.

**Source.** 2010, 225:2, eff. July 1, 2010.

### Section 115-C:4

 **115-C:4 Funding. –** Funding for the veterans' legal advocacy
project established by this chapter shall be contingent upon the receipt
of grants or federal funds for such purpose. The veterans' legal
advocacy project shall report on the availability and acquisition of
federal appropriations and grants to the governor and the general court.

**Source.** 2010, 225:2, eff. July 1, 2010.
