---
title: CHAPTER 115 STATE OFFICE OF VETERANS SERVICES
---

TITLE VIII
                                             
PUBLIC DEFENSE AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS
====================================

CHAPTER 115
                                             
STATE OFFICE OF VETERANS SERVICES
---------------------------------

### Section 115:1

 **115:1 Council Established. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a state veterans council of 3 members to be
appointed by the governor and council, each of whom shall be veterans of
any war in which the United States has been engaged and a citizen of the
state. Of the first appointments under this section one shall be
appointed for a term of 3 years, one for a term of 2 years, one for a
term of one year and thereafter each shall be appointed for a term of 3
years. Each member of the council shall hold office until a successor is
appointed and qualified. Any vacancy in the council shall be filled by
the governor and council for the unexpired term.
                                             
 II. The members of the council shall meet not less than
semi-annually to review activities of the state office of veterans
services and provide guidance to the director of the state office of
veterans services on the adequacy and delivery of office programs. The
council may designate one of its members to serve as liaison to the
state veterans advisory committee.

**Source.** 1943, 190:1, par. 1. RSA 115:1. 1994, 41:1. 2010, 119:2,
eff. July 31, 2010.

### Section 115:2

 **115:2 Assistants; Organization. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1967, 66:1, eff.
July 1, 1967.
                                             ]

### Section 115:3

 **115:3 Compensation. –** No member of the council shall receive
compensation for services rendered but his or her necessary expenses
incurred in the performance of his or her official duties shall be paid
from the appropriation for the office of veterans services.

**Source.** 1948, 190:1, par. 2. 1950, 5, part 11:1. 2010, 119:3, eff.
July 31, 2010.

### Section 115:4

 **115:4 Director of State Office of Veterans Services. –**
                                             
 I. The council shall, with the approval of the governor and council,
appoint a director of the state office of veterans services, who shall
be an honorably separated veteran of a war in which the United States
was engaged. The director shall serve during the pleasure of the council
and shall perform the duties listed in paragraph II.
                                             
 II. The director of the office shall:
                                             
 (a) Supervise the activities of a statewide service delivery
structure which assists veterans and family members in identifying
eligibility for veterans' benefits, filing claims, coordinating benefits
with other state and federal agencies, and reviewing claims decisions
for appeals or waivers of unfavorable decisions.
                                             
 (b) Identify and develop legislative proposals to improve
delivery of services, review and monitor legislation introduced by
others, testify at hearings, and prepare legislative fiscal note work
sheets. The director shall coordinate, implement, and administer
programs mandated by the legislature.
                                             
 (c) Prepare the agency budget and administer and monitor
expenditures for the office of veterans services.
                                             
 (d) Develop and coordinate agency programs in conjunction with
the United States Department of Veterans Affairs as well as other
federal, state, local, and private organizations.
                                             
 (e) Represent the veterans council at various state and national
conventions, conferences, and public functions and provide supervision
to the office of veterans services' public relations program.
                                             
 (f) Perform such other duties as the veterans council shall
determine.

**Source.** 1943, 190:1, par. 8. RSA 115:4. 1969, 229:1. 1994, 41:2.
2010, 119:4, eff. July 31, 2010.

### Section 115:5

 **115:5 Salary. –** The annual salary of such director shall be that
prescribed by RSA 94:1-4.

**Source.** 1953, 265:1. RSA 115:5. 1969, 229:2, eff. June 13, 1969.

### Section 115:6

 **115:6 State Office of Veterans Services Established; Duties. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a state office of veterans services under
the supervision of the director of state veterans services appointed
pursuant to RSA 115:4. The state office of veterans services shall
assist veterans who are residents of this state or their dependents to
secure all benefits or preferences to which they may be entitled under
any state or federal laws or regulations. The office shall employ such
assistance as may be necessary, within the limits of the appropriation
made therefor, subject to the rules of the state division of personnel.
                                             
 II. (a) Biennially beginning July 1, 2009, the state office of
veterans services shall publish a state veterans handbook. The state
veterans handbook shall include the following information:
                                             
 (1) Points of contact for all federal, state, local, and
nonprofit veterans agencies, departments, councils, hospitals, clinics,
and other organizations offering services, benefits, and programs to New
Hampshire veterans, including addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail
addresses.
                                             
 (2) A description of the services, benefits, and programs
offered by each entity listed under subparagraph (a)(1).
                                             
 (b) The state office of veterans services shall distribute the
state veterans handbook through the state, local, and nonprofit entities
listed under subparagraph (a)(1).
                                             
 (c) The state office of veterans services may accept and expend
for purposes of publishing and distributing the state veterans handbook,
any donations, grants, bequests, and contributions which become
available for such purposes.

**Source.** 1943, 190:1, par. 4. 1950, 9:2. RSA 115:6. 1994, 41:3. 2008,
50:1. 2010, 119:5, eff. July 31, 2010.

### Section 115:7

 **115:7 Copies of Public Records. –** When a copy of any public
record is required by the Department of Veterans Affairs to be used in
determining the eligibility of any person to participate in benefits
made available by the Department of Veterans Affairs, the official
custodian of such public record shall without charge provide the
applicant for such benefits or any person acting on his behalf or the
authorized representative of the Department of Veterans Affairs with a
certified copy of such record; provided, however, that in any case where
the copy is made by a town clerk whose official income is derived in
part or entirely from fees a charge for services hereunder shall be made
and the town shall reimburse the clerk for the charges.

**Source.** 1949, 27:1. 1951, 101:2. RSA 115:7. 1994, 41:4, eff. June
27, 1994.

### Section 115:8

 **115:8 Donations. –** The state office of veterans services may
receive, on behalf of the state, all donations and bequests that may be
made to support the delivery of state office of veterans services
programs.

**Source.** 2007, 109:2. 2010, 119:7, eff. July 31, 2010.
