---
title: 'CHAPTER 117 SERVICEMEN''S LOANS TO MINORS'
---

TITLE VIII
                                             
PUBLIC DEFENSE AND VETERANS' AFFAIRS
====================================

CHAPTER 117
                                             
SERVICEMEN'S LOANS TO MINORS
----------------------------

### Section 117:1

 **117:1 Rights of Minors. â€“** The disability of minority of any
person otherwise eligible for a loan, or guaranty or insurance of a
loan, pursuant to the Act of the Congress of the United States entitled
the Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944 (58 Stat. 284), as heretofore
or hereafter amended (38 U.S.C. 693 et seq.), and of the minor spouse of
any eligible veteran, in connection with any transaction entered into
pursuant to said act of the Congress of the United States, as heretofore
or hereafter amended, shall not affect the binding effect of any
obligation incurred by such eligible person or spouse as an incident to
any such transaction, including incurring of indebtedness and acquiring,
encumbering, selling, re-leasing, or conveying property, or any interest
therein, if all or part of any such obligation be guaranteed or insured
by the government or the administrator of veterans' affairs pursuant to
said act and amendments thereto; or if the administrator be the
creditor, by reason of a loan or a sale pursuant to said act and
amendments. This chapter shall not create, or render enforceable, any
other or greater rights or liabilities than would exist if neither such
person nor such spouse were a minor.

**Source.** 1945, 60:1; 178:1. 1953, 77:1, eff. April 10, 1953.
