---
title: |
    CHAPTER 507-G FRIVOLOUS ACTIONS AGAINST TEACHERS AND OTHER EDUCATION
    EMPLOYEES
---

TITLE LII
                                             
ACTIONS, PROCESS, AND SERVICE OF PROCESS
========================================

CHAPTER 507-G
                                             
FRIVOLOUS ACTIONS AGAINST TEACHERS AND OTHER EDUCATION EMPLOYEES
----------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 507-G:1

 **507-G:1 Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the Penalties for
Frivolous Actions Against Teachers and Other Education Employees Act.

**Source.** 2002, 149:1, eff. July 14, 2002.

### Section 507-G:2

 **507-G:2 Purpose. –** The general court finds that good order and
discipline are necessary to provide New Hampshire students with a proper
learning environment and that "employees,'' as defined in RSA 507-G:3,
should not be inhibited in their attempts to enforce good order and
discipline by the threat of civil actions against them.

**Source.** 2002, 149:1, eff. July 14, 2002.

### Section 507-G:3

 **507-G:3 Definitions. –** In this chapter, "employee'' means any
individual elected or appointed to an educational entity, any individual
who is an employee of such an entity, and any employee of a company
under contract to a school or school district who is directly engaged in
student-related services.

**Source.** 2002, 149:1, eff. July 14, 2002.

### Section 507-G:4

 **507-G:4 Penalties for Frivolous Actions Against Employees. –**
                                             
 I. If, during any phase of a tort action brought against an employee
which results from an action taken while the employee is directly
engaged in student-related services, it appears to the court by a
preponderance of evidence that the action is frivolous, or intended to
harass or intimidate the named employee or any other employee involved
in the student-related services at issue, or both; then the court, upon
motion of a party or upon its own motion, may order summary judgment or
other relief against the party who brought such action, and it shall
award costs and reasonable attorneys' fees to the prevailing party or
parties. Costs shall include, but not be limited to, all reasonable
pre-trial investigation and tribunal time and expenses. The court shall
report such conduct to the professional conduct committee.
                                             
 II. In addition to the above, the court shall order the party
bringing the action against an employee to pay the sum of 
                                             $1,000 to
each of the prevailing parties.

**Source.** 2002, 149:1, eff. July 14, 2002.
