---
title: 'CHAPTER 507-B BODILY INJURY ACTIONS AGAINST GOVERNMENTAL UNITS'
---

TITLE LII
                                             
ACTIONS, PROCESS, AND SERVICE OF PROCESS
========================================

CHAPTER 507-B
                                             
BODILY INJURY ACTIONS AGAINST GOVERNMENTAL UNITS
------------------------------------------------

### Section 507-B:1

 **507-B:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Governmental unit'' means any political subdivision within the
state including any county, city, town, precinct, school district,
chartered public school, school administrative unit, or departments or
agencies thereof, or any other body corporate and politic within the
state, but does not include the state or any department or agency
thereof.
                                             
 II. "Action to recover for bodily injury'' means an action arising
out of bodily injury, including an action brought under RSA 556:9-14,
whether brought by or on behalf of the person actually sustaining bodily
injury or brought by any other person to whom rights may accrue arising
out of such injury, regardless of the nature of the damages claimed.
                                             
 III. "Personal injury'' means:
                                             
 (a) Any injury to the feelings or reputation of a natural person,
including but not limited to, false arrest, detention or imprisonment,
malicious prosecution, libel, slander, or the publication or utterance
of other defamatory or disparaging material, invasion of an individual's
right of privacy, invasion of the right of private occupancy, wrongful
entry or eviction, mental injury, mental anguish, shock, and, except
when against the public policy or the laws of New Hampshire, or both,
discrimination; and
                                             
 (b) Any injury to intangible property sustained by any
organization as a result of false eviction, malicious prosecution,
libel, slander, or defamation.
                                             
 The term "personal injury'' shall not include "bodily injury'' or
"property damage.''
                                             
 IV. "Property damage'' means a loss through injury to, or
destruction of, tangible property.
                                             
 V. "Pollutant incident'' means any emission, discharge, release, or
escape of any irritants, noxious substances or radioactive materials, in
any physical state, into or upon land, the atmosphere, or any
watercourse or body of water, including but not limited to all wastes
and materials as defined in RSA 146-A, 147-A, 147-B and 149-M.

**Source.** 1975, 483:1. 1981, 376:1. 1986, 227:9. 1995, 260:7. 2008,
354:1, eff. Sept. 5, 2008.

### Section 507-B:2

 **507-B:2 Liability for Negligence. –** A governmental unit may be
held liable for damages in an action to recover for bodily injury,
personal injury or property damage caused by its fault or by fault
attributable to it, arising out of ownership, occupation, maintenance or
operation of all motor vehicles, and all premises; provided, however,
that the liability of any governmental unit with respect to its
sidewalks, streets, and highways shall be limited as provided in RSA 231
and the liability of any governmental unit with respect to publicly
owned airport runways and taxiways shall be limited as set forth in RSA
422.

**Source.** 1975, 483:1. 1981, 376:2. 1991, 385:9, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 507-B:2-a

 **507-B:2-a Municipal Immunity. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1991, 385:10, IV,
eff. Jan. 1, 1992.
                                             ]

### Section 507-B:2-b

 **507-B:2-b Snow, Ice, and Other Weather Hazards. –**
Notwithstanding RSA 507-B:2, a municipality or school district shall not
be liable for damage arising from insufficiencies or hazards on any
premises owned, occupied, maintained, or operated by it, even if it has
actual notice of them, when such hazards are caused solely by snow, ice,
or other inclement weather, and the municipality's or school district's
failure or delay in removing or mitigating such hazards is the result of
its implementation, absent gross negligence or reckless disregard of the
hazard, of a winter or inclement weather maintenance policy or set of
priorities with respect to such premises, adopted in good faith by the
official responsible for such policy. All municipal or school district
employees, officials, and agents shall be presumed to be acting pursuant
to such a policy or set of priorities in the absence of proof to the
contrary.

**Source.** 1995, 109:2. 1998, 249:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 507-B:3

 **507-B:3 Compulsory Consolidation of Actions. –** All actions to
recover for bodily injury, personal injury or property damage arising
out of bodily injury, personal injury or property damage to one person
shall be tried together, and not otherwise.

**Source.** 1975, 483:1. 1981, 376:4, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 507-B:4

 **507-B:4 Limit of Liability. –**
                                             
 I. Liability of a governmental unit for bodily injury, personal
injury or property damage sustained by any one person in actions brought
under this chapter is limited to 
                                             $275,000. Such limit applies in the
aggregate to any and all actions to recover for bodily injury, personal
injury or property damage arising out of bodily injury, personal injury
or property damage sustained by one person in a single incident or
occurrence. Liability of a governmental unit for bodily injury, personal
injury or property damage sustained by any number of persons in a single
incident or occurrence is limited to 
                                             $925,000. The limits applicable to
any action shall be the limits in effect at the time of the judgment or
stipulated settlement.
                                             
 II. The court shall award no punitive damages against a governmental
unit for bodily injury, personal injury or property damage.
                                             
 III. The jury shall not be informed of the limits in paragraph I but
the court shall abate any verdict to the extent it exceeds the limits
prescribed in this section. In actions consolidated under RSA 507-B:3,
in the event the verdicts exceed the limits prescribed in this section,
the verdicts shall be abated pro rata. Interest and costs may be
recovered as in any civil action, in addition to the limits prescribed
in this section.
                                             
 IV. If any claim is made or any civil action is commenced against a
present or former employee, trustee, or official of a municipality or
chartered public school seeking equitable relief or claiming damages,
the liability of said employee or official shall be governed by the same
principles and provisions of law and shall be subject to the same limits
as those which govern municipal liability, so long as said employee or
official was acting within the scope of his office and in good faith.

**Source.** 1975, 483:1. 1981, 376:5. 1986, 227:8. 1995, 260:8. 2007,
356:1. 2008, 354:1, eff. Sept. 5, 2008.

### Section 507-B:5

 **507-B:5 Effect on Common Law. –** No governmental unit shall be
held liable in any action to recover for bodily injury, personal injury
or property damage except as provided by this chapter or as is provided
or may be provided by other statute.

**Source.** 1975, 483:1. 1981, 376:6, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 507-B:6

 **507-B:6 Property Exempt From Attachment. –** No property, either
real or personal, of the governmental unit shall be subject to
attachment or execution to secure payment of or to satisfy any judgment
entered against the governmental unit under this chapter.

**Source.** 1975, 483:1, eff. July 1, 1975.

### Section 507-B:7

 **507-B:7 Limitation on Actions. –** No actions shall be maintained
against the governmental unit under this chapter unless the same is
commenced within 3 years after the time of injury or damage, except that
when the injury and its causal relationship to the act or omission were
not discovered and could not reasonably have been discovered at the time
of the act or omission, the action shall be commenced within 3 years of
the time the plaintiff discovers, or in the exercise of reasonable
diligence should have discovered, the injury and its causal relationship
to the act or omission complained of. As a condition precedent to
commencement of the action, the clerk of the governmental unit shall be
notified by registered mail within 60 days after the time of the injury
or damage or discovery of the injury or damage, if it could not
reasonably have been discovered at the time of the occurrence of the
injury or damage, as to the date, time and location where the injury or
damage occurred, and provided that in any case where lack of written
notice, actual knowledge or reasonable opportunity to obtain knowledge
of any injury or damage within the 60-day period is alleged by the
governmental unit, the burden of proof shall be on the governmental unit
to show that it was substantially prejudiced thereby.

**Source.** 1975, 483:1. 1981, 376:7. 1989, 161:1, eff. May 17, 1989.

### Section 507-B:7-a

 **507-B:7-a Insurance Policies Procured by Governmental Agency. –**
It shall be lawful for the state or any municipal subdivision thereof,
including any county, city, town, school district, school administrative
unit or other district, to procure the policies of insurance described
in RSA 412. In any action against the state or any municipal subdivision
thereof to enforce liability on account of a risk so insured against,
the insuring company or state or municipal subdivision thereof shall not
be allowed to plead as a defense immunity from liability for damages
resulting from the performance of governmental functions, and its
liability shall be determined as in the case of a private corporation
except when a standard of care differing from that of a private
corporation is set forth by statute; provided, however, that liability
in any such case shall not exceed the limits of coverage specified in
the policy of insurance or as to governmental units defined in RSA
507-B, liability shall not exceed the policy limit or the limit
specified in RSA 507-B:4, if applicable, whichever is higher, and the
court shall abate any verdict in any such action to the extent that it
exceeds such limit.

**Source.** 2003, 144:14, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 507-B:8

 **507-B:8 Appropriation to Satisfy Judgment. –** Upon entry of final
judgment against the governmental unit in any action brought under this
chapter, the body charged with the appropriation of funds for the
governmental unit shall provide funds through insurance or otherwise to
satisfy said judgment within a reasonable time.

**Source.** 1975, 483:1, eff. July 1, 1975.

### Section 507-B:9

 **507-B:9 Pollutant Liability Standard. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the liability of any
governmental unit or public employee for any personal injury, bodily
injury, or property damage caused by or resulting from pollutant
incidents shall only be based upon a showing by a preponderance of the
evidence that the acts or omissions of the governmental unit were
unreasonable. The acts or omissions of a governmental unit or public
employee shall be conclusively presumed to be reasonable if they are in
accord with the generally prevailing state of the art, scientific
knowledge, and technology available to the governmental unit at the time
the acts or omissions were undertaken or made by the governmental unit
or public employee.
                                             
 II. If the fault of the governmental unit or public employee arising
from a pollutant incident is 50 percent or greater, liability shall be
joint and several. Otherwise, governmental units or public employees
shall be liable only to the extent that their acts or omissions
contributed to the causation of the personal injury, bodily injury, or
property damage.
                                             
 III. The doctrines of strict liability or absolute liability shall
not be the basis of liability of a governmental unit or public employee
for any personal injury, bodily injury, or property damage caused by
pollutant incidents.

**Source.** 1986, 227:10, eff. June 6, 1986.

### Section 507-B:10

 **507-B:10 Statutory Construction. –** Nothing contained in this
chapter shall be construed to modify or limit the duties,
responsibilities or liabilities of government units or their agents owed
to the state for pollutant containment, cleanup, removal and restoration
as established under state public health and environmental statutes,
including but not limited to the following:
                                             
 I. RSA 125-C, relative to air pollution control.
                                             
 II. RSA 146-A, relative to oil spillage in public waters.
                                             
 III. RSA 147, relative to sanitation.
                                             
 IV. RSA 147-A, relative to hazardous waste management.
                                             
 V. RSA 147-B, relative to the hazardous waste cleanup fund.
                                             
 VI. RSA 485, relative to the safe drinking water act.
                                             
 VII. RSA 485-A, relative to pollution and waste disposal.
                                             
 VIII. RSA 149-M, relative to solid waste management.

**Source.** 1986, 227:10. 2004, 116:7, eff. May 17, 2004.

### Section 507-B:11

 **507-B:11 Use of Municipal and School District Facilities for
Skateboarding, Rollerblading, Stunt Biking, or Rollerskiing. –** A
municipality or school district, which without charge permits any person
to use a facility operated by the municipality or school district for
the purpose of skateboarding, rollerblading, stunt biking, or
rollerskiing, shall not be liable for personal injury or property damage
resulting from the person's participation in such activity, in the
absence of gross and wanton negligence.

**Source.** 1995, 111:1. 1997, 62:1. 2000, 237:1, eff. June 6, 2000.
