---
title: 'CHAPTER 507-D PRODUCT LIABILITY ACTIONS'
---

TITLE LII
                                             
ACTIONS, PROCESS, AND SERVICE OF PROCESS
========================================

CHAPTER 507-D
                                             
PRODUCT LIABILITY ACTIONS
-------------------------

### Section 507-D:1

 **507-D:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Product liability action'' means any action brought for or on
account of personal injury, death or property damage or other damage
caused by or resulting from the development, manufacture, construction,
design, formula, preparation, assembly, testing, warning, instructing,
advertising, marketing, certifying, packaging, or labeling of any
product. The term includes all such actions, regardless of the legal
theory relied upon, whether strict liability in tort, negligence, breach
of warranty, breach of or failure to discharge a duty to warn or
instruct, misrepresentation, concealment, nondisclosure or any other
theory whatsoever.
                                             
 II. "Risk'' means any risk, danger, hazard, defect, condition or
adverse effect or side effect of the product in question.
                                             
 III. "User'' means a purchaser, or any individual who uses or
consumes the product. Where the user is under legal disability, the term
also includes the user's legal representative. Where the user is an
employee who has been using the product while acting within the scope of
employment, the term also includes the employee's employer or
co-employee. The term also includes any person who, while acting on
behalf of the user, was in possession and control of the product in
question.

**Source.** 1978, 31:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1978.

### Section 507-D:2

 **507-D:2 Limitation of Product Liability Actions. –**
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all product liability
actions must be commenced within the following time limits and not
otherwise:
                                             
 I. Within 3 years of the time the injury is, or should, in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, have been discovered by the plaintiff;
and
                                             
 II. (a) No later than 12 years after the manufacturer of the final
product parted with its possession and control or sold it, whichever
occurred last; or
                                             
 (b) Where the defendant is a lessor, bailor or licensor of a
product who is under a legal duty to inspect, maintain, repair, modify,
alter or improve the product in question, no later than 12 years after
the time at which the defendant ceases to have the use, possession or
control of the product or ceases to be under the legal duty to inspect,
maintain, repair, modify or improve it; or
                                             
 (c) Where the plaintiff's action is based upon a legal duty
imposed by any governmental regulatory agency to alter, repair, recall,
inspect or issue warnings or instructions about the product or otherwise
to take any action or precaution for the benefit of the injured party,
which legal duty arose after the defendant parted with possession and
control of the product or sold the product, whichever came last, no
longer than 6 years after the defendant first incurred the legal duty.
This subparagraph does not shorten the time period established in
subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this paragraph.
                                             
 III. Where the action is brought to recover indemnity or
contribution for damages paid to or claimed by another, the action must
be commenced within the same period established in RSA 507-D:2, I and
II, plus 90 days.
                                             
 IV. The limitation periods established in RSA 507-D:2, I, II and III
do not apply to actions based on the defendant's fraudulent
misrepresentation, concealment or nondisclosure, or to any actions based
upon a written contractual obligation which provides for a different
period of limitation, or to actions brought under RSA 382-A:2-313, 2-314
or 2-315 which do not seek damages for or on account of injury to person
or property.

**Source.** 1978, 31:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1978.

### Section 507-D:3

 **507-D:3 Modification or Alteration of Products. –** In any product
liability action, the defendant may be held liable only for harm that
would have occurred if the product had been used in its unaltered and
unmodified condition and shall not be held liable for harm arising in
any part from alteration or modification of the product by another. For
the purpose of this section, alteration or modification includes failure
to observe routine care and maintenance, but does not include ordinary
wear and tear or alterations or modifications made in accordance with
specifications or instructions furnished by the defendant.

**Source.** 1978, 31:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1978.

### Section 507-D:4

 **507-D:4 Discoverability of Risk. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988, 39:3, eff.
Jan. 1, 1989.
                                             ]

### Section 507-D:5

 **507-D:5 Applicability. –** This chapter applies to all product
liability actions accruing after August 22, 1978, and, as to such
actions, shall supersede any inconsistent provision of law. In addition,
this chapter applies to causes of action accruing prior to August 22,
1978, upon which no action has been instituted as of August 22, 1978,
except that the time for bringing such actions as specified in RSA
507-D:2 shall be computed from August 22, 1978.

**Source.** 1978, 31:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1978.
