---
title: 'CHAPTER 507-E MEDICAL INJURY ACTIONS'
---

TITLE LII
                                             
ACTIONS, PROCESS, AND SERVICE OF PROCESS
========================================

CHAPTER 507-E
                                             
MEDICAL INJURY ACTIONS
----------------------

### Section 507-E:1

 **507-E:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Action for medical injury'' means any action against a medical
care provider, whether based in tort, contract or otherwise, to recover
damages on account of medical injury.
                                             
 II. "Medical care provider'' means a physician, physician's
assistant, registered or licensed practical nurse, hospital, clinic or
other health care agency licensed by the state or otherwise lawfully
providing medical care or services, or an officer, employee or agent
thereof acting in the course and scope of employment.
                                             
 III. "Medical injury'' or "injury'' means any adverse, untoward or
undesired consequences arising out of or sustained in the course of
professional services rendered by a medical care provider, whether
resulting from negligence, error, or omission in the performance of such
services; from rendition of such services without informed consent or in
breach of warranty or in violation of contract; from failure to
diagnose; from premature abandonment of a patient or of a course of
treatment; from failure properly to maintain equipment or appliances
necessary to the rendition of such services; or otherwise arising out of
or sustained in the course of such services.

**Source.** 1986, 227:4, eff. July 1, 1986.

### Section 507-E:2

 **507-E:2 Burden of Proof. –**
                                             
 I. In any action for medical injury, the plaintiff shall have the
burden of proving by affirmative evidence which must include expert
testimony of a competent witness or witnesses:
                                             
 (a) The standard of reasonable professional practice in the
medical care provider's profession or specialty thereof, if any, at the
time the medical care in question was rendered; and
                                             
 (b) That the medical care provider failed to act in accordance
with such standard; and
                                             
 (c) That as a proximate result thereof, the injured person
suffered injuries which would not otherwise have occurred.
                                             
 II. Without limiting the applicability of paragraph I of this
section, where the plaintiff claims that a medical care provider failed
to supply adequate information to obtain the informed consent of the
injured person:
                                             
 (a) The plaintiff shall have the burden of proving by affirmative
evidence, which must include expert testimony of a competent witness or
witnesses, that the treatment, procedure or surgery was performed in
other than an emergency situation and that the medical care provider did
not supply that type of information regarding the treatment, procedure
or surgery as should reasonably have been given to a patient in the
position of the injured person or other persons authorized to give
consent for such a patient by other competent medical care providers
with similar training and experience at the time of the treatment,
procedure or surgery.
                                             
 (b) In determining whether the plaintiff has satisfied the
requirements of subparagraph (a) of this paragraph, the following
matters shall also be considered as material issues:
                                             
 (1) Whether the injured person or person giving consent on his
behalf could reasonably be expected to know of the risks or hazards
inherent in such treatment, procedure, or surgery;
                                             
 (2) Whether the injured person or the person giving consent on
his behalf knew of the risks or hazards inherent in such treatment,
procedure, or surgery;
                                             
 (3) Whether the injured party would have undergone the
treatment, procedure, or surgery regardless of the risk involved or
whether he declined to be informed thereof;
                                             
 (4) Whether it was reasonable for the medical care provider to
limit disclosure of information because such disclosure could be
expected to adversely and substantially affect the injured person's
condition.
                                             
 III. The requirements of this section are not satisfied by evidence
of loss of opportunity for a substantially better outcome. However, this
paragraph shall not bar claims based on evidence that negligent conduct
by the defendant medical provider or providers proximately caused the
ultimate harm, regardless of the chance of survival or recovery from an
underlying condition.

**Source.** 1986, 227:4. 2003, 208:2, eff. June 30, 2003.

### Section 507-E:3

 **507-E:3 Settlement Agreements. –** Any portion of a settlement
agreement in an action for medical injury which has the purpose or
effect of prohibiting disclosure of relevant information to the
appropriate state medical licensing board is void, contrary to public
policy, and shall not be enforced.

**Source.** 2003, 195:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 507-E:4

 **507-E:4 Evidence of Admissions of Liability. –**
                                             
 I. In this section "family'' means spouse, parent, grandparent,
stepfather, stepmother, child, adopted child, grandchild, brother,
sister, half-brother, half-sister, father-in-law, or mother-in-law.
                                             
 II. A statement, writing, or action that expresses sympathy,
compassion, commiseration, or a general sense of benevolence relating to
the pain, suffering, or death of an individual and that is made to that
individual or to the individual's family is inadmissible as evidence of
an admission of liability in a medical injury action.
                                             
 III. This section does not apply to a statement of fault,
negligence, or culpable conduct that is part of or made in addition to a
statement, writing, or action described in paragraph II.

**Source.** 2005, 144:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.
