---
title: CHAPTER 507 ACTIONS
---

TITLE LII
                                             
ACTIONS, PROCESS, AND SERVICE OF PROCESS
========================================

CHAPTER 507
                                             
ACTIONS
------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 507:1

 **507:1 Partners. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 378:2, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 507:2

 **507:2 Cotenants; Generally. –** One cotenant of real estate may
recover, in an action of assumpsit against another, for his share of any
trees, fixtures or other part of the estate destroyed, severed or
carried away by the other.

**Source.** RS 180:5. CS 191:6. GS 201:3. GL 220:3. PS 216:3. PL 328:7.
RL 384:7.

### Section 507:3

 **507:3 Cotenants; Income. –** One cotenant of real estate may
recover, in an action of assumpsit, from another taking the income
thereof without his consent, and wrongfully withholding the same, all
damages he may sustain thereby.

**Source.** RS 180:5. CS 191:6. GS 201:4. GL 220:4. PS 216:4. PL 328:8.
RL 384:8.

### Section 507:4

 **507:4 Erroneous Levy, New Suit. –** Whenever an execution is
returned, satisfied in whole or in part by an extent or levy upon estate
or property not liable to be taken upon the execution, an action of debt
may be brought upon the judgment, within 6 years after the extent or
levy, for the amount equitably due and the costs of levying.

**Source.** RS 180:3. CS 191:4. GS 201:5. GL 220:5. PS 216:5. PL 328:9.
RL 384:9.

### Section 507:5

 **507:5 For Official Default. –** Sheriffs, constables and other
officers liable for default or misconduct in office shall be held to
answer for the damages in an action on the case, and in no other form.

**Source.** RS 180:12. CS 191:13. GS 201:6. GL 220:6. PS 216:6. PL
328:10. RL 384:10.

### Section 507:6

 **507:6 Escape, Recovery Over. –** A person compelled to pay damages
for the escape of a prisoner in his custody may recover the same of the
prisoner escaping or of others aiding the escape.

**Source.** RS 180:11. CS 191:12. GS 201:7. GL 220:7. PS 216:7. PL
328:11. RL 384:11.

### Section 507:7

 **507:7 False Checks, Etc. –** Any person who makes, draws, utters
or delivers any check, draft or order for the payment of money upon any
bank or other depository, knowing that the maker or drawer has not
sufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository for the
payment thereof, and which is not paid in full upon presentation, shall
be liable to the person injured thereby.

**Source.** 1917, 55:1. PL 328:12. RL 384:12. RSA 507:7. 1971, 227:5,
eff. Aug. 17, 1971.

### Section 507:7-a

 **507:7-a Comparative Negligence. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 227:24, eff.
July 1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 507:7-b

 **507:7-b Release or Covenant Not to Sue; Joint Tortfeasors. –**

                                             [Repealed 1986, 227:24, eff. July 1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 507:7-c

 **507:7-c Inadmissible Evidence; Post Verdict Procedure. –**

                                             [Repealed 1986, 227:24, eff. July 1, 1986.
                                             ]

Comparative Fault, Apportionment of Damages, and Contribution Among Tortfeasors
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 507:7-d

 **507:7-d Comparative Fault. –** Contributory fault shall not bar
recovery in an action by any plaintiff or plaintiff's legal
representative, to recover damages in tort for death, personal injury or
property damage, if such fault was not greater than the fault of the
defendant, or the defendants in the aggregate if recovery is allowed
against more than one defendant, but the damages awarded shall be
diminished in proportion to the amount of fault attributed to the
plaintiff by general verdict. The burden of proof as to the existence or
amount of fault attributable to a party shall rest upon the party making
such allegation.

**Source.** 1986, 227:2, eff. July 1, 1986.

### Section 507:7-e

 **507:7-e Apportionment of Damages. –**
                                             
 I. In all actions, the court shall:
                                             
 (a) Instruct the jury to determine, or if there is no jury shall
find, the amount of damages to be awarded to each claimant and against
each defendant in accordance with the proportionate fault of each of the
parties; and
                                             
 (b) Enter judgment against each party liable on the basis of the
rules of joint and several liability, except that if any party shall be
less than 50 percent at fault, then that party's liability shall be
several and not joint and he shall be liable only for the damages
attributable to him.
                                             
 (c) RSA 507:7-e, I(b) notwithstanding, in all cases where parties
are found to have knowingly pursued or taken active part in a common
plan or design resulting in the harm, grant judgment against all such
parties on the basis of the rules of joint and several liability.
                                             
 II. In all actions, the damages attributable to each party shall be
determined by general verdict, unless the parties agree otherwise, or
due to the presence of multiple parties or complex issues the court
finds the use of special questions necessary to the determination. In
any event, the questions submitted to the jury shall be clear, concise,
and as few in number as practicable, and shall not prejudice the rights
of any party to a fair trial.
                                             
 III. For purposes of contribution under RSA 507:7-f and RSA 507:7-g,
the court shall also determine each defendant's proportionate share of
the obligation to each claimant in accordance with the verdict and
subject to any reduction under RSA 507:7-i. Upon motion filed not later
than 60 days after final judgment is entered, the court shall determine
whether all or part of a defendant's proportionate share of the
obligation is uncollectible from that defendant and shall reallocate any
uncollectible amount among the other defendants according to their
proportionate shares. The party whose liability is reallocated is
nonetheless subject to contribution and to any continuing liability to
the claimant on the judgment.
                                             
 IV. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to modify
or limit the duties, responsibilities, or liabilities of any party for
personal injury or property damage arising from pollutant contamination,
containment, cleanup, removal or restoration as established under state
public health or environmental statutes including, but not limited to,
RSA 146-A, RSA 147-A and RSA 147-B.

**Source.** 1986, 227:2. 1989, 278:1-3, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 507:7-f

 **507:7-f Contribution Among Tortfeasors. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph II, a right of contribution
exists between or among 2 or more persons who are jointly and severally
liable upon the same indivisible claim, or otherwise liable for the same
injury, death or harm, whether or not judgment has been recovered
against all or any of them. Except as provided in RSA 507:7-g, I and IV,
the right of contribution may be enforced only by a separate action
brought for that purpose. The basis for contribution is each person's
share of the obligation, including the proportionate share of the
claimant at fault as determined in accordance with the provisions of RSA
507:7-e. No right of contribution exists against a person who is immune
to the claim which would otherwise give rise to a right of contribution.
No right of contribution exists against the claimant at fault.
                                             
 II. Contribution is not available to a person who enters into a
settlement with a claimant unless the settlement extinguishes the
liability of the person from whom contribution is sought, and then only
to the extent that the amount paid in settlement was reasonable.

**Source.** 1986, 227:2, eff. July 1, 1986.

### Section 507:7-g

 **507:7-g Enforcement of Contribution. –**
                                             
 I. If the proportionate fault of the parties to a claim for
contribution has been established as provided in RSA 507:7-e, a party
paying more than its proportionate share of the obligation may recover
judgment for contribution upon motion in the same action, or by separate
action.
                                             
 II. If the proportionate fault of the parties to the claim for
contribution has not been established, contribution may be enforced in a
separate action, whether or not a judgment has been rendered against
either the person seeking contribution or the person from whom
contribution is being sought.
                                             
 III. If a judgment has been rendered, the action for contribution
must be commenced within one year after the judgment becomes final. If
no judgment has been rendered, the person bringing the action for
contribution must have either (a) discharged by payment the common
liability within the period of the statute of limitations applicable to
the claimant's right of action against that person and commenced the
action for contribution within one year after payment, or (b) agreed
while action was pending to discharge the common liability and, within
one year after the agreement, have paid liability and commenced an
action for contribution.
                                             
 IV. All such claims for contribution shall be resolved by
arbitration in accordance with the rules of the American Arbitration
Association, and judgment upon the award rendered by the arbitrator may
be entered in any court having jurisdiction thereof except as follows:
                                             
 (a) A party seeking contribution by separate action may at the
outset elect to have the contribution action heard in a court of
competent jurisdiction by filing an action in court; or
                                             
 (b) A party against whom contribution is sought in a separate
action may, within 60 days of receiving notice by certified mail of a
demand for arbitration, elect to have the contribution action heard by a
court of competent jurisdiction. Such election shall be made by notice
by regular mail to the party seeking contribution or his counsel.
                                             
 (c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if and only if the plaintiff
in the principal action agrees, a defendant seeking contribution may
bring an action in contribution prior to the resolution of the
plaintiff's principal action, and such action shall be consolidated for
all purposes with the principal action.

**Source.** 1986, 227:2, eff. July 1, 1986.

### Section 507:7-h

 **507:7-h Effect of Release or Covenant Not to Sue. –** A release or
covenant not to sue given in good faith to one of 2 or more persons
liable in tort for the same injury discharges that person in accordance
with its terms and from all liability for contribution, but it does not
discharge any other person liable upon the same claim unless its terms
expressly so provide. However, it reduces the claim of the releasing
person against other persons by the amount of the consideration paid for
the release.

**Source.** 1986, 227:2, eff. July 1, 1986.

### Section 507:7-i

 **507:7-i Inadmissible Evidence; Post Verdict Procedure. –**
Evidence of a settlement with, or the giving of a release or covenant
not to sue to, one or more persons liable for the same injury shall not
be introduced in evidence in a trial by jury of an action against
another person to recover damages for the same injury. However, upon
return of a verdict for the plaintiff by the jury in any such trial, the
court shall inquire of counsel the amount of consideration paid for any
such settlement, release, or covenant not to sue, and shall reduce the
plaintiff's verdict by that amount.

**Source.** 1986, 227:2, eff. July 1, 1986.

### Section 507:7-j

 **507:7-j Subrogation Claims. –** Whenever a subrogation claim
pursuant to a contract of insurance is asserted for reimbursement of
medical expenses as to a plaintiff's recovery against a third party, the
court in which the action is pending shall order such division of
expenses and costs of the action, including attorneys' fees, between the
plaintiff and the insurance carrier and the medical provider, as justice
may require.

**Source.** 2010, 364:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 507:8

 **507:8 Contributory Negligence as Defense. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1969,
225:2, eff. Aug. 12, 1969.
                                             ]

Other Actions and Limitations on Liability
------------------------------------------

### Section 507:8-a

 **507:8-a Loss of Consortium. –** In a proper action, either a wife
or husband is entitled to recover damages for loss or impairment of
right of consortium whether caused intentionally or by negligent
interference. Where fault on the part of the claimant or the claimant's
spouse is found to have caused, in whole or in part, the injury to the
spouse on which the claim for loss or impairment of consortium is based,
damages recoverable shall be subject to diminution to the extent and in
the manner provided for in RSA 507:7-d.

**Source.** 1967, 218:1. 1986, 227:7, eff. July 1, 1986.

### Section 507:8-b

 **507:8-b Strict Liability and Implied Warranties Limited. –** It is
expressly declared that no strict liability in tort, nor any implied
warranty, attaches to the procurement, furnishing, donation, processing,
distributing, or use of whole blood, plasma, blood products or blood
derivatives for the purpose of administering, injecting or transfusing
any of them into the human body, whether or not remuneration is paid
therefor, and no person, firm, or corporation participating therein
shall be liable for damages, except for negligence.

**Source.** 1971, 471:1, eff. Aug. 30, 1971.

### Section 507:8-c

 **507:8-c Members of Professional Standards Review Organizations.
–**
                                             
 I. In this section, "professional standards review organization''
means any committee, board or similar entity which reviews and evaluates
the acts of members of a profession and shall only include entities
established for the following professions and by the following bodies:
                                             
 (a) In the case of dentists, by an agency of the federal or state
government, or a political subdivision thereof, by a licensed hospital
or by a society or association affiliated with the American Dental
Association, the board of dental examiners or the Dental Service
Corporation.
                                             
 (b) In the case of nurses, by an agency of the federal or state
government, or a political subdivision thereof, by a licensed hospital
or by a society or association affiliated with the American Nurses
Association or the Medical Care Foundation.
                                             
 (c) In the case of optometrists, by an agency of the federal or
state government, or a political subdivision thereof, by a licensed
hospital or by a society or association affiliated with the American
Optometric Association, the Medical Care Foundation or the Vision
Service Corporation.
                                             
 (d) In the case of pharmacists, by an agency of the federal or
state government, or a political subdivision thereof, by a licensed
hospital or by a society or association affiliated with the Medical Care
Foundation.
                                             
 (e) In the case of physicians, by an agency of the federal or
state government, or any political subdivision thereof, by a licensed
hospital or by a society or association affiliated with the American
Medical Association or the Medical Care Foundation.
                                             
 (f) In the case of chiropractors, by an agency of the federal or
state government, or any political subdivision thereof, or by a society
or association affiliated with the American Chiropractic Association,
the International Chiropractic Association, the New Hampshire
Chiropractic Association or the New Hampshire Straight Chiropractic
Society, Inc.
                                             
 (g) In the case of engineers, by an agency of the federal or
state government, or a political subdivision thereof, or by a society
affiliated with the National Society of Professional Engineers or the
board of engineers.
                                             
 (h) In the case of veterinarians, by an agency of the federal or
state government, or a political subdivision thereof, or by a society or
association affiliated with the New Hampshire Veterinary Medical
Association or the American Veterinary Medical Association or the board
of veterinary medicine.
                                             
 (i) In the case of physical therapists, by an agency of the
federal or state government, or a political subdivision thereof, or by a
society or association affiliated with the New Hampshire chapter of the
American Physical Therapy Association.
                                             
 II. A person serving as a member of a professional standards review
organization shall not be liable in damages for any act taken by such
person in good faith as a member of such organization.

**Source.** 1975, 360:1. 1977, 219:1. 1990, 198:2. 1994, 13:1, eff. June
7, 1994.

### Section 507:8-d

 **507:8-d Liability Limited. –** No person shall incur any civil
liability to another person by taking any action against such person
which would constitute justification pursuant to RSA 627.

**Source.** 1979, 429:1, eff. Aug. 22, 1979.

### Section 507:8-e

 **507:8-e Action Against Parent for Minor's Vandalism. –** A parent,
guardian or other person having legal custody of a minor who fails or
neglects to exercise reasonable supervision and control of the conduct
of such minor shall be liable in a civil action for any acts of
vandalism, as defined in RSA 169-B:45, by such minor to the real or
personal property of another.

**Source.** 1979, 450:2, eff. Aug. 24, 1979.

### Section 507:8-f

 **507:8-f Civil Actions for Theft. –** When the conduct of a person
would constitute willful concealment as provided in RSA 637:3-a, the
person shall be liable to the merchant for damages as provided in RSA
544-C:1. An action for recovery of damages, pursuant to this section,
may be brought in small claims court if the total damages do not exceed
the jurisdictional limit of such court, or in any other appropriate
court. The provisions of this section are in addition to other civil
remedies and shall not limit the rights of merchants or other persons to
elect to pursue other civil remedies.

**Source.** 1986, 222:4. 1992, 106:3. 2009, 209:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 507:8-g

 **507:8-g Discoverability of Risk. –** In product liability actions
brought by or in consequence of harm to a user, it is an affirmative
defense that the risks complained of by the plaintiff were not
discoverable using prevailing research and scientific techniques under
the state of the art and were not discoverable using procedures required
by federal or state regulatory authorities charged with supervision or
licensing of the product in question. Discoverability of risk shall be
measured as of the time the manufacturer parted with possession and
control of, or sold the product in question, whichever occurred last.

**Source.** 1988, 39:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1989.

### Section 507:8-h

 **507:8-h Firefighter's Rule. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Firefighters, emergency medical technicians (E.M.T.'s),
police officers, and other public safety officers shall have no cause of
action for injuries incurred during the performance of duties incidental
to and inherent in the officer's official engagement arising from
negligent conduct of the person or persons requiring the officer's
services or the homeowner or lessee of the premises on which such duties
were performed.
                                             
 (b) This section does not affect such officer's causes of action
for unrelated negligent conduct occurring during the officer's official
engagement, or for other negligent conduct, or for reckless, wanton or
willful acts of misconduct.
                                             
 II. In this section, "public safety officer'' means a person who is
exposed to injury while acting in an official capacity in law
enforcement or protection of life or property.

**Source.** 1993, 261:1. 1997, 246:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998. 2013, 169:1, 2,
eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 507:8-i

 **507:8-i Actions Under RSA 151-E:19. –** The defendant in any
action brought under RSA 151-E:19 shall be liable to the long-term care
facility as provided in RSA 151-E:19. An action under RSA 151-E:19 shall
be tried by bench trial. Nothing contained in RSA 151-E or this section
shall prohibit or otherwise diminish any other causes of action
possessed by any such long-term care facility.

**Source.** 2013, 167:2, eff. July 2, 2013.

Venue
-----

### Section 507:9

 **507:9 Transitory. –** Transitory actions, in which any one of the
parties is an inhabitant of the state, shall be brought in the county or
judicial district thereof where some one of them resides. If no one of
the parties is an inhabitant of the state, the action may be brought in
any county or judicial district.

**Source.** RS 180:1. CS 191:1. GS 201:1. 1877, 42:1. GL 20:19. 220:1.
1885, 20:1. PS 216:1. 1905, 94:1. PL 328:1. RL 384:1. RSA 507:9. 1992,
284:42, eff. July 1, 1992.

### Section 507:10

 **507:10 By or Against Executor. –** An action by or against an
executor or administrator shall be brought in the same county or
judicial district thereof or in one of the counties or judicial district
thereof in which it might have been brought by or against the testator
or intestate at the time of his death; provided, that nothing in this
section shall affect the right of any executor or administrator to
maintain an action in the county or judicial district in which he or she
is appointed.

**Source.** RS 180:1. CS 191:1. GS 201:1. 1877, 42:1. GL 20:19; 220:1.
1885, 20:1. PS 216:1. 1905, 94:1. PL 328:2. RL 384:2. RSA 507:10. 1992,
284:43, eff. July 1, 1992.

### Section 507:11

 **507:11 Change of Venue. –** The superior court may change the
venue in any civil proceeding when justice or convenience requires it.

**Source.** 1907, 135:1. PL 328:3. RL 384:3.

### Section 507:12

 **507:12 Liens Not Affected by. –** No lien obtained by attachment
or otherwise shall be abated or in any way affected thereby.

**Source.** 1907, 135:2. PL 328:4. RL 384:4.

### Section 507:13

 **507:13 County Expenses Where Venue Changed. –** Whenever in any
case the venue is changed by order of court, and the case is tried by a
jury in the county to which it is transferred, such county shall have
judgment and execution against the county from which it is transferred
for the fees due jurors, sheriffs and the stenographer for travel,
attendance and services while engaged in such trial, to be taxed,
allowed and entered by the presiding justice.

**Source.** 1885, 20:1. PS 287:23. PL 328:5. RL 384:5.

### Section 507:14

 **507:14 Minors Contracts; Motor Vehicles. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973,
72:41, eff. June 3, 1973.
                                             ]

Frivolous Lawsuits and Punitive Damages
---------------------------------------

### Section 507:15

 **507:15 Penalties for Frivolous Actions. –** If, upon the hearing
of any contract or tort action, it clearly appears to the court that the
action or any defense is frivolous or intended to harass or intimidate
the prevailing party, then the court, upon motion of the prevailing
party or on its own motion, may order summary judgment against the party
who brought such action or raised such defense, and award the amount of
costs and attorneys' fees incurred by the prevailing party plus 
                                             $1,000
to be paid to the prevailing party, provided such costs and fees are
reasonable. The trial judge shall also report such conduct to the
supreme court committee on professional conduct.

**Source.** 1986, 227:3. 1996, 2:2, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 507:15-a

 **507:15-a Vexatious Litigants. –**
                                             
 I. In this section, "vexatious litigant'' means an individual who
has been found by a judge to have filed 3 or more frivolous lawsuits
which the judge finds, by clear and convincing evidence, were initiated
for the primary purpose of harassment.
                                             
 II. The court may require a vexatious litigant to:
                                             
 (a) Retain an attorney or other person of good character to
represent him or her in all actions; or
                                             
 (b) Post a cash or surety bond sufficient to cover all attorney
fees and anticipated damages.

**Source.** 2013, 181:1, eff. July 2, 2013.

### Section 507:15-b

 **507:15-b Powers of Court. –** RSA 507:15 and RSA 507:15-a shall
not be construed to diminish the inherent power of any court to grant
appropriate relief not specified in those sections.

**Source.** 2013, 181:1, eff. July 2, 2013.

### Section 507:16

 **507:16 Punitive Damages Outlawed. –** No punitive damages shall be
awarded in any action, unless otherwise provided by statute.

**Source.** 1986, 227:3, eff. July 1, 1986.

Actions Against Governmental Units
----------------------------------

### Section 507:17

 **507:17 Actions Against Governmental Units; Definition; Court
Records. –**
                                             
 I. "Governmental unit'' means the state and any political
subdivision within the state including any county, city, town, precinct,
school district, chartered public school, school administrative unit, or
departments or agencies thereof.
                                             
 II. In any action against a governmental unit where the governmental
unit has agreed to a settlement of such action, the complete terms of
the settlement and the decree of the court judgment shall be available
as a matter of public record pursuant to RSA 91-A.
                                             
 III. The court may redact the names of minor children or any other
person the court determines to be entitled to privacy.

**Source.** 2004, 246:1. 2008, 354:1, eff. Sept. 5, 2008.
