---
title: |
    CHAPTER 508-B PROCEDURE FOR ADVANCE PAYMENT ON CLAIMS FOR DAMAGES FOR
    BODILY INJURY, DEATH OR PROPERTY DAMAGE
---

TITLE LII
                                             
ACTIONS, PROCESS, AND SERVICE OF PROCESS
========================================

CHAPTER 508-B
                                             
PROCEDURE FOR ADVANCE PAYMENT ON CLAIMS FOR DAMAGES FOR BODILY INJURY, DEATH OR PROPERTY DAMAGE
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 508-B:1

 **508-B:1 Payment: Not to Imply Liability. –** No advance payment or
partial payment of damages made by any person, or made by his insurer
under liability insurance, as an accommodation to an injured person or
on his behalf to others or to the heirs at law or dependents of a
deceased person, because of a personal injury or death claim or
potential claim against any person or insured shall be construed as an
admission of liability by the person claimed against, or as a
recognition by such person or by his insurer of such liability, with
respect to such injured or deceased person or with respect to any other
claim arising from the same accident or event. Any such payments shall,
however, constitute a credit against and be deducted from any final
settlement made or judgment rendered with respect to such injured or
deceased person which does not expressly provide to the contrary.

**Source.** 1971, 456:6, eff. Aug. 29, 1971.

### Section 508-B:2

 **508-B:2 Duty of Person Making Payment. –** Any person, including
any insurer, who makes an advance or partial payment as described in RSA
508-B:1 shall, at the time of beginning payment, notify the recipient
thereof in writing:
                                             
 I. That the payment is not any assurance that a final settlement of
the claim will be made.
                                             
 II. That the period of time in which the recipient may bring an
action against such person is limited by law, and what the applicable
limitation period is and when it will expire.

**Source.** 1971, 456:6, eff. Aug. 29, 1971.

### Section 508-B:3

 **508-B:3 Statute of Limitations Tolled by Failure to Provide
Notice. –** Failure to provide the written notice required by RSA
508-B:2 shall operate to toll the applicable statute of limitations from
the time of such advance or partial payment until such written notice is
actually given.

**Source.** 1971, 456:6, eff. Aug. 29, 1971.
