---
title: CHAPTER 508 LIMITATION OF ACTIONS
---

TITLE LII
                                             
ACTIONS, PROCESS, AND SERVICE OF PROCESS
========================================

CHAPTER 508
                                             
LIMITATION OF ACTIONS
---------------------

### Section 508:1

 **508:1 Limitation of Chapter. –** The provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to cases in which a different time is limited by
statute.

**Source.** RS 181:11. CS 192:11. GS 202:10. GL 221:10. PS 217:10. PL
329:10. RL 385:10.

### Section 508:2

 **508:2 Real Actions. –**
                                             
 I. No action for the recovery of real estate shall be brought after
20 years from the time the right to recover first accrued to the party
claiming it or to some persons under whom the party claims.
                                             
 II. No action for the recovery of real estate pursuant to rights
based on a possibility of reverter, right of re-entry, or executory
interest shall be brought after 5 years from the time the right to
recover possession or the right of re-entry first accrued to the party
claiming it or to some persons under whom the party claims.

**Source.** RS 181:1. CS 192:1. GS 202:1. GL 221:1. PS 217:1. PL 329:1.
RL 385:1. 2008, 228:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 508:3

 **508:3 Disabilities. –** If the person first entitled to bring an
action for recovery of real estate is an infant or mentally incompetent
at the time the right accrues, the action may be brought within 5 years
after such disability is removed.

**Source.** RS 181:2. CS 192:2. GS 202:2. GL 221:2. PS 217:2. PL 329:2.
RL 385:2.

### Section 508:4

 **508:4 Personal Actions. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided by law, all personal actions, except
actions for slander or libel, may be brought only within 3 years of the
act or omission complained of, except that when the injury and its
causal relationship to the act or omission were not discovered and could
not reasonably have been discovered at the time of the act or omission,
the action shall be commenced within 3 years of the time the plaintiff
discovers, or in the exercise of reasonable diligence should have
discovered, the injury and its causal relationship to the act or
omission complained of.
                                             
 II. Personal actions for slander or libel, unless otherwise provided
by law, may be brought only within 3 years of the time the cause of
action accrued.

**Source.** RS 181:3, 4. CS 192:3, 4. GS 202:3. GL 221:3. PS 217:3. PL
329:3. 1937, 21:1. RL 385:3. RSA 508:4. 1969, 378:1. 1981, 514:1. 1986,
227:12, eff. July 1, 1986.

### Section 508:4-a

 **508:4-a Skiing Injuries. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1965, 241:3, eff. Aug. 31,
1965.
                                             ]

### Section 508:4-b

 **508:4-b Damages From Construction. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in this section, all actions to
recover damages for injury to property, injury to the person, wrongful
death or economic loss arising out of any deficiency in the creation of
an improvement to real property, including without limitation the
design, labor, materials, engineering, planning, surveying,
construction, observation, supervision or inspection of that
improvement, shall be brought within 8 years from the date of
substantial completion of the improvement, and not thereafter.
                                             
 II. The term "substantial completion'' means that construction is
sufficiently complete so that an improvement may be utilized by its
owner or lawful possessor for the purposes intended. In the case of a
phased project with more than one substantial completion date, the
8-year period of limitations for actions involving systems designed to
serve the entire project shall not begin until all phases of the project
are substantially complete.
                                             
 III. If an improvement to real property is expressly warranted or
guaranteed in writing for a period longer than 8 years, the period of
limitation set out in paragraph I shall extend to equal the longer
period of warranty or guarantee.
                                             
 IV. In all actions for negligence in design or construction
described in paragraph I, the standard of care used to determine
negligence shall be the standard of care applicable to the activity
giving rise to the cause of action at the time the activity was
performed, rather than a standard applicable to a later time.
                                             
 V. (a) The limitation set out in paragraph I shall not apply to
actions involving fraudulent misrepresentations, or to actions involving
the fraudulent concealment of material facts upon which a claim might be
based. Such actions shall be brought within 8 years after the date on
which all relevant facts are, or with due care ought to be, discovered
by the person bringing the action.
                                             
 (b) The 8-year limitation period in paragraph I shall not apply
to actions arising out of any deficiency in the design, labor,
materials, planning, engineering, surveying, observation, supervision,
inspection or construction of improvements which are for nuclear power
generation, nuclear waste storage, or the long-term storage of hazardous
materials.
                                             
 VI. Nothing in this section shall affect the liabilities of a person
having actual possession or control of an improvement to real property
as owner or lawful possessor thereof, and nothing contained in this
section shall alter or amend the time within which an action in tort may
be brought for damages arising out of negligence in the repair,
maintenance or upkeep of an improvement to real property.

**Source.** 1965, 118:1. 1990, 164:2, eff. June 26, 1990.

### Section 508:4-c

 **508:4-c Elimination of Ad Damnum Clause. –** In any personal
action, the declaration or other affirmative pleading shall not specify
or allege the amount of damages claimed, but shall, instead, state that
the damages claimed are within any minimum or maximum jurisdictional
limits of the court to which the pleading is addressed.

**Source.** 1985, 354:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 508:4-d

 **508:4-d Damages Recoverable for Non-Economic Loss. –**
                                             
 I. In any action for personal injury, the damages awarded may
include compensation for non-economic loss, including pain and suffering
and such other elements of damage which are recognized by law and which
are not objectively verifiable monetary losses. However, damages for
non-economic loss shall in no case exceed 
                                             $875,000.
                                             
 II. In trials to a jury, the jury shall not be informed of the
maximum allowable amount prescribed in paragraph I of this section. If
the jury awards total damages in excess of the maximum allowable amount,
the court shall inquire of the jury as to the portion of the damages
attributed to non-economic loss. If that portion of the damages exceeds
the maximum allowable amount, the court shall reduce damages awarded for
non-economic loss to the maximum allowable amount.

**Source.** 1986, 227:13, eff. July 1, 1986.

### Section 508:4-e

 **508:4-e Attorneys' Fees for Services. –**
                                             
 I. Contingent fee agreements between attorney and client shall be
governed by Rules of Professional Conduct, Rule 1.5 as it may be amended
by the supreme court from time to time and by any other rules regarding
fees which are adopted or amended by the court.
                                             
 II. No attorney shall enter into such a contingent fee arrangement
with his or her client without first advising the client of his or her
right and affording the client an opportunity to retain the attorney
under an arrangement whereby the attorney would be compensated on the
basis of the reasonable value of his or her services.
                                             
 III. All fees and costs for actions, resulting in settlement or
judgment of 
                                             $200,000 or more, shall be subject to approval by the
court.

**Source.** 1986, 227:13. 2002, 153:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 508:4-f

 **508:4-f Bidders on Construction Contracts. –** Any person, firm,
association or corporation which suffers damages as a result of a
competitive bid for a project involving the construction, repair,
remodeling, alteration, conversion, modernization, improvement,
rehabilitation, replacement, or renovation of a building or structure
not being awarded due to another person, firm, association or
corporation knowingly violating RSA 281-A:5 of the workers' compensation
law may bring an action for damages or other relief in the superior
court against said violator.

**Source.** 1991, 376:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 508:4-g

 **508:4-g Actions Based on Sexual Assault and Related Offenses. –**
A person, alleging to have been subjected to any offense under RSA 632-A
or an offense under RSA 639:2, who was under 18 years of age when the
alleged offense occurred, may commence a personal action based on the
incident within the later of:
                                             
 I. Twelve years of the person's eighteenth birthday; or
                                             
 II. Three years of the time the plaintiff discovers, or in the
exercise of reasonable diligence should have discovered, the injury and
its causal relationship to the act or omission complained of.

**Source.** 2005, 283:1. 2008, 193:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 508:5

 **508:5 Specialties. –** Actions of debt upon judgments,
recognizances, and contracts under seal may be brought within 20 years
after the cause of action accrued, and not afterward.

**Source.** RS 181:5. CS 192:5. GS 202:4. GL 221:4. PS 217:4. PL 329:4.
RL 385:4.

### Section 508:6

 **508:6 Mortgage Notes. –** Actions upon notes secured by a mortgage
of real estate may be brought so long as the plaintiff is entitled to
bring an action upon the mortgage.

**Source.** RS 181:6. CS 192:6. GS 202:5. GL 221:5. PS 217:5. PL 329:5.
RL 385:5.

### Section 508:7

 **508:7 Writs of Error. –** Writs of error may be sued out within 3
years after judgment and not afterward, unless allowed by the court for
sufficient cause, upon petition and notice.

**Source.** RS 181:7. CS 192:7. GS 202:6. GL 221:6. PS 217:6. PL 329:6.
RL 385:6.

### Section 508:8

 **508:8 Disabilities. –** An infant or mentally incompetent person
may bring a personal action within 2 years after such disability is
removed.

**Source.** RS 181:8. CS 192:8. GS 202:7. GL 221:7. PS 217:7. PL 329:7.
RL 385:7.

### Section 508:9

 **508:9 Defendant's Absence. –** If the defendant in a personal
action was absent from and residing out of the state at the time the
cause of action accrued, or afterward, the time of such absence shall be
excluded in computing the time limited for bringing the action.

**Source.** RS 181:9. CS 192:9. GS 202:8. GL 221:8. PS 217:8. PL 329:8.
RL 385:8.

### Section 508:10

 **508:10 Second Suit. –** If judgment is rendered against the
plaintiff in an action brought within the time limited therefor, or upon
a writ of error thereon, and the right of action is not barred by the
judgment, a new action may be brought thereon in one year after the
judgment.

**Source.** RS 181:10. CS 192:10. GS 202:9. GL 221:9. PS 217:9. PL
329:9. RL 385:9.

### Section 508:11

 **508:11 Breach of Contract to Marry. –** Breach of contract to
marry shall not constitute an injury or wrong recognized by law, and no
action, suit, or proceeding shall be maintained therefor.

**Source.** 1941, 150:1, 2. RL 385:11.

### Section 508:12

 **508:12 Aid at Scene of Emergency or to Victim of Crime. –**
                                             
 I. If any person in good faith renders emergency care at the place
of the happening of an emergency or to a victim of a crime or delinquent
act or while in transit in an ambulance or rescue vehicle, to a person
who is in urgent need of care as a result of the emergency or crime or a
delinquent act, and if the acts of care are made in good faith and
without willful or wanton negligence, the person who renders the care is
not liable in civil damages for his acts or omissions in rendering the
care, as long as he receives no direct compensation for the care from or
on behalf of the person cared for. Any person rendering emergency care
shall have the duty to place the injured person under the care of a
physician, nurse, or other person qualified to care for such person as
soon as possible and to obey the instructions of such qualified person.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this section shall be used to construe that the
perpetrator of a crime or a delinquent act or his accomplice shall be
rendered innocent of liability.
                                             
 III. A law enforcement officer acting in the line of duty who in
good faith and without negligence renders emergency care or transport
pursuant to paragraph I is exempt from civil liability under the
provisions of paragraph I.

**Source.** 1967, 128:1. 1969, 130:1. 1971, 222:1. 1977, 148:1. 1985,
294:1, eff. Aug. 13, 1985.

### Section 508:12-a

 **508:12-a Limitation of Liability. –**
                                             
 I. No licensed physician, registered nurse or hospital shall be
liable in a suit for damages as a result of any act or omission related
to advice, consultation or orders given in good faith to emergency
medical care providers licensed under RSA 153-A, by radio, telephone or
other remote means of communication under emergency conditions and prior
to arrival of the patient at the hospital, clinic, office, or other
health facility from which the emergency communication to the emergency
medical care provider is made, unless the act or omission was a result
of gross negligence or willful misconduct.
                                             
 II. No emergency medical care provider licensed under RSA 153-A
shall be liable in a suit for damages as a result of any act or omission
made within the level of his training and certification and in good
faith based upon advice, consultation, or orders by remote communication
as described in paragraph I unless said act or omission was a result of
gross negligence or willful misconduct.
                                             
 III. (a) No person or corporation shall be liable in any suit for
civil damages who, in good faith and without willful or wanton
negligence receives, develops, collects, provides, or processes
information for the enhanced 911 database or the statewide emergency
notification system (ENS) database, relays or transfers enhanced 911
services, transmits ENS messages and notifications to the public, or
provides emergency telephone and radio communications for ambulance,
police and fire departments.
                                             
 (b) No person or corporation shall be liable in any suit for
civil damages who, in good faith and without willful or wanton
negligence receives, develops, collects, provides, or processes
information within any entity storing 911 records used in the provision
of enhanced 911 services or for emergency notification system purposes.

**Source.** 1977, 106:3. 1979, 258:1. 1985, 97:3. 1992, 48:11; 165:6.
1999, 345:10, eff. July 1, 1999. 2010, 271:3, eff. Aug. 6, 2010.

### Section 508:12-b

 **508:12-b Liability Limited; Fire Department, Emergency Service,
and Rescue Squad Members. –**
                                             
 I. No person who is a volunteer, "part paid'' or "call'' member of a
nonprofit fire department, emergency service or rescue squad operating
in any political subdivision shall be held personally liable in any
action to recover for personal injury or property damage arising out of
any act performed or occurring in the furtherance of his official
duties. Nothing in this section shall affect the liability of the
political subdivision, department, service or squad served by such
person. Nothing in this section shall affect the liability of such
person for damages arising out of willful misconduct, gross negligence,
or operation under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
                                             
 II. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Call'' member means any member other than a full-time paid
employee who receives payment for each emergency response.
                                             
 (b) "Official duties'' mean emergency duties only.
                                             
 (c) "Part paid'' member means any member other than a full-time
paid employee who receives an annual retainer or stipend of less than

                                             $5,000 for his services as a member.

**Source.** 1990, 14:1, eff. May 12, 1990.

### Section 508:12-c

 **508:12-c Liability Limited for Certain Out-of-State Emergency
Services. –** When a police officer, firefighter, or other emergency
services worker from an out-of-state entity responds to an emergency in
New Hampshire, such out-of-state entity and its employees and volunteers
shall have all the same liability limitations to which a New Hampshire
entity, police officer, firefighter, or emergency services worker would
be entitled under New Hampshire laws.

**Source.** 2015, 170:1, eff. June 26, 2015.

### Section 508:12-d

 **508:12-d Liability Limited; Licensed Engineers and Architects.
–**
                                             
 I. Any engineer or engineering firm, architect, or architectural
firm licensed pursuant to RSA 310-A who, in good faith, voluntarily and
without charge or compensation, acting under the direction of the
director of the division of homeland security and emergency management,
the state fire marshal, or a town or city emergency management director
who is managing a natural or human caused disaster or other
life-threatening emergency, provides professional advice or assistance
in connection with such disaster or emergency, shall not be liable for
any civil damages alleged to have been caused by the acts or omissions
of such licensed professional or firm in providing the requested
professional advice or assistance, subject to the following conditions:
                                             
 (a) The service rendered applies to the practice of engineering
or architecture and concerns any building, structure, or system, whether
publicly or privately owned, that is involved in or affected by the
disaster or emergency;
                                             
 (b) The service rendered relates to the structural integrity of
the entire building or system or any portion thereof, or to a
nonstructural element of the structure or system, affecting public
safety; and
                                             
 (c) The service is rendered during the time in which the
emergency exists.
                                             
 II. The immunity granted by this section shall not apply to acts or
omissions constituting gross negligence, or wanton or willful
misconduct.

**Source.** 2015, 191:1, eff. July 6, 2015.

### Section 508:13

 **508:13 Professional Malpractice; Evidence. –** In determining
whether the person against whom a malpractice claim has been made has
met the applicable standard of care, the jury or judge shall not be
bound or limited by the standard of care accepted or established with
respect to any particular geographical area or locality, but shall
consider only whether the person against whom the claim is made has
acted with due care having in mind the standards and recommended
practices and procedures of his profession, and the training, experience
and professed degree of skill of the average practitioner of such
profession, and all other relevant circumstances.

**Source.** 1971, 348:1.

### Section 508:14

 **508:14 Landowner Liability Limited. –**
                                             
 I. An owner, occupant, or lessee of land, including the state or any
political subdivision, who without charge permits any person to use land
for recreational purposes or as a spectator of recreational activity,
shall not be liable for personal injury or property damage in the
absence of intentionally caused injury or damage.
                                             
 II. Any individual, corporation, or other nonprofit legal entity, or
any individual who performs services for a nonprofit entity, that
constructs, maintains, or improves trails for public recreational use
shall not be liable for personal injury or property damage in the
absence of gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct.
                                             
 III. An owner of land who permits another person to gather the
produce of the land under pick-your-own or cut-your-own arrangements,
provided said person is not an employee of the landowner and
notwithstanding that the person picking or cutting the produce may make
remuneration for the produce to the landowner, shall not be liable for
personal injury or property damage to any person in the absence of
willful, wanton, or reckless conduct by such owner.

**Source.** 1975, 231:1. 1979, 439:1. 1981, 293:2. 1985, 193:2. 2006,
5:1, eff. Feb. 3, 2006.

### Section 508:15

 **508:15 Donors and Distributors of Food. –**
                                             
 I. As used in this section:
                                             
 (a) "Donor'' means any person, corporation, unincorporated
business entity, non-profit corporation or entity which donates food or
harvests food for distribution. "Donor'' includes any non-profit "food
bank'' which shall collect, store and distribute food without charge or
at a charge sufficient only to cover the cost of handling and
administering such food and the distribution thereof. "Donor'' includes
the employees, agents, officers or volunteers working for or with any
donor in connection with the giving or distribution of food.
                                             
 (b) "Food'' means any raw, cooked or processed edible substance,
ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in
whole or in part for human consumption or for feeding of animals.
"Food'' also means food items open-dated for which the date has passed.
                                             
 II. The good faith donor of any food to a needy individual or
individuals or to a bona fide charitable or non-profit organization for
distribution or serving by such organization without charge or at a
charge sufficient only to cover the cost of handling and administering
such food and the distribution thereof, or to a person for uses such as
animal feed or composting, shall not be subject to criminal penalty or
civil damages arising from the condition of the food, unless an injury
is caused by the gross negligence, recklessness, or intentional
misconduct of the donor; provided, however, that at the time of donation
such food is not knowingly misbranded and is not adulterated and has not
been manufactured, processed, prepared, handled or stored in violation
of applicable rules of the department of health and human services, or
unless an injury is caused by the gross negligence, recklessness or
intentional conduct of the donor.
                                             
 III. A bona fide charitable or non-profit organization which in good
faith receives food, apparently fit for human consumption, and
distributes it without charge or at a charge sufficient only to cover
the cost of handling and administering such food and the distribution
thereof shall be considered a donor under this section and shall not be
subject to criminal penalty or civil damages resulting from the
condition of the food; provided, however, that at the time of
distribution or serving such food is not knowingly misbranded or
adulterated or has not been manufactured, processed, prepared, handled
or stored in violation of applicable rules of the department of health
and human services or, unless an injury results from the gross
negligence, recklessness or intentional conduct of the organization.
                                             
 IV. This section is applicable but not limited to the good faith
donation of food not readily marketable due to appearance, freshness,
grade, surplus, or other considerations, but does not restrict the
authority of any appropriate agency to regulate or ban the use of such
food for human consumption.

**Source.** 1985, 30:1. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995. 2016, 38:1, 2,
eff. July 2, 2016.

### Section 508:16

 **508:16 Directors and Officers of Charitable Organizations or
Societies; Liability Limited. –**
                                             
 I. For the purposes of this section:
                                             
 (a) "Director'' means a person who serves without compensation on
the board of trustees or board of directors of a charitable organization
or society organized or incorporated in this state or having a principal
place of business in this state.
                                             
 (b) "Officer'' means a person who serves without compensation as
an officer of such an organization or society.
                                             
 (c) "Compensation'' does not include reimbursement for expenses
actually incurred.
                                             
 (d) "Charitable organization or society'' means an organization
or society which is "charitable'' as defined in RSA 72:23-*l.*
                                             
 II. Directors and officers shall not be liable for damages for
bodily injury, personal injury, or property damage if the claim for such
damages arises from an act committed in good faith and without willful
or wanton negligence in the course of an activity carried on to
accomplish the charitable purposes of the organization or society.

**Source.** 1986, 227:5. 1995, 290:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 508:17

 **508:17 Volunteers; Nonprofit Organizations; Liability Limited.
–**
                                             
 I. Any person who is a volunteer of a nonprofit organization or
government entity shall be immune from civil liability in any action
brought on the basis of any act or omission resulting in damage or
injury to any person if:
                                             
 (a) The nonprofit organization or government entity has a record
indicating that the person claiming to be a volunteer is a volunteer for
such organization or entity; and
                                             
 (b) The volunteer was acting in good faith and within the scope
of his official functions and duties with the organization; and
                                             
 (c) The damage or injury was not caused by willful, wanton, or
grossly negligent misconduct by the volunteer.
                                             
 I-a. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. Liability of a nonprofit organization for damage or injury
sustained by any one person in actions brought against the organization
alleging negligence on the part of an organization volunteer is limited
to 
                                             $250,000. Such limit applies in the aggregate to any and all actions
to recover for damage or injury sustained by one person in a single
incident or occurrence. Liability of a nonprofit organization for damage
or injury sustained by any number of persons in a single incident or
occurrence involving negligence on the part of an organization volunteer
is limited to 
                                             $1,000,000.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any civil
action brought by any nonprofit organization against any volunteer of
such organization.
                                             
 IV. Volunteer activity related to transportation or to care of the
organization's premises shall be excepted from the provisions of
paragraph I of this section.
                                             
 V. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Damage or injury'' includes physical, nonphysical, economic
and noneconomic damage and property damage.
                                             
 (b) "Nonprofit organization'' shall include, but not be limited
to, a not for profit organization, corporation, community chest, fund or
foundation organized and operated exclusively for religious, cultural,
charitable, scientific, recreational, literary, agricultural, or
educational purposes, or to foster amateur competition in a sport
formally recognized by the National Collegiate Athletic Association, and
an organization exempt from taxation under section 501(c) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 organized or incorporated in this state or
having a principal place of business in this state.
                                             
 (c) "Volunteer'' means an individual performing services for a
nonprofit organization or government entity who does not receive
compensation, other than reimbursement for expenses actually incurred
for such services. In the case of volunteer athletic coaches or sports
officials, such volunteers shall possess proper certification or
validation of competence in the rules, procedures, practices, and
programs of the athletic activity.

**Source.** 1988, 280:1. 1990, 116:1-3. 1998, 255:1, 2, eff. Jan. 1,
1999.

### Section 508:17-a

 **508:17-a Agents Assisting Certain State Departments; Liability
Limited. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who acts as an agent to the department of health and
human services or the department of safety by providing assistance in
response to a specific public health or public safety incident shall be
protected from claims and civil actions arising from acts committed
within the scope of his or her official duty as an agent to such
departments to the same extent as state officers, trustees, officials,
employees, and members of the general court under RSA 99-D, provided
that:
                                             
 (a) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services or the commissioner of the department of safety has declared in
writing to the governor that a public health or public safety incident
exists;
                                             
 (b) The department of health and human services or the department
of safety has designated the person to act as its agent to assist in
responding to the public health or public safety incident;
                                             
 (c) The agent was acting in good faith and within the scope of
his or her official functions and duties as an agent to the department
of health and human services or the department of safety; and
                                             
 (d) The damage or injury was not caused by willful, wanton, or
grossly negligent misconduct by the agent.
                                             
 II. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Agent'' means any person who acts as an agent to the
department of health and human services or the department of safety by
providing assistance in response to a specific public health or public
safety incident and the person does not receive compensation from either
department, other than possible reimbursement for expenses actually
incurred for such services, but who may be receiving compensation from
his or her employer or from any other source.
                                             
 (b) "Damage or injury'' includes physical, nonphysical, economic
and noneconomic damage, and property damage.
                                             
 (c) "Public health or public safety incident'' means a specific
incident that the commissioner of the department of health and human
services or the commissioner of the department of safety has declared in
writing poses a threat to the health and safety of the public and
demands a response that will require the assistance of agents from
outside the state system, but which does not rise to the level that
would necessitate the declaration of a state of emergency by the
governor under RSA 4:45.
                                             
 II-a. For purposes of immunity and exemption, any declared public
health or public safety incident shall be considered an emergency
management function under RSA 21-P:41, I-II.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be
considered an agent of the department of health and human services or
the department of safety for the purposes of this section unless the
commissioner of one of those 2 departments has declared in writing to
the governor that a public health or public safety incident exists and
the appropriate department acknowledges in writing the person's status
as an agent. Such written acknowledgment shall identify the person,
indicate the department of the state for which the person will be acting
as an agent, indicate the duration for which the person will be acting
as an agent, indicate the functions that the person will be performing
for the appropriate department, and specifically indicate that the
provisions of this section apply to the person's status as an agent to
the appropriate department.
                                             
 IV. Any licensed health care provider who acts as an agent to the
department of health and human services by providing health care or
services in response to a public health incident shall work under the
oversight of a department physician.
                                             
 V. No disciplinary action shall be taken by a licensing board
against a licensed health care provider who acted as an agent or a
volunteer to the department of health and human services or the
department of safety. This paragraph shall apply only to a health care
provider who was designated by either the department of health and human
services or the department of safety to act as an agent in accordance
with paragraph III and who acted in good faith within the scope of his
or her official functions and duties as an agent, and who did not engage
in willful, wanton, or grossly negligent conduct in the course of
carrying out his or her official functions and duties.

**Source.** 2005, 191:5. 2008, 336:5, eff. July 7, 2008.

### Section 508:18

 **508:18 Liability Limited; Health Care Facilities and Personnel.
–**
                                             
 I. No health care facility licensed under RSA 151, licensed
physician, registered nurse, certified physician's assistant or
qualified medical technician or medical technologist ordered by a law
enforcement officer to perform a test, medical examination or procedure
on a person in the custody of such officer, shall be held liable for any
damage arising out of the performance of such test, examination, or
procedure, if the test, examination, or procedure is performed with
ordinary care. Nothing in this section shall be construed to legalize an
otherwise illegal test, examination or procedure insofar as the law
enforcement agency and any employee thereof is concerned.
                                             
 II. For purposes of this section, "health care facility'' means
hospitals, ambulatory surgical facilities, specialty hospitals, and
licensed nursing homes including all services and property owned by
such. Health care facilities shall include facilities which are publicly
or privately owned or for-profit or not-for-profit, and which are
licensed or required to be licensed in whole or in part by the state.

**Source.** 1989, 193:1. 1997, 158:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1998. 2012, 282:16,
eff. June 30, 2015.

### Section 508:18-a

 **508:18-a Law Enforcement Agencies; Limitation on Liability for
Injuries Caused by Dogs Used in Law Enforcement Work. –**
                                             
No law enforcement officer or agency shall be held liable for damages
resulting from injuries caused by a dog used in law enforcement work
provided that:
                                             
 I. The officer and the dog have completed training together and
received certification from a nationally recognized organization
required for police work or other law enforcement work or from the New
England State Police Administrators Compact;
                                             
 II. The injury arises out of law enforcement conduct within the
provisions of RSA 627:5, I and II; and
                                             
 III. The law enforcement agency using a dog in enforcement work has
adopted a written policy on the necessary and appropriate use of a dog
for the work enumerated in paragraphs I and II. Said written policy
shall be available for public inspection at any time.

**Source.** 2001, 284:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2002. 2011, 36:1, eff. May 9,
2011.

### Section 508:19

 **508:19 Liability; Equine Activities. –**
                                             
 I. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Engages in an equine activity'' means rides or drives an
equine; or assists in medical treatment of an equine; or is a passenger
upon an equine; or is a passenger in a vehicle drawn by an equine; or
trains, whether mounted or unmounted, an equine; or who is involved in
event management. The term "engages in an equine activity'' does not
include being a spectator at an equine activity, except in cases where
the spectator is in an unauthorized area and in immediate proximity to
the equine activity.
                                             
 (b) "Equine'' means a horse, pony, mule, donkey, or hinny.
                                             
 (c) "Equine activity'' means:
                                             
 (1) Equine shows, fairs, competitions, performances, or
parades that involve any or all breeds of equines and any of the equine
disciplines, including, but not limited to, dressage, hunter and jumper
horse shows, grand prix jumping, 3-day events, combined training,
rodeos, driving, pulling, cutting, polo, steeple chasing, hunting,
english and western performance riding, endurance riding, games, and
eventing.
                                             
 (2) Equine training or teaching activities.
                                             
 (3) Boarding equines.
                                             
 (4) Riding, inspecting, or evaluating an equine belonging to
another, whether or not the owner has received some monetary
consideration or other thing of value for the use of the equine or is
permitting a prospective purchaser of the equine to ride, inspect, or
evaluate the equine.
                                             
 (5) Rides, trips, hunts, field trials, or other equine
activities of any type, however informal or impromptu, that are
sponsored by an equine activity sponsor.
                                             
 (6) Placing or replacing shoes on an equine.
                                             
 (d) "Equine activity sponsor'' means an individual, group, club,
partnership, or corporation, whether or not the sponsor is operating for
profit or not for profit, which sponsors, organizes, or provides for,
equine activities, including, but not limited to, pony clubs, 4-H clubs,
field trial clubs, hunt clubs, riding clubs, school and college
sponsored classes, programs and activities, therapeutic riding programs,
stables, clubhouses, pony ride strings, fairs, and arenas at which the
activity is held.
                                             
 (e) "Equine professional'' means a person engaged for
compensation:
                                             
 (1) In instructing a participant or renting to a participant
an equine for the purpose of riding, driving, or being a passenger upon
the equine.
                                             
 (2) In renting equipment or tack to a participant.
                                             
 (3) In providing daily care of horses boarded at an equine
facility.
                                             
 (4) In training an equine.
                                             
 (f) "Inherent risks of equine activities'' means those dangers
and conditions which are an integral part of equine activities,
including, but not limited to:
                                             
 (1) The propensity of an equine to behave in ways that may
result in injury, harm, or death to persons on or around them.
                                             
 (2) The unpredictability of an equine's reaction to such
things as sounds, sudden movements, and unfamiliar objects, persons, or
other animals.
                                             
 (3) Certain hazards such as surface and subsurface conditions
not obvious to the equine participant or not known and reasonably not
known by the equine professional or sponsor.
                                             
 (4) Collisions with other equines or objects that can be
reasonably foreseen as a result of normal equine activities.
                                             
 (5) The potential of a participant to act in a negligent
manner that may contribute to injury of the participant or others, such
as failing to maintain control over the animal or not acting within the
participant's ability; except where said negligence can be reasonably
foreseen and the equine professional or sponsor has failed to take any
corrective measures.
                                             
 (g) "Participant'' means any person, whether amateur or
professional, who engages in an equine activity, whether or not a fee is
paid to participate in the equine activity.
                                             
 II. Except as provided in paragraph III of this section, an equine
activity sponsor, an equine professional, or any other person engaged in
an equine activity, shall not be liable for an injury or the death of a
participant resulting from the inherent risks of equine activities and,
except as provided in paragraph III of this section, no participant's
representative shall make any claim against, maintain an action against,
or recover from any other person for injury, loss, damage, or death of a
participant resulting from any of the inherent risks of equine
activities. Each participant in an equine activity expressly assumes the
risk of and legal responsibility for any injury, loss or damage to
person or property which results from participation in an equine
activity. Each participant shall have the sole responsibility for
knowing the range of his or her ability to manage, care for, and control
a particular equine or perform a particular equine activity, and it
shall be the duty of each participant to act within the limits of the
participant's own ability, to maintain reasonable control of the
particular equine at all times while participating in an equine
activity, to heed all posted warnings, and to refrain from acting in a
manner which may cause or contribute to the injury of any person.
                                             
 III. Nothing in paragraph II of this section shall prevent or limit
the liability of an equine activity sponsor, an equine professional, or
any other person engaged in an equine activity, if the equine activity
sponsor, equine professional, or person:
                                             
 (a) Provided the equipment or tack, and knew or should have known
that the equipment or tack was faulty, and such equipment or tack was
faulty to the extent that it did cause the injury.
                                             
 (b) Provided the equine and failed to make reasonable and prudent
efforts to determine the ability of the participant to engage safely in
the equine activity.
                                             
 (c) Owns, leases, rents, or otherwise is in lawful possession and
control of the land or facilities upon which the participant sustained
injuries because of a dangerous latent condition which was known to the
equine activity sponsor, equine professional, or person and for which
warning signs have not been conspicuously posted.
                                             
 (d) Commits an act or omission that constitutes willful or wanton
disregard for the safety of the participant, and that act or omission
caused the injury.
                                             
 (e) Intentionally injures the participant.

**Source.** 1998, 24:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 508:20

 **508:20 Wrongful Death Action on Behalf of Nonsupported Child;
Recovery Limited. –** No parent shall receive any portion of an award of
damages or an out-of-court settlement resulting from any claim or action
for wrongful death on behalf of such parent's dependent child, until
such parent has paid in full any child support arrearages owed, if such
parent:
                                             
 I. Was convicted of nonsupport of such child under RSA 639:4;
                                             
 II. Failed to comply with a legal order for support of such child
under RSA 161-B; or
                                             
 III. Was otherwise ordered to pay support for such child by a court
or administrative agency in this state or another state, and failed to
comply with such order.

**Source.** 1998, 153:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 508:21

 **508:21 Liability Limited; Manufacturers, Distributors, Dealers, or
Importers of Firearms or Ammunition. –**
                                             
 I. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Manufacturer'' means:
                                             
 (1) A person who is engaged in a business to import, make,
produce, create, or assemble a qualified product, and who designs or
formulates, or has engaged another person to design or formulate, a
qualified product.
                                             
 (2) A seller of a qualified product, but only with respect to
an aspect of the product that is made or affected when the seller makes,
produces, creates, or assembles and designs or formulates an aspect of
the product made by another person.
                                             
 (3) Any seller of a qualified product who represents to a user
of a qualified product that the seller is a manufacturer of the
qualified product.
                                             
 (b) "Person'' means any individual, corporation, company,
association, firm, partnership, society, joint stock company, or any
other entity, including any governmental entity.
                                             
 (c) "Qualified product'' means a firearm or ammunition or a
component part of a firearm or ammunition, manufactured in compliance
with federal and state law, that has been shipped or transported in
intrastate, interstate, or foreign commerce.
                                             
 (d) "Qualified civil liability action'' means a civil action, in
law or in equity, brought by any person against a manufacturer or seller
or a trade association of a qualified product, for damages resulting
from the criminal or unlawful use of a qualified product by the person
or a third party, but shall not include an action brought against a
manufacturer, seller, or trade organization convicted of a felony under
state or federal law, by a party directly harmed by the felonious
conduct.
                                             
 (e) "Seller'' means, with respect to a qualified product, a
person who:
                                             
 (1) In the course of a business conducted for that purpose
sells, distributes, rents, leases, prepares, blends, packages, labels,
or otherwise is involved in placing a qualified product in the stream of
commerce.
                                             
 (2) Installs, repairs, refurbishes, reconditions, or maintains
an aspect of a qualified product that is alleged to have resulted in
damages.
                                             
 (f) "Trade association'' means a federal, state, or local trade
association which has one or more members which are manufacturers or
sellers of a qualified product.
                                             
 II. A qualified civil liability action shall not be brought in any
state court.

**Source.** 2003, 267:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 508:22

 **508:22 Liability Limited for Winter Maintenance. –**
                                             
 I. No commercial applicator as defined in RSA 489-C:1, II and
certified under RSA 489-C:2, or owner, occupant, or lessee of land whose
premises is maintained by a commercial applicator certified under RSA
489-C:2, shall be liable for damages arising from insufficiencies or
hazards on any premises owned, occupied, maintained, or operated by
them, even with actual notice thereof, when such hazards are caused
solely by snow or ice, and the commercial applicator's, owner's,
occupant's, or lessee's failure or delay in removing or mitigating such
hazards is the result of its implementation, absent gross negligence or
reckless disregard of the hazard, of best management practices for
winter road, parking lot, and sidewalk maintenance adopted and published
by the department of transportation and the department of environmental
services. All commercial applicators, owners, occupants, or lessees who
adopt such best management practices shall be presumed to be acting
pursuant to the best management practices in the absence of proof to the
contrary.
                                             
 II. In order to receive the liability protection provided in
paragraph I, a commercial applicator as defined in RSA 489-C:1, II, or
an owner, occupant, or lessee of land shall keep a written record
describing its winter road, parking lot and property maintenance
practices. The written record shall include the type and rate of
application of de-icing materials used, the dates of treatment, and the
weather conditions for each event requiring de-icing. Such records shall
be kept for a period of 3 years.

**Source.** 2013, 144:123, eff. Sept. 26, 2013.
