---
title: 'CHAPTER 216-H AHERN STATE PARK'
---

TITLE XIX
                                             
PUBLIC RECREATION
=================

CHAPTER 216-H
                                             
AHERN STATE PARK
----------------

### Section 216-H:1

 **216-H:1 Declaration of Policy. –** Under the impact of a steadily
increasing population and the effects of the continuing development of
land for residential and other purposes, few large tracts of forest
land, particularly with a lake frontage, remain available in New
Hampshire. Laconia developmental services, located in the city of
Laconia, with a shoreline of approximately 3,500 feet on Lake
Winnisquam, is one such tract which is owned by the state and is deemed
to be a natural resource that should be preserved for the enjoyment and
benefit of the citizens of this state and the many tourists from other
states and countries who visit here. The general court therefore deems
it to be a major asset and a significant benefit to the general public
to retain this wonderful shoreline on the lake and approximately 200
acres, more or less, of the contiguous property immediately back from
the shoreline of the lake, to be perpetually preserved as a state park
for the generations to come.

**Source.** 1983, 299:1. 1988, 107:5, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 216-H:2

 **216-H:2 Authority. –** The commissioner of the department of
resources and economic development, with the consent of the governor and
council, is hereby authorized, if and when Laconia developmental
services is relocated or this overall property becomes available for
disposal, to delineate and develop the 200 acres, more or less, located
nearest to and including the approximately 3,500 foot shoreline on Lake
Winnisquam, as a state park.

**Source.** 1983, 299:1. 1988, 107:5, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 216-H:3

 **216-H:3 Ahern State Park. –** Pursuant to RSA 4:43, the general
court hereby designates and names this tract of land, upon its
availability and development as a park under RSA 216-H:2, Ahern state
park.

**Source.** 1983, 299:1. 1998, 76:2, eff. July 1, 1998.

### Section 216-H:4

 **216-H:4 State Ownership; Permanent Retention. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 4:29 or any other law to
the contrary, if Laconia developmental services is relocated, or this
overall property becomes available for disposal and a state park is not
developed pursuant to RSA 216-H:2, the 200 acres more or less and the
approximately 3,500 feet of shoreline on Lake Winnisquam shall be
retained and preserved on a permanent basis by the state in its natural
botanical and geological state.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit Laconia developmental
services from utilizing the 200 acres and the approximately 3,500 feet
of shoreline for purposes of the school's rehabilitation program;
provided, however, the 200 acres and shoreline shall not be developed or
used by any other agency of the state or commercial interest for any
other purpose.

**Source.** 1987, 102:1. 1988, 107:5, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 216-H:5

 **216-H:5 Ahern State Park Advisory Committee. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010,
368:1(24), eff. Dec. 31, 2010.
                                             ]
