---
title: 'CHAPTER 216-A EXPANSION OF STATE PARK SYSTEM'
---

TITLE XIX
                                             
PUBLIC RECREATION
=================

CHAPTER 216-A
                                             
EXPANSION OF STATE PARK SYSTEM
------------------------------

### Section 216-A:1

 **216-A:1 Intent. –** It is the intent of the general court that a
comprehensive state park system shall be developed, operated, and
maintained to achieve the following purposes in order of the following
priority:
                                             
 I. To protect and preserve unusual scenic, scientific, historical,
recreational, and natural areas within the state.
                                             
 II. To continually provide such additional park areas and facilities
as may be necessary to meet the recreational needs of the citizens of
all regions of the state.
                                             
 III. To make these areas accessible to the public for recreational,
education, scientific, and other uses consistent with their protection
and preservation.
                                             
 IV. To encourage and support tourism and related economic activity
within the state.

**Source.** 1961, 263:1. 1985, 389:3, eff. June 25, 1985.

### Section 216-A:2

 **216-A:2 Duties, Director of Parks and Recreation. –** The director
of the division of parks and recreation, under the supervision of the
commissioner of resources and economic development, shall execute all
matters related to the design, development, administration, operation,
and maintenance of the state park system. These responsibilities shall
include, but not be limited to:
                                             
 I. The director shall continually assess the state's recreational
needs and formulate a state park development plan which addresses those
needs, and shall supervise the implementation of that plan.
                                             
 II. The director shall implement a maintenance program for state
parks and recreational areas to ensure that the natural, historical, and
recreational value of these areas is preserved and the state's
investment in such facilities is protected.
                                             
 III. The director shall develop and implement operating procedures
for the state park system designed to ensure its efficient
administration and high standards of operation, maintenance, and service
within the purposes established in RSA 216-A:1.
                                             
 IV. The director shall cooperate with the director of the division
of forests and lands on matters pertaining to the joint recreational and
forestry use of state lands, with other state and federal agencies in
the development of parkways and scenic routes, in the development of
wayside picnic areas, in the promotion of hunting and fishing on public
recreational areas, and in the promotion of better understanding of the
recreational advantages of the state.
                                             
 V. The director may also recommend for state acquisition lands or
the use of lands for recreational purposes and for the protection and
preservation of areas of unusual scenic, scientific, historic, or other
value.
                                             
 VI. The director shall purchase such merchandise for resale and such
operating supplies and materials as may be necessary for the operation
of the ski school, ski rental and repair, souvenir, and food services
concessions at Cannon Mountain. The operating costs shall be a direct
charge against gross sales receipts.
                                             
 VII. The director shall prepare a 5 year capital budget for capital
development at Cannon Mountain in consultation with the Cannon Mountain
Advisory Commission, pursuant to RSA 12-A:29-b to be submitted by the
commissioner to the general court on a biennial basis.
                                             
 VIII. The director shall be responsible for all personnel and
equipment at the ski operations, and any other duties that may be
assigned to the director by the commissioner of resources and economic
development.

**Source.** 1961, 263:2. 1985, 389:4. 1996, 210:5. 1998, 134:7, eff.
June 10, 1998. 2016, 207:7, eff. June 6, 2016.

### Section 216-A:3

 **216-A:3 Department of Resources and Economic Development;
Authority. –** With the approval of the governor and council, the
department shall have the following authority:
                                             
 I. Acquire, by purchase or gift, real property with recreational or
historic value.
                                             
 II. Dispose of real property, by sale or exchange.
                                             
 III. Enter into agreements with other state agencies, the federal
government, municipalities or other public and private agencies
regarding the acquisition, development or operation of recreational
areas or facilities.
                                             
 IV. Apply for and receive, with the approval of the governor and
council, grants, donations, and other assistance to assist in the
development and operation of the park system.

**Source.** 1961, 263:3. 1985, 389:5, eff. June 25, 1985.

### Section 216-A:3-a

 **216-A:3-a Payments by State. –** Whenever the state acquires any
real property in a town or city for public recreational or park purposes
the state shall annually pay to the town or city where such property is
situate a sum equal to the taxes which would have been assessed against
such property had such property remained taxable, basing such payments
upon the assessed value of the property for the year prior to the year
of acquisition at the current local rate of taxation applicable for the
year in which payment is made, until and including the year the property
is opened to the public for recreational or park use. The year following
the opening of the property for recreational or park use and for the
second, third, fourth and fifth years following such opening the
payments shall be based on 80, 60, 40 and 20 percent respectively of the
assessed value of the property for the year prior to the year of
acquisition at the current local rate of taxation applicable for the
year in which payment is made and thereafter such payments shall cease.
If less than all the real property included in a single assessment is
acquired by the state the commissioner of revenue administration shall
determine the apportionment of the assessment between the state and the
former owner. At the time of computing the rate percent of taxation for
the town or city where said real property is situate, the commissioner
of revenue administration shall certify to the state treasurer the
amount of the payment to be made to each town and city in each year and
the treasurer shall make such payment on or before December 1. The
director of the division of parks and recreation shall notify the
commissioner of revenue administration of the date when any real
property acquired for recreational or park use is opened to the public.

**Source.** 1963, 308:1. 1973, 544:8, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 216-A:3-b

 **216-A:3-b Authority for Payment. –** The governor is authorized to
draw his warrant for the payments authorized under the provisions of RSA
216-A:3-a out of any money in the treasury not otherwise appropriated.

**Source.** 1963, 308:1, eff. April 1, 1964.

### Section 216-A:3-c

 **216-A:3-c Development Plan. –**
                                             
 I. The director of parks and recreation shall by September 30, 2009,
publish a written comprehensive 10-year development plan for the state
park system. The director may contract with an experienced, independent
firm to assist in the development of this plan. The director shall
submit copies of the plan to the governor, the governor's council, the
presiding officers of the general court, the chairperson of the house
resources, recreation and development committee, and the chairperson of
the senate energy, environment, and economic development committee. On
or before June 1, 2009, the director of parks and recreation shall
submit a progress report to the chairperson of the house resources,
recreation and economic development committee and the chairperson of the
senate energy, environment, and economic development committee.
                                             
 II. The director shall continually review this plan and revise it as
necessary.
                                             
 III. The strategic plan shall include:
                                             
 (a) An analysis of the recreational needs of each geographic
region of the state and the degree to which existing park facilities
address those needs.
                                             
 (b) An evaluation of overall state park system operations to
identify strengths, weaknesses, and future approaches to increase
revenue and simplify operations.
                                             
 (c) Specific goals and objectives for the park system.
                                             
 (d) A report on the progress in meeting goals and objectives
during each biennium.
                                             
 (e) Identification of areas in which there is a need for physical
expansion of park properties.
                                             
 (f) Identification of park system properties which are surplus to
the state's needs.
                                             
 (g) A summary of the division's planned maintenance program for
park facilities, including, but not limited to, measures to protect
against undue environmental stress.
                                             
 (h) Proposed improvements to park facilities, including major
renovations, repairs, additions, or new construction.
                                             
 (i) A full evaluation of facilities, profit and loss, and usage
trends in each state park and a comparison of such usage to national
trends.
                                             
 (j) A continual overview of marketing approaches and reservation
systems to maximize day rental usage of the state park system.
                                             
 (k) The adoption of uniform standards for managing facility day
use including uniformity in fee structure, reservation procedures, and
monitoring of use.
                                             
 (l) An analysis of whether leasing or outsourcing certain state
park functions, or entering into public/private partnerships would
increase revenues and simplify operations.
                                             
 IV. The strategic plan shall serve as a basis for the division's
capital and operating budget requests.
                                             
 V. In developing the plan, the department shall solicit local input.
The director shall also consult with the division of historical
resources of the department of cultural resources. The office of energy
and planning shall provide the director of parks and recreation with
such information on the recreational needs of the state and other
technical assistance as is necessary for the division to properly
perform its responsibilities under this section.
                                             
 VI. The director of parks and recreation shall report to the house
resources, recreation and development committee and the senate energy,
environment, and economic development committee within the biennial
report pursuant to RSA 12-A:6 on the state of the parks and historic
sites.

**Source.** 1985, 389:6. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44. 2007, 359:2. 2009,
242:1, eff. July 16, 2009. 2015, 259:30, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 216-A:3-d

 **216-A:3-d Maintenance of State Park System. –**
                                             
 I. The director of parks and recreation and commissioner of
resources and economic development shall develop operating procedures to
ensure that the division and other departmental units and other agencies
of state government effectively coordinate their efforts to provide for
proper maintenance of park system properties and facilities.
                                             
 II. The division shall establish an automated maintenance management
information system. This system shall:
                                             
 (a) Maintain an inventory of division properties and facilities;
                                             
 (b) Provide a current statement of condition of such properties
and facilities;
                                             
 (c) Serve as a mechanism for scheduling and tracking maintenance
projects.

**Source.** 1985, 389:6, eff. June 25, 1985.

### Section 216-A:3-e

 **216-A:3-e Financial Reports. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of resources and economic development, director
of parks and recreation, and commissioner of administrative services
shall develop a financial reporting system for the state park system
which shall provide for:
                                             
 (a) An accurate report of all revenue collected from park system
operations, by source, including fees and income from the sale of goods
and services;
                                             
 (b) An accurate report of the direct operating costs of the
division of parks and recreation and the facilities for which it is
responsible;
                                             
 (c) An accurate report of the debt service costs associated with
park system facilities;
                                             
 (d) An accurate report of such other costs, including the costs
of administrative services provided to the park system by other elements
of state government, related to park operations;
                                             
 (e) An accurate report of the funds budgeted for maintenance of
park areas and facilities and of the actual amount spent for such
maintenance.
                                             
 II. The financial report shall include detail on the operations of
the state's ski areas of Franconia Notch state park. This element of the
report shall:
                                             
 (a) Detail operating expenses and revenue associated with ski
area operations;
                                             
 (b) Detail debt service and other capital expense costs
associated with ski area operations;
                                             
 (c) Include a description of the assumptions made in defining
costs and revenues related to ski area operations;
                                             
 (d) Identify the net profit or loss on ski area operations
including all costs and revenues in any fiscal year;
                                             
 (e) Identify financial management and budgeting procedures to
improve the profitability of ski operations.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of resources and economic development shall
submit the financial reports required by this section to the governor
and council by January 31 following the close of each fiscal year. These
reports shall include data on financial operations during the previous
fiscal year. The governor and council shall provide the presiding
officers of the general court with copies of the commissioner's
financial reports.

**Source.** 1985, 389:6, eff. June 25, 1985. 2016, 207:4, eff. June 6,
2016.

### Section 216-A:3-f

 **216-A:3-f Promotion of Park Facilities. –**
                                             
 I. The director of parks and recreation in consultation with the
director of travel and tourism development shall formulate an annual
promotion program for state park facilities.
                                             
 II. This program shall be coordinated with the state's general
tourism promotion efforts.
                                             
 III. Funding for park system promotion shall be appropriated to the
division of parks and recreation and shall be expended with the
assistance of the division of travel and tourism development.

**Source.** 1985, 389:6. 1999, 317:10. 2010, 146:1, eff. Aug. 13, 2010.

### Section 216-A:3-g

 **216-A:3-g Fees for Park System. –** The commissioner of the
department of resources and economic development, in consultation with
the director of parks and recreation, shall establish fees for access to
and use of the state park system. The fees approved by the commissioner,
after prior approval of the fiscal committee, shall not be subject to
the provisions of RSA 541-A, so as to provide the department with the
ability to maximize revenues and to adjust fees according to market
conditions and trends as is the common practice in private industry. Any
change to the fees for access to or use of the state park system
proposed by the commissioner shall take effect no later than 60 days
after such change is proposed, unless the fee change is denied by the
fiscal committee of the general court. Said fees shall be consistent
with the following criteria:
                                             
 I. Fees for the use of park areas shall be designed to recover a
reasonable portion of budget expenses consistent with the purposes of
RSA 216-A:1 and 216-A:3. The general court does not intend that all park
facilities be self-supporting.
                                             
 II. Fees for the use of campgrounds and ski lifts shall be
comparable with the fees for use of similar privately owned facilities.
The operation of all enterprise functions within the park system,
including ski lifts, food service, retail facilities, campgrounds, and
other concession activities, shall be as profitable as possible, within
the purposes of the park system.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. No disabled veteran of this state, upon providing satisfactory
proof of a service-connected disability, shall be charged a fee for
day-use admission to the state park system. Special number plates issued
to disabled veterans pursuant to RSA 261:86 or a letter issued by the
United States Department of Veterans Affairs certifying that the veteran
suffers from a service-connected disability shall constitute
satisfactory proof under this section. Any fees for the use of
enterprise activities as defined in paragraph II shall be charged.
                                             
 V. (a) Upon presentation of military identification, any active
member of the armed forces who meets the minimum requirements for
satisfactory membership, as defined in federal regulations, shall not be
charged a fee for admission to day-use areas of the state park system.
In this section, "armed forces'' means armed forces as defined in RSA
21:50, II and includes active and reserve members of the New Hampshire
national guard.
                                             
 (b) Any New Hampshire national guard member who retired in pay
grade E6 or below shall not be charged a fee for day-use admission to
the state park system.
                                             
 (c) Any fees for the use of enterprise activities as described in
paragraph II of this section shall be charged.
                                             
 VI. No admission fee shall be charged for day use of the state park
system to the occupants of a vehicle with a number plate bearing a
special registration plate symbol authorized by RSA 261:75-c. Any fees
for: (a) enterprise activities as defined in paragraph II, (b) metered
parking after June 15 and before September 16, (c) metered parking on
weekends and holidays on or before June 15 and on or after September 16,
(d) more than 6 consecutive hours of metered parking, or (e) metered
parking for residential use or business employee use, shall be charged
to occupants of such vehicles.
                                             
 VII. (a) The commissioner shall periodically review all fees paid
for entrance into and use of state parks.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner may immediately begin to accept donations
for the use and maintenance of Jericho Mountain state park and shall
require fees for the entrance into and use of Jericho Mountain state
park beginning on or before January 1, 2011. All fees generated by
Jericho Mountain state park shall be deposited into the state park fund
established in RSA 216-A:3-i. Such fees shall be based on revenue
projected in the master plan and shall be in addition to registration
fees for vehicles, all terrain vehicles as defined in RSA 215-A:1, I-b,
and off highway recreational vehicles as defined in RSA 215-A:1, VI.
                                             
 (c) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VIII. The commissioner may adopt parking fees or charges within the
state park system that assess an increased rate for parking on holidays
and weekend days with high traffic rates unless such plan for parking
fees and charges is denied by the fiscal committee of the general court
as provided by this section.

**Source.** 1985, 389:6. 1991, 355:62. 1993, 358:24. 1995, 308:127, X.
1996, 210:6. 2003, 153:1; 282:1. 2010, 373:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2011; 374:6,
eff. July 26, 2010. 2011, 184:2, eff. June 14, 2011. 2012, 274:2, eff.
June 20, 2012 at 12:01 a.m.; 276:1, eff. Aug. 18, 2012; 276:4, eff. June
20, 2012 at 12:02 a.m.; 277:1, eff. June 20, 2012. 2016, 191:1, 2, eff.
July 1, 2016.

### Section 216-A:3-h

 **216-A:3-h Indemnification of Department of Resources and Economic
Development Volunteers. –** Any person recognized by the commissioner of
the department of resources and economic development as a volunteer and
who is under the general supervision of authorized department of
resources and economic development personnel, and is actually performing
assigned volunteer duties or activities at a state park, forest,
reservation, trail, or historic site, shall be considered a state
employee for the purpose of defense and indemnification from civil suits
under RSA 99-D.

**Source.** 1986, 178:1, eff. May 28, 1986. 2011, 256:1, eff. July 13,
2011.

### Section 216-A:3-i

 **216-A:3-i State Park Fund Established. –**
                                             
 I. The state treasurer shall establish a separate and distinct
account to be known as the state park fund. The treasurer shall
establish within the state park fund separate and distinct accounts,
known as the state park account and the state-owned ski area account.
The accounts shall be continuing and nonlapsing. The treasurer shall
deposit in the state park account actual revenues from fees, services,
accommodations, rentals, retail sales, net profit from concession
operations, and special registration plate symbol fees collected under
RSA 261:75-c in excess of budget expenses and excluding revenues
associated with state-owned ski areas. The treasurer shall deposit in
the state-owned ski area account actual revenues associated with the
state-owned ski areas, derived by the department of resources and
economic development from fees, services, accommodations, rentals,
revenue from lift and tramway operations, retail sales, and net profit
from concession operations in excess of budget expenses. Any federal
moneys which become available and all donations and gifts shall be
deposited into their appropriately designated accounts.
                                             
 II. Any funds deposited into the state park account are hereby
continually appropriated to and may be expended by the commissioner of
the department of resources and economic development to cover budgeted
appropriations provided the balance in the state park account does not
go below 
                                             $1.5 million and any transfer is reported to the governor and
council and fiscal committee of the general court within 60 days.

**Source.** 1991, 40:2. 1996, 210:7. 2010, 373:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.
2015, 276:26, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 216-A:3-j

 **216-A:3-j Debt Service for Cannon Tramway. –** Effective July 1,
1996, debt service for the Cannon Tramway shall be a charge against the
state park fund, state-owned ski area account.

**Source.** 1996, 210:8. 2010, 373:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 216-A:3-k

 **216-A:3-k State Park System Advisory Council. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2007,
359:5, eff. June 30, 2016.
                                             ]

### Section 216-A:3-l

 **216-A:3-l Adopt-a-State Park Program Established. –** The director
of the division of parks and recreation, under the supervision of the
commissioner of the department of resources and economic development:
                                             
 I. Shall establish an adopt-a-state park program by directly
involving citizens, groups, associations, municipalities, and the
business community in the beautification of New Hampshire's state
parks.
                                             
 II. May permit any interested citizen or group to provide ongoing
maintenance on a voluntary basis to the state park system.
                                             
 III. Shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, necessary to
implement the adopt-a-state park program consistent with the provisions
of this section. Such rules shall include an application and evaluation
procedure to allow interested citizens or groups to adopt a state park,
and a procedure for terminating an adopt-a-state park agreement. Such
procedure shall require the citizens or group to provide information on
how they plan to maintain the park and what specific projects they
intend to undertake, how frequently the park will be visited for
cleaning and maintenance, and any other responsibilities of the parties
involved. The director of parks and recreation shall develop any forms
necessary for the adopt-a-state park program.
                                             
 IV. Shall determine an appropriate method of recognizing those who
provide service to the state park system through participation in the
adopt-a-park program.

**Source.** 2010, 108:1, eff. July 31, 2010.

### Section 216-A:3-m

 **216-A:3-m Field Purchases and Transfer of Funds. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding RSA 21-I:17-a, I, the director of the division of
parks and recreation may make purchases using field purchase orders for
expenditures of up to 
                                             $2,000 for the state park system and facilities.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development may transfer funds between and among the appropriations for
the operation of the state park system. The commissioner shall submit a
report on a quarterly basis to the fiscal committee of the general
court, the governor and council, and the chairmen of the house and
senate executive departments and administration committees, the chairman
of the resources, recreation and development committee, and the chairman
of the wildlife, fish and game and agriculture committee of all
transfers made under this paragraph. RSA 9:17-a and RSA 9:17-c shall not
apply to transfers made under this paragraph.

**Source.** 2010, 374:2, eff. July 26, 2010. 2012, 179:1, eff. June 11,
2012.

### Section 216-A:3-n

 **216-A:3-n Financial Analysis Required. –**
                                             
 I. The director of the division of parks and recreation shall retain
an independent financial consulting firm to conduct a written analysis
of a lease proposal for the lease of state park property, operations, or
management and render an opinion as to the financial viability of the
lease proposal if:
                                             
 (a) The lease term is for a minimum of 10 years; and
                                             
 (b) The lease is for the entirety or majority of the state park
or its facilities and improvements, or is for the entirety or majority
of the state park operation or management; or
                                             
 (c) The lease is to enable significant capital investment in the
state park.
                                             
 II. A proposed or existing lessee shall be liable for the cost of
the financial analysis under paragraph I if so required by the director
of the division of parks and recreation.

**Source.** 2012, 136:1, eff. Aug. 4, 2012.

### Section 216-A:3-o

 **216-A:3-o State Park Gifts and Donations; Account Established.
–**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
individual gifts and donations not exceeding 
                                             $2,500 in value in a
fiscal year may be received by the division of parks and recreation
without the approval of the governor or the governor and council.
Individual gifts and donations exceeding 
                                             $2,500 in value in a fiscal
year may be received by the division of parks and recreation with the
approval of the governor and council.
                                             
 II. There is established an account within the division of parks and
recreation to be known as the state parks gifts and donations account.
Moneys in the state park gifts and donations account are nonlapsing and
continually appropriated to the division of parks and recreation. All
gifts and donations to the division of parks and recreation shall be
deposited in this account, except gifts and donations made to the
division in support of a specific program that has an established
dedicated account which shall be deposited into the appropriate
dedicated account and expended in accordance with the purpose of the
dedicated account.

**Source.** 2012, 179:4, eff. June 11, 2012.

### Section 216-A:4

 **216-A:4 State Historical Commission; Recommendations. –**

                                             [Repealed 1965, 212:5, eff. July 1, 1965.
                                             ]

### Section 216-A:5

 **216-A:5 Recommendation of Projects. –** At such time as the
department of resources and economic development shall have been
established, the recommendations to governor and council, which shall be
initiated by the director of parks and recreation, the advisory
commission to the department of resources and economic development, or
by the director of parks and recreation and said advisory commission
jointly, in respect to any project shall have appended thereto a
statement of opinion on said project from the advisory commission to the
department of resources and economic development. Projects may also be
initiated by the governor and council under the same conditions as
provided herein.

**Source.** 1961, 263:13. 1963, 287:3, eff. Sept. 1, 1963.

### Section 216-A:6

 **216-A:6 Execution of Agreements. –** The provisions of RSA 228:4
shall apply to the execution of agreements pursuant to this chapter.

**Source.** 1961, 263:14, eff. Sept. 4, 1961.

### Section 216-A:6-a

 **216-A:6-a Old Man of the Mountain; Official Designation. –**
Pursuant to RSA 4:43, the general court hereby designates and names the
granite formation on the eastern slope of Cannon Mountain in Franconia
as the "Old Man of the Mountain.''

**Source.** 1997, 83:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1997.

Conservation Corps
------------------

### Section 216-A:7

 **216-A:7 Conservation Corps Established. –** The director of the
division of parks and recreation, in cooperation with the commissioner
of the department of health and human services, shall establish a
conservation corps for the purpose of employing New Hampshire youth with
an emphasis on employing young people who need educational and
vocational assistance to perform successfully in school, in their
communities, and in their personal lives. The services of these young
people shall be used to create a hiking trail extending the length of
the state or such other resource management and conservation projects
deemed appropriate and necessary.

**Source.** 1988, 265:1. 1994, 212:2. 1995, 310:182, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 216-A:8

 **216-A:8 Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. The conservation corps program is designed to increase the sense
of involvement and ownership by the participants in their state and to
give them an opportunity to contribute something of lasting value to the
state, by creating a new recreational resource for the state.
                                             
 II. The general court finds that because of the impact of a steadily
growing population, the continuing development of land for residential,
commercial and other purposes, and the loss of shorelands for various
purposes, fewer opportunities exist for the citizens of New Hampshire
and visitors from other states to enjoy recreational activities in
natural areas in this state. Therefore, to fill a major gap in the
state's existing trail system it shall be the policy of the state of New
Hampshire to create, foster, maintain and promote a recreational trail
generally following the Connecticut, Pemigewasset, and Merrimack rivers
from the Canadian border to the Massachusetts border.
                                             
 III. If, in the judgment of the advisory committee established in
RSA 216-F:5, temporary segments, alternate segments, or feeder segments
of trail are identified that would enhance the development of the New
Hampshire Heritage Trail, such segments shall be eligible for
participation in all of the provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1988, 265:1. 1990, 263:1. 1996, 221:1, eff. Aug. 9, 1996.

### Section 216-A:9

 **216-A:9 Duration of Corps. –** The conservation corps shall be a
permanent and ongoing program.

**Source.** 1988, 265:1, eff. April 30, 1988.

### Section 216-A:10

 **216-A:10 Supervision of the Director of Parks and Recreation. –**
When the corps is organized, the director of the division of parks and
recreation shall be responsible for the corps' activities and all
aspects of the program by assuring that supervision, guidance, training,
and other essentials that may be required by the participants when in
the field are provided.

**Source.** 1988, 265:1, eff. April 30, 1988.

### Section 216-A:11

 **216-A:11 New Hampshire Heritage Trail. –** Pursuant to RSA 4:43,
the general court hereby designates and names the trail as authorized by
RSA 216-A:7 and 8 as the New Hampshire Heritage Trail.

**Source.** 1988, 265:1. 1990, 263:2, eff. April 28, 1990.

### Section 216-A:12

 **216-A:12 Gifts may be Accepted. –** The department of resources
and economic development may receive and expend funds with governor and
council approval for this program and for that purpose such funds are
hereby appropriated.

**Source.** 1988, 265:1. 1990, 263:2, eff. April 28, 1990.

### Section 216-A:13

 **216-A:13 Acquisition of Rights to Use of Land. –** Where the
proposed trail route passes through land owned by the federal
government, or by a unit of county or municipal government, the state
shall secure permission to construct a trail through such property.
Where the land is owned by a private landowner, the state may acquire by
purchase or gift or negotiate an easement from the landowner for the
purpose of protecting or developing the New Hampshire Heritage Trail.

**Source.** 1990, 263:3, eff. April 28, 1990.

### Section 216-A:14

 **216-A:14 Liability Insurance. –** The department shall provide a
liability insurance policy to provide protection to private landowners
whose property is under agreement for use as part of the New Hampshire
Heritage Trail by easement, lease or other legal means.

**Source.** 1990, 263:3, eff. April 28, 1990.

### Section 216-A:15

 **216-A:15 Advisory Committee. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1996, 221:4, eff. Aug.
19, 1996.
                                             ]

### Section 216-A:16

 **216-A:16 Cooperation With Other Agencies. –** The department of
resources and economic development shall work in cooperation with other
municipal, state and federal agencies, including private organizations,
in order to carry out its duties. Such agencies and organizations shall
assist the department to assure that all existing state owned or leased
lands within the trail corridor are reviewed for use in the development
of the New Hampshire Heritage Trail.

**Source.** 1990, 263:3. 1995, 10:6, eff. April 12, 1995.

### Section 216-A:17

 **216-A:17 Applicability of Other Statutes. –** All provisions of
RSA 216-F, multi-use statewide trail system, shall be applicable to the
department for the purposes of carrying out this chapter.

**Source.** 1990, 263:3, eff. April 28, 1990.
