---
title: 'CHAPTER 216-I RECREATIONAL CAMPGROUNDS AND CAMPING PARKS'
---

TITLE XIX
                                             
PUBLIC RECREATION
=================

CHAPTER 216-I
                                             
RECREATIONAL CAMPGROUNDS AND CAMPING PARKS
------------------------------------------

### Section 216-I:1

 **216-I:1 Definition. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Approved disposal system'' means a system:
                                             
 (a) Constructed prior to July 1, 1967; or
                                             
 (b) Constructed in accordance with plans submitted to and
approved by:
                                             
 (1) The former New Hampshire water supply and pollution
control commission; or
                                             
 (2) The department of environmental services.
                                             
 II. "Campsite'' means a parcel of land in a recreational campground
or camping park rented for the placement of a tent, recreational
vehicle, or a recreational camping cabin for the overnight use of its
occupants.
                                             
 III. "Campground owner'' means the owner or operator of a
recreational campground or camping park, or their agents.
                                             
 IV. "Dependent vehicle'' means a recreational vehicle which does not
have toilet and lavatory facilities.
                                             
 V. "Individual sewage disposal system'' means any sewage disposal or
treatment system, other than a municipally-owned and operated system,
which receives either sewage or other wastes, or both.
                                             
 VI. "Portable sanitary service vehicle'' means a vehicle used to
transport septage or waste water from a recreational vehicle to a
sanitary station.
                                             
 VII. "Recreational campground or camping park'' means a parcel of
land on which 2 or more campsites are occupied or are intended for
temporary occupancy for recreational dwelling purposes only, and not for
permanent year-round residency, excluding recreation camps as defined in
RSA 485-A:23.
                                             
 VII-a. "Recreational camping cabin'' means a structure on a
campsite, 400 square feet or less, calculated by taking the measurements
of the exterior of the cabin, including all siding, corner trim, molding
and area enclosed by windows, but not the roof or porch overhang, or log
overhang at corners. It shall be designed not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as a temporary dwelling for recreational camping and
vacation use.
                                             
 VIII. "Recreational vehicle'' means any of the following vehicles:
                                             
 (a) Motorhome or van, which is a portable, temporary dwelling to
be used for travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral
part of a self-propelled vehicle.
                                             
 (b) Pickup camper, which is a structure designed to be mounted on
a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation,
and vacation.
                                             
 (c) Recreational trailer, which is a vehicular, portable
structure built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when
measured at the largest exterior horizontal projections, calculated by
taking the measurements of the exterior of the recreational trailer
including all siding, corner trim, molding, storage space and area
enclosed by windows but not the roof overhang. It shall be designed
primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary
dwelling for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
                                             
 (d) Tent trailer, which is a canvas or synthetic fiber folding
structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation, and
vacation purposes.
                                             
 IX. "Sanitary station'' means an approved facility used for
accepting and disposing of wastes from recreational vehicle holding
tanks, portable recreation toilets, or portable sanitary service
vehicles.
                                             
 X. "Tent'' means a portable canvas or synthetic fiber structure used
as a temporary dwelling for vacation or recreation purposes.

**Source.** 1989, 343:1. 1996, 228:108. 2000, 130:1-3. 2001, 49:1, eff.
Aug. 10, 2001.

### Section 216-I:2

 **216-I:2 Density Requirement. –** A minimum of 600 square feet
shall be provided for each tent site and a minimum of 1,000 square feet
shall be provided for each recreational vehicle and recreational camping
cabin campsite, with or without connections to an approved sewage
disposal system.

**Source.** 1989, 343:1. 2000, 130:4, eff. May 8, 2000.

### Section 216-I:3

 **216-I:3 Water Supply. –** An accessible, adequate, safe and
potable supply of water shall be provided in each recreational
campground or camping park. Where a public supply of water of sufficient
quantity, quality, and pressure is available, connection shall be made
to the supply and that supply shall be used exclusively. When a
satisfactory public water supply is not available, a private water
supply system may be used if approved by the department of environmental
services.

**Source.** 1989, 343:1. 1996, 228:108, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 216-I:4

 **216-I:4 Disposal System. –**
                                             
 I. An approved disposal system shall be provided in all recreational
campgrounds or camping parks.
                                             
 II. Septage or waste water shall be discharged from recreational
vehicles or portable recreational toilets into portable sanitary service
vehicles, individual sewage disposal system connections, or sanitary
stations.
                                             
 III. Flush toilets or other approved toilet facilities, such as
self-composting toilets or incinerating toilets, shall be provided in
all recreational campgrounds or camping parks.
                                             
 IV. The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in recreational
campgrounds or camping parks shall be conducted in a manner that will
prevent health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding, accident or
fire hazards.
                                             
 V. A sanitary station shall be provided for disposal of waste from
recreational vehicle holding tanks, portable recreational toilets and
portable sanitary service vehicles. This requirement shall not apply to
those recreational campgrounds or camping parks that have individual
sewage connections to every campsite. Existing recreational campgrounds
or camping parks which do not comply with this paragraph shall comply
within 5 years of the effective date of this paragraph.
                                             
 VI. A recreational camping cabin which has water plumbed to it shall
have a connection to an approved sewage disposal system.

**Source.** 1989, 343:1. 2000, 130:5, eff. May 8, 2000. 2011, 52:1, eff.
July 8, 2011.

### Section 216-I:5

 **216-I:5 Registration. –** All persons upon entering a recreational
campground or camping park shall register with the appropriate
authorities. All recreational campground or camping park owners or
operators or their agents shall upon the registration of each camper or
camper's guest cause an entry to be made on a registration book or card
system which shall record the campers' or camper's guests' agreed-upon
departure time and date. No camper or camper's guest shall, without the
consent of the campground or camping park owner or operator or his
agent, remain on a campsite beyond the departure time and date so
recorded at registration.

**Source.** 1989, 343:1, eff. June 2, 1989.

### Section 216-I:6

 **216-I:6 Eviction and Remedial Action. –**
                                             
 I. All recreational campground or camping park owners or operators
or their agents may remove or cause to be removed from such recreational
campground or camping park any person remaining in a recreational
campground or camping park in violation of this chapter by notifying
such person that the establishment no longer desires to entertain him
and requesting that he immediately leave. Any person who remains or
attempts to remain after being so requested to leave shall be guilty of
a violation.
                                             
 II. All recreational campground or camping park owners or operators
or their agents may remove, or cause to be removed by a law enforcement
officer of this state, any person refusing to pay registration or
visitors' fees, any person who willfully denies other persons their
right to quiet enjoyment of their recreational use of such facilities,
or any person who violates any local or state law. The right to remove
or cause to be removed shall arise after the recreational campground or
camping park owner or operator, or their agent, makes a reasonable
attempt to verbally warn the person to cease and desist the breach of
quiet enjoyment or violation of local or state law. Following eviction,
said person may make written request to the owner or operator or their
agent of such recreational campground or camping park within 30 days for
the refund of the unused portion of his prepaid campsite rental or
visitor fee. Upon such a request, such owner or operator shall refund
such unused portion of the fees, less any amount deducted to pay for
damages.
                                             
 III. Any law enforcement officer of this state, upon request of a
recreational campground or camping park owner or operator or their
agent, shall place under arrest and take into custody any person who
violates this section in the presence of the officer. Upon arrest, the
person shall be deemed to have abandoned his right of use of the
recreational campground or camping park and the owner or operator or
their agent may then make such campsite available to other persons. The
owner or operator or their agent of a recreational campground or camping
park shall employ all reasonable means to protect any personal property
left in storage at the recreational campground or camping park.

**Source.** 1989, 343:1, eff. June 2, 1989.

### Section 216-I:7

 **216-I:7 Storage of Property. –** Any property left in a
recreational campground or camping park after check-out time or eviction
pursuant to RSA 216-I:6 shall be considered abandoned. Such abandoned
property may then be moved off the campsite and placed in storage. Any
owner or operator or their agent of a recreational campground or camping
park shall have a lien upon such property, so long as it shall remain in
their possession, for proper charges due them for the storage and care
of the property.

**Source.** 1989, 343:1, eff. June 2, 1989.

### Section 216-I:8

 **216-I:8 Notice and Sale. –** If any of the charges referred to in
RSA 216-I:7 shall remain unpaid for 60 days, the lien holder may sell
such property at public sale. The proceeds, after first paying the
expense of sale, shall be applied in payment of the storage charges, and
the balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the property or the
person entitled to such balance. Notice of such sale shall be given and
record made as provided in RSA 444.

**Source.** 1989, 343:1, eff. June 2, 1989.

### Section 216-I:9

 **216-I:9 Fireplaces and Fires. –**
                                             
 I. All fireplaces in recreational campgrounds or camping parks shall
be on an area cleaned to mineral soil at least 8 feet across. Where
fires are built on the ground, there shall be at least 6 inches of sand
or gravel under the fire.
                                             
 II. All tree limbs or other burnable material within a height of 10
feet above the fireplace area shall be removed.
                                             
 III. Fireplaces shall not be moved.
                                             
 IV. Fire shall not be kindled except in fireplaces provided by
recreational campgrounds or camping parks.
                                             
 V. Recreational campground or camping park owners or operators or
their agents shall obtain a fire permit as required pursuant to RSA
227-L.

**Source.** 1989, 343:1. 1995, 299:11, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 216-I:10

 **216-I:10 Liability. –** Any person who through his negligence
causes a fire to damage a recreational campground or camping park or
adjacent lands shall be liable to reimburse the owner or operator or
their agent of a recreational campground or camping park for all damages
and costs incurred in attending or extinguishing such fire.

**Source.** 1989, 343:1, eff. June 2, 1989.

### Section 216-I:11

 **216-I:11 Penalty. –** Any person who violates any provision of
this chapter shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1989, 343:1, eff. June 2, 1989.

### Section 216-I:12

 **216-I:12 Manufactured Housing Exempted. –** Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to apply to "manufactured housing'' as
defined in RSA 205-A:1.

**Source.** 1989, 343:1, eff. June 2, 1989.

### Section 216-I:13

 **216-I:13 Partial Exception for Certain Uses of Recreational
Vehicles. –** Except as provided in RSA 216-I:4, II, this chapter shall
not apply to the occasional commercial or noncommercial use of
recreational vehicles on parcels of lands if the parcels are used for
not more than 7 days in any calendar year; however, the owner of the
land or the party responsible for the land shall file a statement of
compliance with the governing body for the municipality in which the
parcel is located, stating the method of compliance with RSA 216-I:4,
II, within 7 days prior to the commencement of each use. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to limit or modify the authority of local
municipalities to enforce local regulations and ordinances relative to
zoning and health and safety.

**Source.** 1989, 343:1, eff. June 2, 1989.

### Section 216-I:14

 **216-I:14 Exception for Agricultural Fairs. –** Except as provided
in RSA 216-I:4, II, this chapter shall not apply to recreational
vehicles used in conjunction with events or fairs sponsored by any
member of the New Hampshire Fairs Association. However, the person
responsible for the operation of the events or fairs at the fairground
shall file a statement of compliance with the governing body for the
municipality in which the fairground is located, stating the method of
compliance with RSA 216-I:4, II within 7 days prior to the commencement
of each event. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or
modify authority of local municipalities to enforce local regulations
and ordinances relative to zoning and health and safety.

**Source.** 1989, 343:1, eff. June 2, 1989.

### Section 216-I:15

 **216-I:15 Exception for Motorsport Events. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in RSA 216-I:4, II, this chapter shall not
apply to recreational vehicles used in conjunction with scheduled racing
events held at motorsport facilities.
                                             
 II. This exception shall apply to:
                                             
 (a) Motorsport facilities with permanent seating capacity greater
than 40,000 seats.
                                             
 (b) Property that is used for the parking of vehicles at the
motorsport facility, or contiguous land used for vehicle parking and
under the control of the motorsport facility.

**Source.** 1996, 220:1, eff. June 10, 1996.
