---
title: 'CHAPTER 216-B HAMPTON HARBOR CHANNEL AND BEACH EROSION CONTROL'
---

TITLE XIX
                                             
PUBLIC RECREATION
=================

CHAPTER 216-B
                                             
HAMPTON HARBOR CHANNEL AND BEACH EROSION CONTROL
------------------------------------------------

### Section 216-B:1

 **216-B:1 Authority. –** The governor with the advice of the council
is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake in cooperation with the
Corps of Engineers, United States Army, a project to improve navigation
in the entrance to Hampton Harbor together with a corrective project to
restore damaged beach areas resulting from coastal erosion on Hampton
Beach between Great Boar's Head and Hampton River. The governor, with
the advice of the council, is further authorized and empowered to act in
behalf and for the town of Hampton and the town of Seabrook and other
public local interests as may be required in the construction of the
cooperative projects. Provided, however, that no action shall be taken
under the authority hereof except upon a finding by the governor and
council that federal funds will be made available for the projects
herein described and upon a determination that the state expenditure
with respect to such projects is economically justified.

**Source.** 1963, 333:1, eff. Sept. 3, 1963.

### Section 216-B:2

 **216-B:2 Federal Assistance. –** The governor and council are
hereby authorized to cooperate with and enter into agreements with the
federal government, or any agency thereof, as they may deem advisable to
secure federal funds for the purposes hereof and further to render such
assurances to the federal government on behalf of the state as the
federal government may require, including but not limited to, an
assurance that the state of New Hampshire will hold and save the United
States free from all claims for damages that may arise before, during or
after prosecution of the work.

**Source.** 1963, 333:1, eff. Sept. 3, 1963.

### Section 216-B:3

 **216-B:3 Construction. –** It is anticipated that the Corps of
Engineers will undertake and supervise the construction of the
cooperative projects. Such direction and supervision of the construction
of the navigational and beach improvement projects as may be required of
the state shall be by the commissioner of transportation.

**Source.** 1963, 333:1. 2004, 257:33, eff. June 15, 2004.

### Section 216-B:4

 **216-B:4 Operation and Maintenance. –** Upon completion of the
project as herein provided, the federal government will assume the
maintenance of the harbor entrance channel and facilities. The operation
and management of the harbor improvement project shall be under the
supervision of the Pease development authority, division of ports and
harbors and the supervision and maintenance of the beach replenishment
project shall be by the division of parks and recreation as provided by
existing statute.

**Source.** 1963, 333:1. 2001, 290:11, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 216-B:5

 **216-B:5 Contracts for Construction. –** Any contracts by the state
shall be administered by the commissioner of transportation in
accordance with RSA 228 as amended.

**Source.** 1963, 333:1. 2004, 257:33, eff. June 15, 2004.

### Section 216-B:6

 **216-B:6 Agency to Negotiate. –** The agency authorized to
negotiate and cooperate in engineering studies and construction with the
United States through the Corps of Engineers shall be the department of
transportation. The commissioner of transportation is hereby ordered,
directed and empowered to take the necessary steps in relation to
securing and coordinating engineering and other information attendant to
implementing the projects provided herein in order to provide the
governor and council with information to carry out the provisions of
this chapter. The cost of required studies shall be a charge against the
appropriations hereinafter provided for the purposes of this project.

**Source.** 1963, 333:1. 2004, 257:33, 34, eff. June 15, 2004.
