---
title: CHAPTER 216 MANAGEMENT OF CERTAIN RECREATIONAL AND HISTORIC SITES
---

TITLE XIX
                                             
PUBLIC RECREATION
=================

CHAPTER 216
                                             
MANAGEMENT OF CERTAIN RECREATIONAL AND HISTORIC SITES
-----------------------------------------------------

### Section 216:1,-2

 **216:1, 216:2 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1961, 223:7, III.
                                             ]

### Section 216:3

 **216:3 Operation of Beach Parking Facilities. –**
                                             
 I. The department of resources and economic development shall
operate, maintain, and manage the parking facilities at Hampton Beach,
and shall be authorized to charge for the use of the parking facilities
by meters or fees, including parking violation fines, whichever is
determined most practical.
                                             
 II. The state treasurer shall establish a special nonlapsing fund,
which shall only lapse pursuant to paragraph III, for the revenues from
the state parking facilities at Hampton Beach. Fifty percent of the
payments for principal and interest of bonds and notes that are issued
for the project of replacing the seawall in the Hampton Beach area shall
be paid from this fund. Each fiscal year, the sum of 
                                             $200,000 shall be
transferred from this fund to the Hampton Beach capital improvement fund
established in paragraph IV.
                                             
 III. The balance of any funds in this special nonlapsing fund shall
be lapsed at the close of each fiscal year to the state park fund.
                                             
 IV. (a) There is established a nonlapsing revolving fund to be known
as the Hampton Beach capital improvement fund in the department of
resources and economic development. The revolving fund shall be used for
capital improvements and capital equipment for the Hampton Beach-area
state parks' parking and beach facilities.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner of resources and economic development shall
submit a report detailing the activities of the revolving fund annually
to the governor and council and the fiscal committee within 60 days of
the close of each fiscal year.

**Source.** 1953, 218:4, 5. RSA 216:3. 1987, 3:4; 94:2. 1989, 137:4.
1990, 3:18. 1991, 40:3. 1995, 308:57. 2003, 319:154. 2008, 263:1, eff.
July 1, 2008. 2012, 187:1, eff. June 11, 2012.

### Section 216:3-a

 **216:3-a Regulation. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 422:17, III, eff. June
24, 1983.
                                             ]

### Section 216:4

 **216:4 Expenditure of Federal Funds. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 299:19,
II, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.
                                             ]

### Section 216:5

 **216:5 Custody of Certain Historic Places. –** The functions of the
governor and council as custodians of the Hannah Dustin monument,
Franklin Pierce homestead, Daniel Webster birthplace, and the grounds
connected with each, as provided in RL 12:1 are hereby transferred to
the department of resources and economic development.

**Source.** 1950, 5, part 12:17, eff. June 30, 1950.

### Section 216:6

 **216:6 Transfer of Functions of Former Superintendent of State
Buildings. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 422:17, II, eff. June 24, 1983.
                                             ]

Connecticut Lakes Headwaters Tract Monitoring Endowment
-------------------------------------------------------

### Section 216:7

 **216:7 Monitoring Endowment Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is established an endowment fund, to be known as the
Connecticut Lakes headwaters tract monitoring endowment, for the purpose
of ensuring a perpetual source of funds to monitor compliance with the
terms and conditions of the conservation easement interests acquired by
the state in the Connecticut Lakes headwaters tract. The fund shall be
administered jointly by the executive director of the fish and game
department and the commissioner of the department of resources and
economic development.
                                             
 II. Funds added to the monitoring endowment pursuant to paragraph I
shall be used to support monitoring by state agencies, local
municipalities, and qualifying nonprofit corporations of conservation
easement interests acquired in the Connecticut Lakes headwaters tract.
Such monitoring shall be to ensure that the tract will be managed
according to the legal agreements embodied within the conservation
easement, which is recorded in its entirety in the Coos county registry
of deeds.

**Source.** 2002, 148:6, eff. May 14, 2002.

### Section 216:8

 **216:8 Administration. –**
                                             
 I. The monitoring endowment established by RSA 216:7 shall be
maintained in perpetuity and shall be utilized only for the purposes of
monitoring and enforcing the conservation easement acquired through the
Connecticut Lakes headwaters tract purchase.
                                             
 II. The principal of the endowment shall be managed by the state
treasurer for the sole purpose of providing interest earnings for the
purposes set forth in this subdivision and expenditures from the
endowment for these purposes shall be limited to the interest earned
thereon.
                                             
 III. Any interest earned on the endowment principal which is not
used for the purposes set forth in this subdivision within the fiscal
year in which it is earned shall be nonlapsing. The state treasurer is
authorized to accept gifts, donations, and grants, including federal
gifts, donations, and grants, for the purposes set forth in this
chapter, and such gifts, donations, and grants shall be added to the
principal amount.
                                             
 IV. The executive director of the fish and game department and the
commissioner of the department of resources and economic development
shall, pursuant to the monitoring endowment established under RSA 216:7,
I, jointly prepare an annual report to be presented no later than
December 1 of each year to the speaker of the house, the president of
the senate, the governor, the house clerk, the senate clerk, and the
state library. The report shall include a listing of all lands and
interests in lands subject to the monitoring provisions of RSA 216:7 and
a complete financial accounting of the funds in the monitoring endowment
including expenditures for the most recent full fiscal year. The report
shall also summarize monitoring activities and findings for each
property, as conducted in the most recent full fiscal year.

**Source.** 2002, 148:6, eff. May 14, 2002.

Connecticut Lakes Headwaters Natural Areas Stewardship Endowment
----------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 216:9

 **216:9 Stewardship Endowment. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established an endowment fund to be known as the
Connecticut Lakes headwaters natural areas stewardship endowment
account.
                                             
 II. The stewardship endowment shall be maintained in perpetuity and
shall be utilized jointly by the executive director of the fish and game
department and the commissioner of the department of resources and
economic development only for the purposes of habitat and public use
management of 25,000 acres of natural areas owned by the state of New
Hampshire, and for the purposes of recreation, use, and the conservation
easement management of the 146,400 acres on which the state shall hold a
conservation easement within the Connecticut Lakes headwaters tract.
                                             
 III. The principal of the endowment shall be managed by the state
treasurer for the sole purpose of providing interest earnings for the
purposes set forth in this subdivision and expenditures from the
endowment account for those purposes shall be limited to the interest
earned thereon.
                                             
 IV. Any interest earned on the endowment principal which is not used
for the purposes set forth in this subdivision within the fiscal year in
which it is earned shall be nonlapsing. The state treasurer is
authorized to accept gifts, donations, and grants, including federal
gifts, donations, and grants, for the purposes set forth in this
chapter, and such gifts, donations, and grants shall be added to the
principal amount.
                                             
 V. The executive director of the fish and game department and the
commissioner of the department of resources and economic development
shall, pursuant to the stewardship endowment, prepare an annual report
to be presented no later than December 1 of each year to the speaker of
the house, the president of the senate, the governor, the house clerk,
the senate clerk, and the state library. The report shall include a
listing of all natural area lands within the Connecticut Lakes
headwaters tract under their joint stewardship and a complete financial
accounting of the funds in the stewardship endowment including
expenditures for the most recent full fiscal year. The report shall also
summarize stewardship activities and findings for each natural area, for
the most recent full fiscal year.

**Source.** 2002, 148:6, eff. May 14, 2002.

Connecticut Lakes Headwaters Tract Road Maintenance Endowment
-------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 216:10

 **216:10 Road Maintenance Endowment Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is established an endowment fund, to be known as the
Connecticut Lakes headwaters tract road maintenance endowment, for the
purpose of ensuring a perpetual source of funds to maintain the system
of roads that exists within the conservation easement and property
interests acquired by the state in the Connecticut Lakes headwaters
tract. The fund shall be administered jointly by the executive director
of the fish and game department and the commissioner of the department
of resources and economic development.
                                             
 II. Funds added to the road maintenance endowment pursuant to
paragraph I shall be used to support road maintenance under the
authority of state agencies within the conservation easement and
property interests acquired in the Connecticut Lakes headwaters tract.

**Source.** 2002, 148:6, eff. May 14, 2002.

### Section 216:11

 **216:11 Administration. –**
                                             
 I. The road maintenance endowment established by RSA 216:10 shall be
maintained in perpetuity and shall be utilized only for the purposes of
maintaining the road system acquired through the Connecticut Lakes
headwaters tract purchase.
                                             
 II. The principal of the endowment shall be managed by the state
treasurer for the sole purpose of providing interest earnings for the
purposes set forth in this subdivision and expenditures from the
endowment for these purposes shall be limited to the interest earned
thereon.
                                             
 III. Any interest earned on the endowment principal which is not
used for the purposes set forth in this subdivision within the fiscal
year in which it is earned shall be nonlapsing. The state treasurer is
authorized to accept gifts, donations, and grants, including federal
gifts, donations, and grants, for the purposes set forth in this
chapter, and such gifts, donations, and grants shall be added to the
principal amount.
                                             
 IV. The executive director of the fish and game department and the
commissioner of the department of resources and economic development
shall, pursuant to the road maintenance endowment established under RSA
216:10, I, jointly prepare an annual report to be presented no later
than December 1 of each year to the speaker of the house, the president
of the senate, the governor, the house clerk, the senate clerk, and the
state library. The report shall include a listing of all roads subject
to the maintenance provisions of RSA 216:10 and a complete financial
accounting of the funds in the monitoring endowment including
expenditures for the most recent full fiscal year. The report shall also
summarize maintenance activities for the road system, as conducted in
the most recent full fiscal year.

**Source.** 2002, 148:6, eff. May 14, 2002.
