---
title: 'CHAPTER 225-A SKIERS, SKI AREA AND PASSENGER TRAMWAY SAFETY'
---

TITLE XIX
                                             
PUBLIC RECREATION
=================

CHAPTER 225-A
                                             
SKIERS, SKI AREA AND PASSENGER TRAMWAY SAFETY
---------------------------------------------

### Section 225-A:1

 **225-A:1 Declaration of Policy. –** The state of New Hampshire
finds that the sports of skiing, snowboarding, snow tubing, and
snowshoeing are practiced by a large number of citizens of the state of
New Hampshire, and also that skiing, snowboarding, snow tubing, and
snowshoeing attract to the state of New Hampshire large numbers of
nonresidents significantly contributing to the economy of New Hampshire.
Therefore, it shall be the policy of the state of New Hampshire to
protect its citizens and visitors from unnecessary mechanical hazards in
the operation of ski tows, lifts, nordic ski jumps and passenger
tramways, to ensure that proper design and construction are used, that
board accepted safety devices and sufficient personnel are provided for,
and that periodic inspections and adjustments are made which are deemed
essential to the safe operation of ski tows, ski lifts, nordic ski jumps
and passenger tramways. The primary responsibility for operation,
construction, maintenance and inspection rests with the operators of
such passenger tramway devices. The state, through its passenger tramway
safety board, as hereinafter provided, shall register all ski lift
devices and nordic ski jumps, establish reasonable standards of design
and operational practices, and make such independent inspections as may
be necessary in carrying out this policy. Further, it shall be the
policy of the state of New Hampshire to define the primary areas of
responsibility of skiers and other users of alpine (downhill) and nordic
(cross country and nordic ski jumps) areas, recognizing that the sport
of skiing and other ski area activities involve risks and hazards which
must be assumed as a matter of law by those engaging in such activities,
regardless of all safety measures taken by the ski area operators.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1. 1959, 299:1. 1978, 13:2. 1979, 207:1. 1987,
124:6, I(b). 1988, 151:14. 2005, 145:1, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 225-A:1-a

 **225-A:1-a Administratively Attached. –** The passenger tramway
safety board shall be an administratively attached agency, under RSA
21-G:10, to the department of safety.

**Source.** 1988, 151:1, eff. June 20, 1988. 2011, 224:240, eff. July 1,
2011.

### Section 225-A:2

 **225-A:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means the passenger tramway safety board.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of safety.
                                             
 III. "Industry'' means the activities of all those persons in the
state who own or control the operation of ski areas.
                                             
 IV. "Nordic ski jump'' means a facility constructed for the purpose
of nordic ski jumping and built in accordance with appropriate standards
and guidelines, and any facilities that are associated with the use or
viewing of such a facility.
                                             
 V. "Passenger'' means any person, including skiers, while being
transported or conveyed by a passenger tramway, or while waiting in the
immediate vicinity for such transportation or conveyance, or while
moving away from the disembarkation or unloading point of a passenger
tramway to clear the way for the following passengers, or while in the
act of boarding or embarking upon or disembarking from a passenger
tramway.
                                             
 VI. "Passenger tramway'' means a device used to transport passengers
uphill on skis or other winter sports devices, or in cars on tracks or
suspended in the air, by the use of steel cables, chains or belts or by
ropes, and usually supported by trestles or towers with one or more
spans. The term passenger tramway shall include the following:
                                             
 (a) Two-car aerial passenger tramway, a device used to transport
passengers in 2 open or enclosed cars attached to, and suspended from, a
moving wire rope, or attached to a moving wire rope and supported on a
standing wire rope, or similar devices.
                                             
 (b) Multi-car aerial passenger tramway, a device used to
transport passengers in open or enclosed cars attached to, and suspended
from, a moving wire rope, or attached to a moving wire rope and
supported on a standing wire rope, or similar devices.
                                             
 (c) "Conveyor'' means a class of outdoor transportation wherein
skiers or passengers are transported uphill on a flexible moving element
such as a conveyor belt.
                                             
 (d) Chair lift, a type of transportation on which passengers are
carried on chairs suspended in the air and attached to a moving cable,
chain or link belt supported by trestles or towers with one or more
spans, or similar devices.
                                             
 (e) J bar, T bar or platter pull, so-called, and similar types of
devices are means of transportation which pull skiers riding on skis by
means of an attachment to a main overhead cable supported by trestles or
towers with one or more spans.
                                             
 (f) Rope tow, a type of transportation which pulls the skier
riding on skis as the skier grasps the rope manually, or similar
devices.
                                             
 (g) Wire rope tow means a type of transportation by which skiers
are pulled on skis while manually gripping a handle attached to a wire
hauling cable. The hauling cable is maintained at a constant height
range between the loading and unloading points, and there is only one
span with no intermediate towers.
                                             
 VII. "Ski area operator'' means a person who owns or controls the
operation of a ski area. The word "operator'' shall include the state or
any political subdivision. An operator of a passenger tramway shall be
deemed not to be operating a common carrier. Ski area operator is
included in the term "operator'' as used in this chapter.
                                             
 VIII. "Ski areas'' means all passenger tramways and all designated
alpine and nordic trails, slopes, freestyle terrain, tubing terrain, and
nordic ski jumps under the control of the alpine and nordic ski area
operator and any other areas under the operator's control open to the
public for winter sports recreation or competition.
                                             
 IX. "Skier'' means a person utilizing the ski area under the control
of a ski area operator for ski, snowboard, and snow tube recreation and
competition.
                                             
 X. "Tubing terrain'' means areas designated for sliding on
inflatable tubes or other similar devices down a prepared course or
lanes at a ski area.
                                             
 XI. "Winter sports'' means the use of skis, snowboards, snow tubes,
snowshoes, and any device being utilized by a disabled or adaptive
participant for winter recreation or competition.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1. 1963, 53:1; 292:1. 1965, 241:1. 1973, 52:1.
1978, 13:3. 1979, 207:2. 1987, 124:26, IV. 1988, 151:2. 2005, 145:2,
eff. July 1, 2005. 2011, 224:241, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 225-A:3

 **225-A:3 Passenger Tramway Safety Board. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987,
124:26, IV, eff. July 1, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 225-A:3-a

 **225-A:3-a Passenger Tramway Safety Board. –** There shall be a
passenger tramway safety board of 4 appointive members. The appointive
members shall be appointed by the governor, with the advice and consent
of the council, from persons representing the following interests: one
member who operates a "surface lift'' as described in RSA 225-A:2,
I(e)-(g) only and one member from the cable and other passenger carrying
devices industry, and in making such appointments consideration shall be
given to recommendations made by members of the industry, so that both
the devices which pull skiers riding on skis and the devices which
transport passengers in cars or chairs shall have proper representation;
one member to represent the public at large; and one member to represent
insurance companies which engage in insuring passenger tramway
operations, and in appointing such member consideration shall be given
to recommendations made by such insurance companies. The authority of
such board shall not extend to any other matter relative to the
operation of a ski area.

**Source.** 1988, 151:3, eff. June 20, 1988. 2011, 224:242, eff. July 1,
2011.

### Section 225-A:4

 **225-A:4 Term of Office. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 124:26, IV, eff. July
1, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 225-A:4-a

 **225-A:4-a Term of Office. –** Of the first appointments under this
section one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, one for a
term of 2 years, one for a term of 3 years and one for a term of 4
years, and until their successors are appointed and qualified, and
thereafter each of the appointed members shall be appointed for a term
of 4 years and until his successor is appointed and qualified. Vacancies
in the board shall be filled for the unexpired term.

**Source.** 1988, 151:4, eff. June 20, 1988.

### Section 225-A:5

 **225-A:5 Removal. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 124:26, IV, eff. July 1,
1987.
                                             ]

### Section 225-A:5-a

 **225-A:5-a Removal. –** The appointive members of the board may
only be removed from office as provided in RSA 4:1.

**Source.** 1988, 151:5, eff. June 20, 1988.

### Section 225-A:6

 **225-A:6 Compensation. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 124:26, IV, eff. July
1, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 225-A:6-a

 **225-A:6-a Compensation. –** The appointive members of the board
shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for their
reasonable expenses incurred in official duties.

**Source.** 1988, 151:6, eff. June 20, 1988.

### Section 225-A:7

 **225-A:7 Records. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 124:26, IV, eff. July 1,
1987.
                                             ]

### Section 225-A:7-a

 **225-A:7-a Records. –** The department shall provide the board with
such office and clerical assistance as may be necessary to carry on the
work of the board, in accordance with RSA 225-A:1-a. The department
shall also preserve the records, codes, inspection reports, and business
records of the board.

**Source.** 1988, 151:7, eff. June 20, 1988.

### Section 225-A:8

 **225-A:8 Rulemaking. –** The board with the approval of the
commissioner of safety shall adopt, under RSA 541-A, rules after public
hearing, relating to public safety in the construction, operation and
maintenance of passenger tramways. The rules shall be in accordance with
established standards, if any, and shall not be discriminatory in their
application to operators of passenger tramways. The board shall also
give notice of any public hearing under RSA 541-A for such rules by
first class mail to each registered operator at least 14 days before the
hearing.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1. 1987, 124:13. 1988, 151:8. 2006, 24:1, eff. May
30, 2006.

### Section 225-A:9

 **225-A:9 Declaratory Judgment. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 124:26, IV,
eff. July 1, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 225-A:9-a

 **225-A:9-a Declaratory Judgment. –** The validity or reasonableness
of any rule adopted by the board may be judicially determined upon a
petition to the superior court for declaratory judgment, brought within
30 days after the effective date of such rule. The court shall hear the
petition and render a declaratory judgment only when it appears that the
rule, or its threatened application, interferes with or impairs or
threatens to interfere with or impair the legal rights and privileges of
the petitioner. In rendering judgment the court shall give effect to any
pertinent constitutional limitations upon the powers of the board, the
limits of the authority and jurisdiction of the board as conferred under
this chapter, and the procedural requirements of this chapter.

**Source.** 1988, 151:9, eff. June 20, 1988.

### Section 225-A:10

 **225-A:10 Inspections. –** The department may make such inspection
of the construction, operation and maintenance of passenger tramways as
the board may reasonably require. The department may, at its own
expense, employ other qualified engineers to make such inspections.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1, eff. July 29, 1957.

### Section 225-A:10-a

 **225-A:10-a Review of Plans and Specifications. –** Prior to the
construction of a new, or the alteration of an existing, passenger
tramway, the operator or prospective operator shall submit plans and
specifications to the department. The department may make
recommendations relative to safety of the layout and equipment, but such
recommendation shall not relieve the operator or prospective operator of
his primary responsibility as set forth in RSA 225-A:1.

**Source.** 1963, 53:8, eff. July 1, 1963.

### Section 225-A:11

 **225-A:11 Operator to Pay Certain Costs. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 52:5,
eff. May 23, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 225-A:12

 **225-A:12 Inspection Reports. –** If, as the result of an
inspection, it is found that a violation of the board's rules,
regulations or code exists, or a condition in passenger tramway
construction, operation or maintenance exists endangering the safety of
the public, an immediate report shall be made to the board for
appropriate investigation and order.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1. 1987, 124:6, I(b). 1988, 151:14, eff. June 20,
1988.

### Section 225-A:13

 **225-A:13 Complaints. –** Any person may make written complaint to
the board setting forth any thing or act claimed to be done or omitted
to be done by any registered operator which is alleged to be in
violation of any rule, regulation or code adopted by the board, or
setting forth any condition in passenger tramway construction, operation
or maintenance which is alleged to endanger the safety of the public.
Thereupon the board shall cause a copy of said complaint to be forwarded
to the registered operator complained of, which may be accompanied by an
order requiring that the matters complained of be answered in writing
within a time to be specified by the board. The board may investigate
the matter complained of if it shall appear to the board that there are
reasonable grounds therefor.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1. 1987, 124:6, I(b). 1988, 151:14, eff. June 20,
1988.

### Section 225-A:14

 **225-A:14 Registration Required. –** No passenger tramway shall be
operated in this state unless the operator thereof was registered by the
board.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1. 1959, 299:2. 1987, 124:6, I(b). 1988, 151:14,
eff. June 20, 1988.

### Section 225-A:15

 **225-A:15 Application for Registration. –** On or before November 1
of each year every operator of a passenger tramway shall apply to the
board, on forms prepared by it, for registration hereunder. The
application shall contain such information as the board may reasonably
require.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1. 1959, 299:3. 1963, 53:4. 1987, 124:6, I(b).
1988, 151:14, eff. June 20, 1988.

### Section 225-A:16

 **225-A:16 Fees. –** The application for registration shall be
accompanied by the applicable annual fees to cover the costs of
administering this chapter. The fees for registration shall be set by
the board by rule adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1. 1972, 29:1. 1977, 563:28. 1985, 347:1. 1988,
151:14. 2003, 191:1, eff. June 30, 2003.

### Section 225-A:17

 **225-A:17 Registration. –** The board, if satisfied with the facts
stated in the application, shall issue a registration certificate to the
operator. Each registration shall expire on October 31 next following
the day of its issue.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1. 1959, 299:4. 1963 53:5. 1987, 124:6, I(b).
1988, 151:14, eff. June 20, 1988.

### Section 225-A:18

 **225-A:18 Fees. –** All fees collected by the board hereunder shall
be credited to the special appropriation for the department to be
expended for purposes of this chapter.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1. 1987, 124:6, I(b). 1988, 151:14, eff. June 20,
1988.

### Section 225-A:18-a

 **225-A:18-a Emergency Shut-down. –** When facts are presented to
the board, or to any member thereof, tending to show that an
unreasonable hazard exists in the continued operation of a tramway, the
board or member, after such verification of said facts as is practical
under the circumstances and consistent with the public safety, may, by
an emergency order require the operator of said tramway forthwith to
cease using the same for the transportation of passengers. Such
emergency order shall be in writing and notice thereof may be served by
any person upon the operator or his agent immediately in control of said
tramway by a true and attested copy of such order, the return of such
service to be shown by an affidavit on the back thereof. Such emergency
order shall be effective for a period not to exceed 48 hours from the
time of service. Immediately after the issuance of an emergency order
hereunder, the board shall conduct an investigation into the facts of
the case as contemplated in RSA 225-A:19, and shall take such action
under said RSA 225-A:19 as may be appropriate.

**Source.** 1959, 299:5. 1987, 124:6, I(b). 1988, 151:14, eff. June 20,
1988.

### Section 225-A:19

 **225-A:19 Orders. –** If, after investigation, the commissioner of
safety or the board finds that a violation of any of the rules exists,
or that there is a condition in passenger tramway construction,
operation or maintenance endangering the safety of the public, either
the commissioner of safety or the board shall forthwith issue a written
order setting forth his or its findings, the corrective action to be
taken, and fixing a reasonable time for compliance therewith. Such order
shall be served upon the operator involved by registered mail, and shall
become final, unless the operator shall apply to the board for a hearing
in the manner hereinafter provided.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1. 1987, 124:14. 1988, 151:10, eff. June 20, 1988.

### Section 225-A:19-a

 **225-A:19-a Operation Forbidden. –** If in any such case the
commissioner of safety or the board is of the opinion that the public
safety would be endangered by the use of the tramway for the
transportation of passengers prior to the taking of some or all of such
corrective action, he or it shall so state in said order, and shall
require in said order that the tramway shall not be so used until
specified corrective action shall have been taken. From and after
receipt of the order by the operator said tramway shall not be used for
the transportation of passengers without the approval of the
commissioner of safety or the board. Application for a hearing before
the board shall not have the effect of suspending said order. Operation
of the tramway following receipt of such order may be enjoined by the
superior court.

**Source.** 1959, 299:6. 1987, 124:6, I(b). 1988, 151:11, eff. June 20,
1988.

### Section 225-A:20

 **225-A:20 Hearing. –** Any such operator, who is aggrieved by any
such order, may, within 10 days after the service of such order upon him
as hereinbefore provided, apply to the board for a review of such order.
It shall be the duty of the board to hear the same at the earliest
convenient date. At such hearing the operator shall have the right to be
heard personally or by counsel, to cross-examine witnesses appearing
against him, and to produce evidence in his own behalf. After such
hearing, the board shall report its findings in writing to the
commissioner of safety and make such order as the facts may require.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1. 1987, 124:6, I(b). 1988, 151:12, eff. June 20,
1988.

### Section 225-A:21

 **225-A:21 Appeal. –** Any such operator, who is aggrieved by any
such post-hearing order of the board, may, within 14 days after the
entry thereof, appeal therefrom to the superior court. No such appeal
shall suspend the operation of the order made by the board; provided
that the superior court may suspend the order of the board pending the
determination of such appeal whenever, in the opinion of the court,
justice may require such suspension. The superior court shall hear such
appeal at the earliest convenient day and shall make such decree as
justice may require.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1. 1987, 124:6, I(b). 1988, 151:14, eff. June 20,
1988.

### Section 225-A:22

 **225-A:22 Suspension of Registration. –** If any such operator
fails to comply with the lawful order of the board issued under RSA
225-A:19 and 20 and within the time fixed thereby, the board may suspend
the registration of such operator for such time as it may consider
necessary for the protection of the safety of the public.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1. 1987, 124:6, I(b). 1988, 151:14, eff. June 20,
1988.

### Section 225-A:23

 **225-A:23 Responsibilities of the Ski Area Operator. –** It shall
be the responsibility of the operator to maintain the following signs
and designations:
                                             
 I. General Designations. The following color code is hereby
established:
                                             
 (a) Green circle: On area's easiest trails and slopes.
                                             
 (b) Black diamond: On area's most difficult trails and slopes.
                                             
 (c) Blue square: On area's trails and slopes that fall between
the green circle and black diamond designation.
                                             
 (d) Yellow triangle with red exclamation point inside with a red
band around the triangle: Extrahazardous.
                                             
 (e) Border around a black figure in the shape of a skier inside
with a band running diagonally across the sign with the word "closed''
beneath the emblem: Trail or slope closed.
                                             
 (f) Orange oval: On area's designated freestyle terrain without
respect to its degree of difficulty.
                                             
 II. Base Area; Information to Skiers and Passengers.
                                             
 (a) A trail board shall be maintained at a prominent location
listing the ski area's network of ski trails, slopes, tubing terrain,
and designated freestyle terrain in accordance with the aforementioned
color code and containing a key to the code in accordance with the above
designations; said trail board shall further designate which trails,
slopes, and snow tube terrain are open or closed.
                                             
 (b) The ski area operator shall warn skiers and passengers by use
of the trail board, if applicable, that snow grooming or snow making
operations are routinely in progress on the slopes and trails serviced
by each tramway.
                                             
 (c) A map shall be available at all ski areas to all skiers and
passengers indicating the system of ski trails, slopes, tubing terrain,
and designated freestyle terrain in accordance with the color code in
paragraph I.
                                             
 III. Ski Trails and Slopes; Information and Warning to Skiers and
Other Persons.
                                             
 (a) The operator shall mark the beginning of each alpine and
nordic ski trail or slope with the appropriate symbol for that
particular trail's or slope's degree of difficulty in accordance with
RSA 225-A:23, I.
                                             
 (b) The beginning of each alpine ski trail or slope is defined as
the highest point of the trail or slope. Lower trail junctions and
intersections may be marked with a degree of difficulty symbol.
                                             
 (c) The operator shall mark the beginning of, and designated
access points to, each alpine trail or slope that is closed with a sign
in accordance with RSA 225-A:23, I(e). For purposes of this
subparagraph, "designated access points'' means the beginning of a
trail, slope, or any point where an open trail crosses or intersects the
closed trail as shown on the ski area's trail board and trail map.
                                             
 (d) The operator shall mark the beginning of and designated
access points to terrain with the appropriate symbol in accordance with
RSA 225-A:23, I(f), which sign shall warn the skier that the use of the
terrain is at the skier's own risk. Further, a sign shall be placed at
each lift depicting the symbols in RSA 225-A:23, I(a)-(f) describing the
trail or slope that the skier may encounter by utilizing such lift.
                                             
 IV. Nordic Ski Jumps. The operator shall provide a sign in a
prominent location at or near the nordic ski jump facility, which sign
shall warn the ski jumper that the use of the nordic ski jump is
entirely at the ski jumper's own risk. Further, the ski area operator
shall be responsible for the design, construction, and structural
maintenance of all nordic ski jumps.

**Source.** 1957, 254:1. 1963, 53:6. 1973, 530:22. 1978, 13:5. 1979,
207:3. 2005, 145:3, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 225-A:24

 **225-A:24 Responsibilities of Skiers and Passengers. –** It is
hereby recognized that, regardless of all safety measures which may be
taken by the ski area operator, skiing, snowboarding, snow tubing, and
snowshoeing as sports, and the use of passenger tramways associated
therewith may be hazardous to the skiers or passengers. Therefore:
                                             
 I. Each person who participates in the sport of skiing,
snowboarding, snow tubing, and snowshoeing accepts as a matter of law,
the dangers inherent in the sport, and to that extent may not maintain
an action against the operator for any injuries which result from such
inherent risks, dangers, or hazards. The categories of such risks,
hazards, or dangers which the skier or passenger assumes as a matter of
law include but are not limited to the following: variations in terrain,
surface or subsurface snow or ice conditions; bare spots; rocks, trees,
stumps and other forms of forest growth or debris; terrain, lift towers,
and components thereof (all of the foregoing whether above or below snow
surface); pole lines and plainly marked or visible snow making
equipment; collisions with other skiers or other persons or with any of
the categories included in this paragraph.
                                             
 II. Each skier and passenger shall have the sole responsibility for
knowing the range of his or her own ability to negotiate any slope,
trail, terrain, or passenger tramway. Any passenger who boards such
tramway shall be presumed to have sufficient knowledge, abilities, and
physical dexterity to negotiate the lift, and no liability shall attach
to any operator or attendant for failure to instruct persons on the use
thereof.
                                             
 III. Each skier or passenger shall conduct himself or herself,
within the limits of his or her own ability, maintain control of his or
her speed and course at all times both on the ground and in the air,
while skiing, snowboarding, snow tubing, and snowshoeing heed all posted
warnings, and refrain from acting in a manner which may cause or
contribute to the injury of himself, herself, or others.
                                             
 IV. Each passenger shall be the sole judge of his ability to
negotiate any uphill track, and no action shall be maintained against
any operator by reason of the condition of said track unless the board,
upon appropriate evidence furnished to it, makes a finding that the
condition of the track, at the time and place of an accident, did not
meet the board's requirements, provided however, that the ski area
operator shall have had notice, prior to the accident, of the board's
requirements the violation of which is claimed to be the basis for any
action by the passenger.
                                             
 V. No skier, passenger or other person shall:
                                             
 (a) Embark or disembark upon a passenger tramway except at
designated areas.
                                             
 (b) Throw or drop any object while riding on a passenger tramway
nor do any act or thing which shall interfere with the running of said
tramway.
                                             
 (c) Engage in any type of conduct which will contribute to cause
injury to any other person nor shall he willfully place any object in
the uphill ski track which may cause another to fall, while riding in a
passenger tramway.
                                             
 (d) Ski or otherwise use a slope or trail which has been
designated "closed'' by the operator without written permission of said
operator or designee.
                                             
 (e) Remove, alter, deface or destroy any sign or notice placed in
the ski area or on the trail board by the operator.
                                             
 (f) Cross the uphill track of a J bar, T bar, rope tow, wire
rope, or similar device except at locations approved by the board.
                                             
 (g) Ski or otherwise access terrain outside open and designated
ski trails and slopes or beyond ski area boundaries without written
permission of said operator or designee.

**Source.** 1965, 241:2. 1969, 414:1. 1978, 13:5. 1987, 124:6, I(b).
1988, 151:14. 2005, 145:4, 5, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 225-A:25

 **225-A:25 Insurance; Limitations. –**
                                             
 I. Unless an operator of a passenger tramway is in violation of this
chapter or the rules of the board, which violation is causal of the
injury complained of, no action shall lie against any operator by any
passenger or his or her representative; this prohibition shall not,
however, prevent the maintenance of an action against an operator for
negligent operation, construction, or maintenance of the passenger
tramway itself.
                                             
 II. Except as limited by paragraph III, each operator of a passenger
tramway shall maintain liability insurance with limits of not less than

                                             $300,000 per accident.
                                             
 III. The requirements of paragraph II shall not apply to an operator
of a passenger tramway which is not open to the general public and
operated without charge to users. Nonprofit ski clubs, outing clubs, or
other similar organizations, which are operators of rope or wire rope
tows shall also be excepted from the requirements of paragraph II if the
organization's bylaws so provide, each member of the organization is
provided with a copy of such bylaws, and use of the rope or wire rope
tows operated by the organization is restricted to members of that
organization. This paragraph shall not relieve the state or any
political subdivision operating a rope or wire rope tow from the
requirement of maintaining liability insurance in accordance with
paragraph II.
                                             
 IV. No action shall be maintained against any operator for injuries
to any skier or passenger unless the same is commenced within 2 years
from the time of injury provided, however, that as a condition precedent
thereof the operator shall be notified by certified return receipt mail
within 90 days of said injury. The venue of any action against an
operator shall be in the county where the ski area is located and not
otherwise.
                                             
 V. No ski area operator shall be held responsible for ensuring the
safety of, or for damages including injury or death resulting to, skiers
or other persons who utilize the facilities of a ski area to access
terrain outside open and designated ski trails. Ski areas shall not be
liable for damages, including injury or death, to persons who venture
beyond such open and designated ski trails.
                                             
 VI. A ski area operator owes no duty to anyone who trespasses on the
ski area property.

**Source.** 1965, 241:2. 1973, 52:2. 1978, 13:5. 1981, 112:1. 1987,
124:6, I(b). 1988, 151:14. 2005, 145:6-8, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 225-A:26

 **225-A:26 Penalty. –** Any person convicted of operating a
passenger tramway without having been registered by the board, or
violating this chapter or rules of the board shall be guilty of a
violation if a natural person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other
person. Any operator who operates after his registration has been
suspended by the board, shall be guilty of a violation for each day of
illegal operation.

**Source.** 1965, 241:2. 1969, 220:1; 378:1; 414:2, 3. 1973, 52:4. 1978,
13:5. 1987, 124:15. 1988, 151:14, eff. June 20, 1988.
