---
title: 'CHAPTER 227-E CONNECTICUT RIVER VALLEY RESOURCE COMMISSION'
---

TITLE XIX
                                             
PUBLIC RECREATION
=================

CHAPTER 227-E
                                             
CONNECTICUT RIVER VALLEY RESOURCE COMMISSION
--------------------------------------------

### Section 227-E:1

 **227-E:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to cooperate
with the state of Vermont in protecting and preserving the visual,
ecological and agricultural integrity of the Connecticut River Valley
while planning for and guiding the development of the recreational,
tourist, commercial, and residential uses of the valley. The commission
shall achieve these goals by identifying, protecting, and promoting the
natural, recreational, cultural, and historical resources of the
Connecticut River Valley. The commission shall seek the cooperation of
the state of Vermont in achieving these goals.

**Source.** 1987, 311:1, eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 227-E:2

 **227-E:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commission'' means the Connecticut River Valley resource
commission.
                                             
 II. "Conservation easement'' means a less than fee interest in
property acquired for the purpose of permanently protecting a natural,
cultural or historical resource or its scenic or recreational values.
                                             
 III. "Development rights'' means the rights of a fee simple owner of
property to improve such property, including the right to change the
terrain, remove natural vegetation and construct buildings on it.
Development rights may be severed from the fee simple to constitute a
restriction on the property.

**Source.** 1987, 311:1, eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 227-E:3

 **227-E:3 Commission Established; Administratively Attached. –**
There is established the Connecticut River Valley resource commission.
The commission shall be administratively attached to the department of
environmental services pursuant to RSA 21-G:10.

**Source.** 1987, 311:1. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44, eff. July 1, 2004.
2011, 24:1, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 227-E:4

 **227-E:4 Membership of Commission. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall consist of 15 members, all of whom shall be
New Hampshire residents, as follows:
                                             
 (a) A member of the North Country Council, designated by the
council.
                                             
 (b) A member of the Upper Valley-Lake Sunapee Council, designated
by the council.
                                             
 (c) A member of the Southwest Regional Planning Commission,
designated by the commission.
                                             
 (d) A member of the Connecticut River Watershed Council,
designated by the council.
                                             
 (e) A New Hampshire member of the Connecticut River Flood Control
Commission, designated by the commission.
                                             
 (f) A representative of a hydro-electric concern located within
the Connecticut River Valley.
                                             
 (g) A representative of a recognized statewide conservation
organization.
                                             
 (h) A representative of the commercial tourism industry.
                                             
 (i) A representative of the agricultural industry who shall be
actively engaged in farming.
                                             
 (j) A representative of the forest product industry or a
timberland owner.
                                             
 (k) Five additional members appointed by the governor and council
from a list of nominees submitted by the commission members appointed
under RSA 227-E:4, I(a) through (j) to the governor and council.
                                             
 II. The governor and council shall appoint the members designated in
subparagraphs I(f) through (k). These members shall all be residents of
the Connecticut River Valley and shall serve 3-year terms, provided that
the initial appointments shall be 2 for a term of one year, 4 for a term
of 2 years, and 4 for a term of 3 years. The members appointed under
subparagraphs I(a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) shall serve at the pleasure of
the organizations they represent.
                                             
 III. Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term. Members shall hold
office until their successors are appointed and qualified.

**Source.** 1987, 311:1, eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 227-E:5

 **227-E:5 Chairman; Meetings. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall elect a chairman from among its members.
                                             
 II. The commission shall meet at least once a month and at the call
of the chairman.

**Source.** 1987, 311:1, eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 227-E:6

 **227-E:6 Power and Duties. –** In performing its duties, the
commission shall cooperate with the department of environmental services
and shall conform its activities with any state comprehensive plan. The
commission shall:
                                             
 I. Assemble and assess a comprehensive inventory of all private and
public resources which serve to preserve and protect the visual and
ecological integrity of the Connecticut River Valley.
                                             
 II. Coordinate, with the department of resources and economic
development, the development of regional promotional programs and other
incentive programs for established and future recreational facilities,
resources, and services using existing public and private mechanisms.
                                             
 III. Initiate and encourage interstate cooperation and participation
with the state of Vermont for the promotion and protection of the
Connecticut River Valley as a recreational and cultural resource.
                                             
 IV. Cooperate with, and suggest guidelines for, local communities
and regional planning commissions to accomplish the purposes of this
chapter.
                                             
 V. Review and evaluate similar river and watershed protection
efforts and regional promotion programs.
                                             
 VI. Investigate, identify, accept and expend additional public and
private funds to:
                                             
 (a) Establish incentives for the expansion of recreational
facilities.
                                             
 (b) Encourage the development of recreational opportunities and
provide additional public access to recreational areas in the
Connecticut River Valley.
                                             
 (c) Administer the duties of the commission.
                                             
 (d) Protect the agricultural, historical and natural resources of
the Connecticut River Valley.
                                             
 VII. Advise federal, state, and local agencies and private
organizations on priorities for acquisition and protection of key
resource lands in the valley to accomplish the purposes of this
chapter.
                                             
 VIII. Evaluate applications from local communities for funding for
the purchase by such communities of development rights, conservation
easements, and titles to or other interests in land having important
recreational, historical, natural, and cultural qualities. The
commission may award grants of up to 50 percent of the cost for such
purchases from funds appropriated to the commission for the purchase of
such interests in land. The commission shall evaluate the applications
in accordance with criteria adopted under RSA 227-E:8, III.

**Source.** 1987, 311:1. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44, eff. July 1, 2004.
2011, 24:2, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 227-E:7

 **227-E:7 Private Donations. –** In addition to the authority
granted in RSA 227-E:6, the commission may solicit and accept private
donations for the purpose of this chapter. Any funds received pursuant
to this section shall be nonlapsing.

**Source.** 1987, 311:1. 1990, 233:20, eff. June 26, 1990.

### Section 227-E:8

 **227-E:8 Rulemaking. –** The commission shall adopt rules, after
public hearing and pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Regional promotional programs and other incentive programs for
recreational facilities, resources and services.
                                             
 II. Criteria for the identification of priority recreational
facilities and land.
                                             
 III. Establishing procedures for grants administered by the
commission. These rules shall include, as appropriate:
                                             
 (a) Application or grant distribution procedures.
                                             
 (b) Criteria and procedures for evaluating applications.
                                             
 (c) Procedures for administration of funds by grantees.
                                             
 (d) Monitoring and report procedures.
                                             
 (e) Appeal procedures for parties dissatisfied with grant
decisions.
                                             
 IV. The administration of the commission.

**Source.** 1987, 311:1, eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 227-E:9

 **227-E:9 Reports; Committee Recommendations. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall annually on or before September 1 submit a
report of its activities and expenditures to the governor, the speaker
of the house of representatives and the president of the senate, to be
forwarded by each of them to the appropriate house or senate standing
committee.
                                             
 II. The house and senate committees receiving the report shall each,
on or before December 1, review the report and submit recommendations,
including recommendations for legislation, if appropriate, to the
speaker or the president of the senate, respectively.

**Source.** 1987, 311:1, eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 227-E:10

 **227-E:10 Staff. –** There shall be the equivalent of one full-time
staff person who shall be hired by the chairman of the commission with
the approval of the commission. The staff person shall assist the
commission in carrying out the purposes of this chapter and shall report
directly to the commission.

**Source.** 1987, 311:1, eff. July 1, 1987.
