---
title: 'CHAPTER 227-C HISTORIC PRESERVATION'
---

TITLE XIX
                                             
PUBLIC RECREATION
=================

CHAPTER 227-C
                                             
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
---------------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 227-C:1

 **227-C:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter, the following
words and terms shall have the following meanings unless a contrary
meaning shall appear in the context:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
cultural resources or his designee.
                                             
 II. "Council'' means the state historical resources council.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of cultural resources.
                                             
 IV. "Field investigation'' means the search for, identification of,
and evaluation of historic resources, and the study of the traces of
human culture at any land or underwater historic property, by means of
inspection, surveying, digging, excavating, or removing surface or
subsurface objects, or going onto a site with that intent.
                                             
 V. "Historic preservation'' means the research, excavation,
protection, restoration and rehabilitation of buildings, structures,
objects, districts, areas and sites significant in the history,
architecture, archeology, or culture of this state, its communities, or
the nation.
                                             
 VI. "Historic property'' means any building, structure, object,
district, area or site that is significant in the history, architecture,
archeology or culture of this state, its communities, or the nation.
                                             
 VII. "Historic resource'' means:
                                             
 (a) Any historic property which has been listed in the New
Hampshire state register of historic places or has been determined
eligible for the New Hampshire state register of historic places by the
division of historical resources or which has been listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or has been determined by the
keeper of the register to be eligible for the National Register using
the criteria for evaluation in 36 C.F.R. section 60.4;
                                             
 (b) Any object, or group of objects, located in or associated
with an historic property or that enhances an understanding and
appreciation of New Hampshire history;
                                             
 (c) Skeletal remains of humans that would not be subject to the
provisions of RSA 611-B and which fall under the provisions of RSA
227-C:8, VI; skeletal remains of other vertebrate animals; and other
fossils within a cultural context that constitutes, or may constitute,
the whole or part of an historic property;
                                             
 (d) Any object, or group of objects, and the district, area, or
site they define, which may yield significant data but whose value and
significance has yet to be determined by the division of historical
resources; or
                                             
 (e) Any significant data that may be used to answer research
questions about an historic property, and events and processes of the
human past, provided by the fields of archeology, history, architecture
and such supplemental sciences as ethnography, paleoecology, and related
sciences.
                                             
 VII-a. "Human remains'' or "remains'' means any part of the body of
deceased human being in any stage of decomposition, together with any
artifacts or other materials known or reliably assumed to have been on
or interred with the deceased human being.
                                             
 VIII. "Office'' means the state historic preservation office, also
known as the division of historical resources, department of cultural
resources.
                                             
 VIII-a. "Skeletal analyst'' means the member of the professional
staff or another professional person designated by the director of the
division of historical resources with the approval of the commissioner
having:
                                             
 (a) A postgraduate degree in a field involving the study of the
human skeleton such as skeletal biology, forensic osteology, or other
relevant aspects of physical anthropology or medicine;
                                             
 (b) A minimum of one year's experience in conducting laboratory
reconstruction and analysis of skeletal remains, including the
differentiation of the physical characteristics denoting cultural or
biological affinity; and
                                             
 (c) Designed and executed a skeletal analysis, and presented the
written results and interpretations of such analysis.
                                             
 IX. "State archeologist'' means the member of the professional staff
designated by the director of the division of historical resources with
the approval of the commissioner to develop, supervise and coordinate
activities necessary to discharge and integrate the powers and duties of
the office in the field of archeology as mandated by federal and state
laws and procedures.
                                             
 IX-a. "State curator'' means the member of the professional staff,
designated by the director of the division of historical resources with
the approval of the commissioner, charged with the identification,
evaluation, protection, and interpretation of objects of historic
significance.
                                             
 X. "Unmarked human burial'' means any interment of human remains for
which there exists no grave marker or any other historical documentation
providing information as to the identity of the deceased.

**Source.** 1974, 32:1. 1981, 90:2; 504:1. 1983, 422:3. 1985, 345:3.
1986, 80:2-4. 1988, 201:1, 2. 1990, 73:1. 1998, 363:3. 2007, 324:12,
eff. Sept. 14, 2007. 2012, 58:1, eff. July 13, 2012.

### Section 227-C:1-a

 **227-C:1-a Findings and Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. The general court has determined that the historical,
archeological, architectural, engineering, and cultural heritage of New
Hampshire is one of the most important environmental assets of the state
and that the rapid social and economic development of contemporary
society threatens the remaining vestiges of this heritage; therefore, it
is hereby declared to be public policy and in the public interest of
this state to engage in a comprehensive program of historic preservation
to promote the use and conservation of such property for the education,
inspiration, pleasure, and enrichment of the citizens of New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. The general court finds that:
                                             
 (a) Unmarked human burials and human remains are subject to
vandalism and inadvertent destruction at an ever-increasing rate;
                                             
 (b) Existing state laws do not provide adequate protection to
prevent damage to and destruction of these remains;
                                             
 (c) There is a great deal of scientific information to be gained
from the proper excavation, study, and analysis of human remains
recovered from such burials; and
                                             
 (d) There has been no procedure for descendants or other
interested individuals to make known their concerns regarding
disposition of these remains.
                                             
 III. Some purposes of this chapter are:
                                             
 (a) To provide adequate protection from vandalism for unmarked
human burials and human remains;
                                             
 (b) To provide adequate protection for unmarked human burials and
human remains not within the jurisdiction of the county medical examiner
that are encountered during archaeological excavation, construction, or
other ground disturbing activities, found anywhere within the state
except on federal land; and
                                             
 (c) To provide for adequate skeletal analysis of remains removed
or excavated from unmarked human burials if the analysis would result in
valuable scientific information.

**Source.** 1986, 80:1. 1998, 363:2, eff. Aug. 25, 1998.

### Section 227-C:2

 **227-C:2 State Historic Preservation Office. –** The division of
historical resources, department of cultural resources established by
RSA 21-K:7 shall also be known as the state historic preservation
office. The director, division of historical resources shall also be
known as the state historic preservation officer.

**Source.** 1974, 32:1. 1985, 345:3. 1990, 73:1. 1998, 363:3, eff. Aug.
25, 1998.

### Section 227-C:3

 **227-C:3 Administration. –**
                                             
 I. The director, subject to the approval of the commissioner, shall
conduct any relations with the representatives of the federal government
and the respective states with regard to matters of historic
preservation.
                                             
 II. The director, subject to the approval of the commissioner, may
employ such professional personnel as required, subject to the personnel
laws of the state and within budgetary limitations.
                                             
 III. Consultants, as required, subject to budgetary limitations, may
be employed by the director, with the approval of the commissioner.
                                             
 IV. With the approval of the commissioner, the director may organize
councils to assist the division as necessary, such as, but not limited
to, an advisory archeological council of professional archeologists and
representatives of professional and amateur societies. All members of
the councils shall serve without compensation.
                                             
 V. The director may employ or otherwise engage certified avocational
archeologists to assist in the performance of field investigations under
the direct supervision of the division, or those authorized by the
commissioner, and to assist in information exchange and historic
preservation with towns and communities, subject to personnel laws,
budgetary limitations, grant restrictions, and approval of the
commissioner.

**Source.** 1974, 32:1. 1981, 504:2. 1985, 345:3.

### Section 227-C:4

 **227-C:4 Historic Preservation Functions. –** The division of
historical resources shall have the following functions, including, but
not limited to:
                                             
 I. Undertaking a statewide survey to identify and document historic
properties, including all those owned by the state, its agencies and
political subdivisions.
                                             
 II. Preparing the state's historic preservation plan with the
assistance of the office of energy and planning, reviewing that plan
annually, and revising it accordingly.
                                             
 III. Providing information on historic properties within the state
to the agencies of the federal, state, regional and local governments
and, when appropriate, to private individuals and organizations.
                                             
 IV. Accepting moneys for historic preservation from public and
private sources in the name of the state and utilizing these as
conditioned by the appropriation, award, grant or donation, or, if the
moneys are unencumbered, supplementing other funding to implement the
annual state historic preservation plan.
                                             
 V. Cooperating with federal, state, regional and local government
agencies in the planning and conduct of specific undertakings affecting
historic properties and preservation objectives and in overall land use
planning.
                                             
 VI. Coordinating the activities of regional and local government
agencies in accordance with the state plan and programs for historic
preservation.
                                             
 VII. Providing technical and financial assistance to regional and
local government agencies and private individuals and organizations
involved in historic preservation activities.
                                             
 VIII. Stimulating public interest in historic preservation in
cooperation with other state, regional and local agencies and with other
private individuals and organizations.
                                             
 IX. Developing an ongoing program of historical, architectural and
archeological research and development to include continuing surveys,
excavation, scientific recording, interpretation and publication of the
state's historical, architectural, archeological and cultural resources.
A reasonable charge may be made for publications.
                                             
 X. Considering proposals to erect highway historical markers under
RSA 236:41. No such marker shall be put in place without division
approval. The division may make cooperative agreements with towns and
historical organizations to place historic markers under RSA 236:44.
                                             
 XI. Providing technical review and comment relative to the
commissioner's powers and duties in the preservation of state historic
resources under RSA 227-C:6-8.
                                             
 XII. Cooperating with the state historian appointed under RSA
17-I:3.
                                             
 XIII. Cooperating with the state archivist appointed under RSA
8-B:4.
                                             
 XIV. Cooperating with and aiding municipalities in the
establishment, layout and definition of historic districts under RSA
674:45-50.
                                             
 XV. Cooperating with and assisting state and local historical
societies in their historic preservation activities.
                                             
 XVI. Cooperating with the director, division of parks and
recreation, in the administration of state public areas which are
historic sites under RSA 218:5-a, I(a) and RSA 218:5-a, II(a).
                                             
 XVII. The archaeological discovery, investigation, analysis, and
disposition of human remains.
                                             
 XVIII. Accepting gifts of objects of historic significance, either
directly or pursuant to RSA 4:8-a, cataloguing such gifts, and including
such gifts in the descriptive inventory and photographic reproduction
collections required by RSA 5:30, X. Accepted gifts shall be formally
recognized by the governor under RSA 4:8 or by the governor and council
under RSA 4:8-a.
                                             
 XIX. Placing objects of historic significance at locations most
appropriate to their conservation and interpretive needs, pursuant to
RSA 4:9.
                                             
 XX. Advising legislative committees and executive departments on the
conservation needs of state-owned objects of historic significance.
                                             
 XXI. Administering the state heritage landmark designation review
process established under RSA 227-C:24-26.

**Source.** 1974, 32:1. 1981, 504:3. 1983, 422:6. 1985, 345:3. 1986,
80:5. 1988, 201:3. 1993, 101:1. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44, eff. July 1,
2004.

### Section 227-C:5

 **227-C:5 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of cultural resources
shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A and subject to ratification by the
state historical resources council, relative to:
                                             
 I. Identifying and documenting historic properties, as authorized by
this chapter.
                                             
 II. Preparing the state's historic preservation plan, as authorized
by RSA 227-C:4, II.
                                             
 III. Providing information on historic properties within the state
to agencies of the federal, state, regional and local governments, as
authorized by RSA 227-C:4, III.
                                             
 IV. Coordinating regional and local government activities with the
state historic preservation plan and programs, as authorized by RSA
227-C:4, VI.
                                             
 V. Providing technical and financial assistance to regional and
local governments involved in historic preservation activities, as
authorized by RSA 227-C:4, VII.
                                             
 VI. Developing an ongoing program of historical, architectural and
archeological research and development, including publication of the
state's historic resources, as authorized by RSA 227-C:4, IX.
                                             
 VII. Accepting moneys for historic preservation from public and
private sources, as authorized by RSA 227-C:4, IV.
                                             
 VIII. Categories of field investigations that may yield or alter
historic resources, as authorized by RSA 227-C:7, II.
                                             
 IX. Standards for the conduct of field investigations, as authorized
by RSA 227-C:7, I.
                                             
 X. Qualification criteria for professional and avocational
archeologists for all established categories of field investigations, as
authorized by RSA 227-C:7, II.
                                             
 XI. Training and certifying avocational archeologists, as authorized
by RSA 227-C:10.
                                             
 XII. Employing and otherwise engaging avocational archeologists, as
authorized by RSA 227-C:3, V.
                                             
 XIII. Employing consultants, as authorized by RSA 227-C:3, III.
                                             
 XIV. Issuance, revocation, suspension and extension of permits, as
authorized by RSA 227-C:7, IV.
                                             
 XV. The terms of a permit, as authorized by RSA 227-C:7, IV.
                                             
 XVI. Fair and equitable allocation and distribution of historic
resources recovered from a permitted field investigation, as authorized
by RSA 227-C:8, III.
                                             
 XVII. Preservation agreements for the protection of historic
resources released in private custody, as authorized by RSA 227-C:8,
IV.
                                             
 XVIII. Temporary loans of historic resources to qualified persons or
institutions within or outside the state, as authorized by RSA 227-C:8,
I(d).
                                             
 XIX. Procedures for the conduct of hearings consistent with due
process, as authorized by RSA 227-C:7, V.
                                             
 XX. Sale or transfer of real property, as authorized by RSA 227-C:9,
III.
                                             
 XXI. Creation and organization of advisory councils, as authorized
by RSA 227-C:3, IV.
                                             
 XXII. Approval of highway historical markers, as authorized by RSA
227-C:4, X.
                                             
 XXIII. Listing historic districts established under RSA 674:46.
                                             
 XXIV. Standards for the conduct of the archaeological discovery,
investigation, analysis, and disposition of human remains.
                                             
 XXV. Acquisition, disposal, care, and interpretation of objects of
historical significance.
                                             
 XXVI. Administering the state heritage landmark designation review
process established under RSA 227-C:24-26.

**Source.** 1981, 504:4. 1983, 422:4. 1985, 345:3. 1986, 80:6. 1988,
201:4. 1990, 73:1. 1993, 101:2. 1998, 363:3, eff. Aug. 25, 1998.

Preservation of State Historic Resources
----------------------------------------

### Section 227-C:6

 **227-C:6 State Title to Historic Resources on State Lands and Under
State Waters. –** The state, acting through the commissioner, reserves
to itself title of ownership of all historic resources, except for human
remains as provided in RSA 227-C:8-a and 8-g, on or from:
                                             
 I. Lands owned or controlled by the state, its agencies,
departments, commissions, institutions or political subdivisions;
                                             
 II. The bottom of navigable waters in the state, great ponds and 3
miles seaward from the New Hampshire shore in the territorial tidal
waters of the state.

**Source.** 1981, 504:5. 1985, 345:3. 1986, 80:7, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 227-C:7

 **227-C:7 Permits Issued for State Lands and Waters. –**
                                             
 I. To assure proper protection, investigation, interpretation and
management of historic resources, and the continued availability of
historic resources for scientific study by qualified persons, agencies
or institutions, the state, acting through the commissioner, reserves to
itself the exclusive right and privilege to conduct, or cause to be
conducted, field investigations of historic resources that involve the
alteration of the surface or subsurface of the resource and removal of
any surface or subsurface objects.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall establish categories of field
investigations that may yield or alter historic resources and
qualification criteria for professional and avocational archeologists
for all categories of field investigations.
                                             
 III. For purposes of determining proper persons to whom permits may
be issued, the original discoverer of a previously unrecorded historic
resource shall be conclusively presumed to be an appropriate person to
actively participate in all phases of subsequent field investigations
and shall be eligible to receive a permit under the rules adopted by the
commissioner, except as provided in RSA 227-C:8-a through 8-g relative
to the discovery of human remains.
                                             
 IV. The division shall issue a permit to any person, agency, or
institution upon application to conduct field investigations in
accordance with the rules adopted by the office, except as provided in
RSA 227-C:8-a through 8-g relative to the discovery of human remains.
                                             
 V. The commissioner may conduct hearings upon receiving written
complaint from any person, including a council member, concerning the
issuance, denial of issuance, revocation, suspension, extension, or
refusal of extension of any permit issued under this chapter.

**Source.** 1981, 504:5. 1985, 345:3. 1986, 80:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 227-C:8

 **227-C:8 Division and Disposition of Historic Resources. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall be the technical custodian of all state
historic resources and shall make arrangements for:
                                             
 (a) The allocation of any historic resources recovered from a
permitted field investigation between state and private custody.
                                             
 (b) The disposition of the state portion in an appropriate
institution of the state as close to the place of origin as possible.
                                             
 (c) A preservation agreement of the portion released for private
custody.
                                             
 (d) Any temporary loan of the historic resources to qualified
persons or institutions in or out of state.
                                             
 (e) The acquisition, disposition, and placement of objects of
historic importance.
                                             
 II. The permittee shall be required under the terms of the permit to
preserve, conserve and restore, as necessary, any historic resources,
and to catalogue and record as specified by the department.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall fairly and equitably allocate and
distribute historic resources recovered from a permitted field
investigation, provided that:
                                             
 (a) Custody of isolated finds from the surface of state land, or
the bottom of state waters, is granted to the discoverer when these are
brought to the division or its designee, for identification and
evaluation of context.
                                             
 (b) Assurances are made that the original discoverer of a
previously unrecorded historic resource receive custody of 25 percent of
the recovered material from subsequent field investigations of that
resource in which he actively participates.
                                             
 (c) The formula for the division of the recovered materials shall
be based on the percentage of private and public capital invested in a
permitted field investigation, with the respective state and private
shares being determined by the ratio of public to private investment,
provided that no less than 25 percent be retained by the state and no
more than 75 percent be released for private custody.
                                             
 (d) The division of the recovered materials shall be made by the
drawing of an appropriate number of equal lots by the permittee, with
the arrangement into the necessary number of equal lots being the
responsibility of the permittee with the concurrence of the historic
preservation officer.
                                             
 IV. Private custody of historic resources shall be governed by a
preservation agreement with the state. The preservation agreement shall
be in perpetuity unless rescinded or limited to a period of time by the
commissioner and shall specify:
                                             
 (a) The catalogue numbers and descriptions of the historic
resources.
                                             
 (b) The responsibility of the custodian to guard and protect such
materials against loss, theft, destruction, damage or deterioration.
                                             
 (c) A requirement that the materials be available for reasonably
convenient study by qualified persons, agencies and institutions.
                                             
 (d) A provision for the bequest of the materials upon settlement
of the estate.
                                             
 (e) The custodian's liability to obtain written consent from the
division for sale, auction, gift or trade of the collection; provided,
however, any disposition of materials by sale or auction shall require
that an assessment of 25 percent of the monetary value be paid to the
state.
                                             
 (f) That physical possession of such materials shall revert to
the state if the commissioner decides that the designated custodian is
not properly caring for such materials or is not keeping them available
for reasonably convenient study as required.
                                             
 V. In considering the disposition of the state share of recovered
materials:
                                             
 (a) An appropriate institution for disposition is one with
laboratory facilities where recovered objects may be cleaned, restored
and preserved, or one willing to contract with another institution for
these services, with secure and fire-protected space of sufficient size
for orderly storage and protection of objects, records, photographs and
other historic resources, and with a staff capable of caring for the
material and making it available to qualified persons or institutions
upon a recommendation of the commissioner.
                                             
 (b) The right and privilege of final disposition shall be granted
to the municipality of origin when that municipality requests the
historic resources through its local museum, library, historical
society, school, or other institution which qualifies as an appropriate
institution.
                                             
 (c) Notwithstanding its right and privilege of final disposition,
the right and privilege of initial display or use of the historic
resources for other public education activities shall be granted the
municipality of origin when that municipality, through its local museum,
library, historical society, school, or other institution, agrees to
provide secure and fire-protected facilities for storage and exhibit.
                                             
 VI. Human remains shall be investigated and disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 227-C:8-a through 8-g, and to the
extent that they are inconsistent, the provisions of paragraphs I-V
shall not apply to the disposition of human remains. Human remains which
qualify as historic resources shall be fully documented before final
disposition. Documentation shall include, at a minimum: a description of
skeletal material (such as age at death, sex, metrical data, and
pathologies); a description of artifacts and other materials (such as
the type of stone or fabric, size, and indications of use); age of the
remains, and cultural association. Human remains which are subject to
reinterment under the provisions of RSA 289 shall be accordingly
interred, but those which are not, including prehistoric remains, shall
be released for reinterment and shall be disposed of according to the
provisions of RSA 227-C:8-g.
                                             
 VII. Appropriate records of all historic resources shall be
maintained by the division of historical resources.

**Source.** 1981, 504:5. 1985, 345:3. 1986, 76:1, 2; 80:9. 1988, 201:5,
eff. July 1, 1988.

### Section 227-C:8-a

 **227-C:8-a Discovery of Remains and Notification of Authorities.
–**
                                             
 I. Any person knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe that
unmarked human burials or human remains are being disturbed, destroyed,
defaced, mutilated, removed, or exposed shall immediately notify the
medical examiner of the county in which the remains are encountered.
                                             
 II. If the unmarked human burials or human remains are encountered
as a result of construction or agricultural activities, disturbance of
the remains shall cease immediately and shall not resume without
authorization from either the county medical examiner or the state
archaeologist, as provided in RSA 227-C:8-b, III or IV.
                                             
 III. (a) If the unmarked human burials or human remains are
encountered by a professional archaeologist, as a result of survey or
test excavations, the remains may be excavated and other activities may
resume after notification, by telephone or certified letter, is provided
to the state archaeologist, and immediate notification is given to
living descendants or specific groups known to have affinity with the
remains. The treatment, analysis, and disposition of the remains shall
be as provided in RSA 227-C:8-c and 8-g.
                                             
 (b) If a professional archaeologist directing long-term
systematic archaeological research, that is, research designed to
continue for one or more field seasons of 4 or more weeks' duration,
sponsored by any accredited institution, accredited college or
university with research interests in New Hampshire, as a part of his
research, recovers Native American remains, he may be exempted from the
provisions of RSA 227-C:8-b through 8-f and 8-g, III so long as he:
                                             
 (1) Notifies the state archaeologist within 5 working days of
the initial discovery of Native American remains;
                                             
 (2) Reports to the state archaeologist, at agreed upon
intervals, the status of the project;
                                             
 (3) Curates the remains prior to ultimate disposition; and
                                             
 (4) Conducts no destructive skeletal analysis without the
express permission of the state archaeologist.
                                             
Upon completion of the project fieldwork, the professional
archaeologist, in consultation with the skeletal analyst and the state
archaeologist, shall determine the schedule for the completion of the
skeletal analysis. In the event of a disagreement, the time for
completion of the skeletal analysis shall not exceed 4 years. The
director or his designee, after consultation with the state
archaeologist, shall have authority concerning the ultimate disposition
of the Native American remains after analysis is completed in accordance
with RSA 227-C:8-g, I and 8-h, II and III.
                                             
 (c) The state archaeologist shall notify the county medical
examiner of any reported human skeletal remains discovered by a
professional archaeologist.

**Source.** 1986, 80:10, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 227-C:8-b

 **227-C:8-b Jurisdiction Over Remains. –**
                                             
 I. Subsequent to notification of the discovery of an unmarked human
burial or human skeletal remains, the medical examiner of the county in
which the remains were encountered shall determine as soon as possible
whether the remains are subject to the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 II. If the county medical examiner determines that the remains are
subject to the provisions of this chapter, he shall immediately proceed
with his investigation. The county medical examiner shall notify the
state archaeologist of the discovery of the human skeletal remains and
of his findings. The state archaeologist shall immediately take charge
of the remains and associated grave items.
                                             
 III. Subsequent to taking charge of the human remains, the state
archaeologist shall have 48 hours to make arrangements with the
landowner for the protection or removal of the unmarked human burial or
human remains; provided, however, that in the case of prolonged bad
weather or upon the discovery of multiple interments, either of which
prohibits the state archaeologist from making arrangements with the
landowner for protection or removal within 48 hours, the state
archaeologist shall have the authority to arrange with the landowner a
longer period of time for such protection or removal which is mutually
agreeable to both parties. The state archaeologist shall have no
authority over the remains at the end of the 48-hour period and may not
prohibit the resumption of the construction or agricultural activities
without the permission of the landowner, unless other arrangements have
been made with the landowner as provided in this paragraph.

**Source.** 1986, 80:10, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 227-C:8-c

 **227-C:8-c Archaeological Investigation of Human Remains. –**
                                             
 I. If an agreement is reached with the landowner for the excavation
of the human remains, the state archaeologist shall either designate a
member of his staff or authorize another professional archaeologist to
excavate or supervise the excavation.
                                             
 II. The professional archaeologist excavating human skeletal
remains, when in situ preservation is not feasible, shall report to the
state archaeologist, by telephone and by certified letter, his opinion
on the cultural and biological characteristics of the remains. This
report shall be transmitted as soon as possible after the commencement
of excavation, but no later than 2 full business days after the removal
of a burial.
                                             
 III. The state archaeologist, in consultation with the professional
archaeologist excavating the remains, shall determine where the remains
shall be held subsequent to excavation, pending other arrangements
according to RSA 227-C:8-d or 8-e.

**Source.** 1986, 80:10, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 227-C:8-d

 **227-C:8-d Consultation With Native American Community. –**
                                             
 I. If the professional archaeologist determines that the human
remains are Native American and the remains are known to have affinity
to federally recognized Indian tribes or specific living ethnic groups
or other nonfederally recognized Indian groups, the state archaeologist
shall immediately notify the leaders, officials, or spokespersons for
these tribes or groups wherever the appropriate tribes or groups are
located, whether in or outside the state of New Hampshire. The state
archaeologist shall consult with such persons who respond in a timely
fashion in the determination of the most appropriate treatment for the
interments.
                                             
 II. Within 4 weeks of the notification, the appropriate Indian tribe
or group shall communicate in writing to the state archaeologist its
concerns with regard to the treatment of interment and ultimate
disposition of the Native American remains.
                                             
 III. Within 90 days of the receipt of the concerns, the state
archaeologist, with the approval of the principal official or officials
of the Indian group or tribe, shall prepare a written agreement
concerning the treatment and ultimate disposition of the Native American
remains. The written agreement shall include the following:
                                             
 (a) Designation of a qualified skeletal analyst to work on the
skeletal remains;
                                             
 (b) The type of analysis and the specific period of time to be
provided for analysis of the skeletal remains;
                                             
 (c) The timetable for written progress reports and the final
report concerning the analysis to be provided to the state archaeologist
by the skeletal analyst and the professional archaeologist; and
                                             
 (d) A plan for ultimate disposition of Native American remains
subsequent to the completion of adequate analysis.
                                             
 IV. If no agreement is reached within 90 days, the state historic
preservation officer and commissioner shall determine the terms of the
agreement.

**Source.** 1986, 80:10, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 227-C:8-e

 **227-C:8-e Consultation With Other Individuals. –**
                                             
 I. If the professional archaeologist determines that the human
skeletal remains are other than Native American, the state archaeologist
shall publish notice that excavation of the remains has occurred, at
least once per week for 4 successive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county where the burials or skeletal remains were
situated, in an effort to determine the identity or next of kin, or
both, of the deceased.
                                             
 II. If the next of kin are located, within 90 days the state
archaeologist in consultation with the next of kin shall prepare a
written agreement concerning the treatment and ultimate disposition of
the skeletal remains. The written agreement shall include:
                                             
 (a) Designation of a qualified skeletal analyst to work on the
skeletal remains;
                                             
 (b) The type of analysis and the specific period of time to be
provided for analysis of the skeletal remains;
                                             
 (c) The timetable for written progress reports and the final
report concerning the analysis to be provided to the state archaeologist
and the next of kin by the skeletal analyst and the professional
archaeologist; and
                                             
 (d) A plan for the ultimate disposition of the skeletal remains
subsequent to the completion of adequate analysis.
                                             
 III. If no agreement is reached, the remains shall be handled
according to the wishes of the next of kin.

**Source.** 1986, 80:10, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 227-C:8-f

 **227-C:8-f Analysis of Remains. –**
                                             
 I. Skeletal analysis conducted under the provisions of this section
shall only be accomplished by a skeletal analyst, as defined in RSA
227-C:1, VIII-a.
                                             
 II. Prior to the execution of the written agreements outlined in RSA
227-C:8-d, III and 8-e, II, the state archaeologist shall consult with
both the professional archaeologist and the skeletal analyst
investigating the remains.
                                             
 III. The professional archaeologist and the skeletal analyst shall
submit a proposal to the state archaeologist within the 90-day period
set forth in RSA 227-C:8-d, III and 8-e, II, including:
                                             
 (a) Methodology and techniques to be utilized;
                                             
 (b) Research objectives;
                                             
 (c) Proposed time schedule for completion of the analysis; and
                                             
 (d) Proposed time intervals for written progress reports and the
final report to be submitted.
                                             
 IV. If the terms of the written agreement are not substantially met,
the state archaeologist or the next of kin may take possession of the
remains. In such cases, the state archaeologist may ensure that
appropriate analysis is conducted by another qualified skeletal analyst
or professional archaeologist, or by both a professional archaeologist
and qualified skeletal analyst, prior to ultimate disposition of the
remains.

**Source.** 1986, 80:10, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 227-C:8-g

 **227-C:8-g Disposition of Human Remains. –**
                                             
 I. If the human remains are Native American, the director or his
designee, after consultation with an appropriate federally recognized
Indian tribe or specific living ethnic group or other nonfederally
recognized Indian group, shall determine the ultimate disposition of the
remains after the analysis.
                                             
 II. If the skeletal remains are other than Native American and the
next of kin have been identified, the next of kin shall have authority
concerning the ultimate disposition of the remains after the analysis.
                                             
 III. If the state archaeologist has received no information or
communication concerning the identity or next of kin of the deceased,
the remains shall be transferred to the state archaeologist who shall
arrange for either permanent curation according to standard museum
procedures or for reburial in a public cemetery after adequate
analysis.
                                             
 IV. In the case of remains encountered during the course of
long-term research of a professional archaeologist is provided in RSA
227-C:8-a, III(b), the director or his designee, on recommendation of
the state archaeologist, may grant permission to a sponsoring
institution, which shall include accredited colleges, universities,
museums, or professional archaeological organizations, to permanently
curate the remains according to standard museum procedures after
appropriate analysis is completed.
                                             
 V. If a determination is made by the director or his designee and
the commissioner, in consultation with an appropriate federally
recognized Indian tribe or specific living ethnic group or other
nonfederally recognized Indian group, that Native American remains shall
be reinterred following the completion of analysis, an appropriate tribe
or group may provide a suitable reburial location and reburial ceremony.
If it elects not to do so, it shall be the responsibility of the
department to provide a suitable reburial location.
                                             
 VI. The expense of transportation of Native American remains to the
reburial location shall be borne by the party conducting the excavation
and removal of the remains. The reburial ceremony may be provided by an
appropriate federally recognized Indian tribe or specific living ethnic
group or other nonfederally recognized Indian group. If such tribe or
group elects not to do so, the reburial ceremony shall be the
responsibility of the director or his designee and the commissioner.

**Source.** 1986, 80:10, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 227-C:8-h

 **227-C:8-h Financial Responsibility. –**
                                             
 I. The provisions of this chapter shall not require that the owner
or lessee of the land on which the unmarked human burials or human
remains are found bear the cost of the excavation, removal, analysis, or
disposition if the discovery is the result of vandalism, erosion, or
noncommercial land-altering activity.
                                             
 II. The owner or lessee of the land on which unmarked human burials
or human remains are found shall bear the cost of the excavation,
removal, analysis, and disposition if the discovery is the result of a
privately-financed commercial land-altering activity, including the
construction of speculative housing.
                                             
 III. If the discovery is the result of a state-funded land-altering
activity, the department providing the funding shall bear the cost of
excavation, removal, analysis, disposition, and land restoration and
shall be authorized to use project funds for those purposes.
                                             
 IV. If unmarked human burials or human remains are discovered by a
professional archaeologist as a result of survey or long-term systematic
research, the sponsoring institution shall bear the cost of the
excavation, removal, analysis, and disposition of human remains and of
land restoration.
                                             
 V. If unmarked human burials or human remains are discovered as a
result of vandalism, erosion, or noncommercial land-altering activity,
or as a result of survey or long-term systematic research funded by the
division of historical resources, the division of historical resources
shall bear the cost of the excavation, removal, analysis, and
disposition of human remains and of land restoration.

**Source.** 1986, 80:10, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 227-C:8-i

 **227-C:8-i Prohibited Acts. –** No person shall:
                                             
 I. Knowingly acquire any human remains removed from unmarked burials
in New Hampshire after January 1, 1987, except in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter;
                                             
 II. Knowingly exhibit any human remains acquired from unmarked
burials in New Hampshire;
                                             
 III. Knowingly sell any human remains; or
                                             
 IV. Knowingly retain human remains acquired from unmarked burials in
New Hampshire after January 1, 1987, for scientific analysis beyond a
period of time provided for such analysis pursuant to the provisions of
RSA 227-C:8-d through 8-f, with the exception of those remains curated
under the provisions of RSA 227-C:8-g.

**Source.** 1986, 80:10. 2009, 156:1, eff. Sept. 6, 2009.

### Section 227-C:8-j

 **227-C:8-j Exceptions. –** Human skeletal remains acquired from
commercial biology supply houses or through medical means are not
subject to the provisions of RSA 227-C:8-i, I.

**Source.** 1986, 80:10, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 227-C:9

 **227-C:9 Directive for Cooperation in the Protection of Historic
Resources. –**
                                             
 I. All state agencies, departments, commissions, and institutions
shall fully cooperate with the division in the location, identification,
evaluation and management of historic resources, and to that end shall
provide the division with appropriate information on all state licensed,
assisted, or contracted projects, activities, or programs so that the
division may determine the effect of such undertakings on historic
resources.
                                             
 II. Upon a recommendation of the division that historic resources
may be adversely affected, the commissioner shall conduct, or cause to
be conducted, any necessary field investigations, subject to personnel
and budgetary limitations. State agencies, departments, commissions, and
institutions are authorized and encouraged to expend project funds or
appropriated moneys for these field investigations.
                                             
 III. When preparing to sell or transfer real property under its
jurisdiction which is expected to have historic resources, or is known
to have historic resources, the state, its agencies, departments,
commissions, institutions and political subdivisions shall, upon a
recommendation of the commissioner:
                                             
 (a) Condition the sale or transfer upon such covenants, deed
restrictions, or other contractual arrangements as shall protect the
historic resources for future generations.
                                             
 (b) Reserve such property from sale or transfer, provided that
the reservation of such lands from sale or transfer may be confined to
the actual location of the historic resources.
                                             
 (c) Defer sale or transfer of such property for the purpose of
conducting field investigations, including salvage mitigation if
necessary, and until the lands are released for sale or transfer by the
commissioner.

**Source.** 1981, 504:5. 1985, 345:3.

### Section 227-C:10

 **227-C:10 Avocational Archeological Training and Certification. –**
The division shall provide a means for training nonprofessional persons
in technical archeological skills and shall acknowledge the achievement
of those who have reached prescribed levels of proficiency in various
aspects of archeology. The individuals shall be encouraged to
participate in field investigations authorized by the commissioner and
supervised by the division. Certification is not to be misconstrued as
an authorization to collect or excavate without a permit.

**Source.** 1981, 504:5. 1985, 345:3.

### Section 227-C:11

 **227-C:11 Confidentiality of Archeological Site Location
Information. –** Information which may identify the location of any
archeological site on state land, or under state waters, shall be
treated with confidentiality so as to protect the resource from
unauthorized field investigations and vandalism. Toward this end, state
agencies, departments, commissions, institutions and political
subdivisions, permittees and private landowners with preservation and
conservation agreements shall consult with the commissioner before any
disclosure of information to insure that the disclosure would not create
a risk to the historic resource or that it is done in a manner to
minimize the risk. Such information is exempt from all laws providing
rights to public access. Disclosure for the public record for tax
assessment, transfer, sale or other consideration of the property shall
receive careful consideration to minimize the risk to the resource.

**Source.** 1981, 504:5. 1985, 345:3.

### Section 227-C:12

 **227-C:12 Exemptions and Limitations. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any provision of this subdivision to the
contrary, any person who, prior to the effective date of this
subdivision, has acquired historic resources from state lands or waters,
which include items commonly known as antiques, may continue to possess
or market such items as antiques.
                                             
 II. Treasure hunting with metal detectors and dowsing rods is
exempted from the restrictions of this subdivision on the following
lands owned or controlled by the state, its agencies, departments,
commissions, and institutions, unless an historic resource on such land
has been recorded and restrictions are posted:
                                             
 (a) Beaches;
                                             
 (b) Athletic fields;
                                             
 (c) School grounds;
                                             
 (d) Perimeters of cemeteries;
                                             
 (e) Unpaved roads;
                                             
 (f) Within 25 feet of picnic tables and park pavilions; and
                                             
 (g) Currently used dumps.
                                             
 III. No power is conferred by this subdivision upon any official,
commission, or other agency of state or local government to close any
body of water or portion thereof, or access thereto, on a temporary or
permanent basis, to recreational diving, recreational or commercial
fishing, scallop dragging, recreational or commercial boating, or
lobstering.
                                             
 IV. Paper documents; photographic positives and negatives;
microforms, including microfilms, microfiche, microcard, and microprint;
and reel to reel, cassette, or cartridge tape recordings and magnetic
tapes of information storage which qualify as historic resources under
RSA 227-C:1, VII, other than documentation of a field investigation, are
exempt from the provisions of RSA 227-C. The responsibility to preserve,
arrange, index, and allow access to these historic resources shall
remain with the department of state, division of archives and records
management.

**Source.** 1981, 504:5. 1985, 345:3. 2003, 97:4, eff. Aug. 5, 2003.

Commission on Historic Burying Grounds
--------------------------------------

### Section 227-C:12-a


                                             


                                             [RSA 227-C:12-a repealed by 2015, 115:2, effective November 1, 2018.
                                             ]

 **227-C:12-a Commission Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a commission on historic burying grounds and
cemeteries.
                                             
 II. The members of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) One member of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (b) Three members of the house of representatives, appointed by
the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (c) One member of a historic district commission, appointed by
the governor.
                                             
 (d) One member of a local historical society, appointed by the
governor.
                                             
 (e) The chairperson of the New Hampshire Preservation Alliance,
or designee.
                                             
 (f) The chairperson of the New Hampshire Historical Society, or
designee.
                                             
 (g) The commissioner of the department of cultural resources, or
designee.
                                             
 (h) The director of the division of historic resources, or
designee.
                                             
 (i) One representative of the New Hampshire commission on Native
American affairs, appointed by that commission.
                                             
 (j) The executive director of the New Hampshire Municipal
Association, or designee.
                                             
 (k) The president of the New Hampshire Old Graveyard Association,
or designee.
                                             
 (l) A member of the New Hampshire State Organization Daughters of
the American Revolution, appointed by the state regent of that
organization.
                                             
 (m) A member of the New Hampshire Funeral Directors Association,
appointed by the president of that association.
                                             
 (n) A member of a cemetery commission or a cemetery trustee,
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (o) The Roman Catholic bishop of Manchester, or designee.
                                             
 III. Legislative members of the commission shall receive mileage at
the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the commission.
                                             
 IV. The commission shall make recommendations:
                                             
 (a) On the documentation and preservation of the state's historic
burying grounds and cemeteries.
                                             
 (b) On the establishment and criteria for a New Hampshire state
register of historic burying grounds and cemeteries, including their
markers, walls, gates, and other associated and identifying features and
artifacts that are meaningful to the history, historic landscape,
cultural, religious, craft, and architectural traditions of the state.
                                             
 (c) Concerning the protection of property owners, and owners of
contiguous or surrounding properties, with respect to a listed
property.
                                             
 (d) On the persons permitted to nominate a state historic burying
ground or cemetery for a state register in accordance with RSA 289.
                                             
 (e) Concerning notice to potentially interested parties for
proposals that affect burial grounds, and the adoption of a "public
good'' standard.
                                             
 V. The members of the commission shall elect a chairperson from
among the members. The first meeting of the commission shall be called
by the senate member. The first meeting of the commission shall be held
within 45 days of the effective date of this section. Nine members of
the commission shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 VI. The commission shall file interim reports of its findings and
any recommendations for proposed legislation to the president of the
senate, the speaker of the house of representatives, the senate clerk,
the house clerk, the governor, and the state library on or before
November 1, 2015, November 1, 2016, and November 1, 2017, and a final
report on or before November 1, 2018.

**Source.** 2015, 115:1, eff. June 8, 2015.

Historical Resources Council
----------------------------

### Section 227-C:13

 **227-C:13 Establishment of a State Historical Resources Council.
–** There is hereby established a state historical resources council
which shall be the only state historical resources council. The
membership of the council shall consist of the governor, or his
designee; the director of historical resources, who shall be nonvoting
members; and 9 members of the public appointed by the governor and
council, at least 3 of whom shall be qualified in the field of
architecture, history and archeology; and the others shall be qualified
in other fields including, but not limited to, law, real estate,
planning, architectural history and historic preservation. The public
members shall serve a term of 5 years; however, on the initial
appointment, 3 shall be appointed for 2 years, 2 appointed for 3 years,
2 appointed for 4 years, and 2 appointed for 5 years. Each shall serve
until his successor is appointed and qualified. Any vacancy shall be
filled for the unexpired term.

**Source.** 1985, 345:3.

### Section 227-C:14

 **227-C:14 Powers and Duties of the Council. –** The council shall
have the power and duty to:
                                             
 I. Approve nominations to the National Register of Historic Places.
                                             
 II. Review and recommend the approval of the state survey of
historic properties undertaken in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
                                             
 III. Review and approve the contents of the state historic
preservation plan developed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 IV. Review and recommend application by the division for federal and
other available funds.
                                             
 V. Review and recommend the removal of properties from the national
register.
                                             
 VI. Otherwise act in an advisory capacity to the division of
historical resources.
                                             
 VII. Administer all federal funds received for historic
preservation.
                                             
 VIII. List nominated properties in the New Hampshire state register
of historic places.

**Source.** 1985, 345:3. 2012, 58:2, eff. July 13, 2012.

### Section 227-C:15

 **227-C:15 Organization. –** The council shall elect a chairman and
vice-chairman and establish such rules of procedure as it deems
necessary.

**Source.** 1985, 345:3.

### Section 227-C:16

 **227-C:16 Expenses. –** All members of the council shall serve
without compensation but may receive reimbursement for necessary travel
and subsistence expenses incurred by them in the performance of the
duties of the council.

**Source.** 1985, 345:3.

Penalty
-------

### Section 227-C:17

 **227-C:17 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who, with the purpose of defrauding anyone or with the
knowledge that he is facilitating a fraud to be perpetrated by anyone,
makes or alters any object so that it appears to have value because of
antiquity, rarity, source or authorship which it does not possess, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall forfeit to the state the equivalent
in dollars of profits made by the sale of the fraudulent objects.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA title LXII, any person who
knowingly appropriates, excavates, sells, purchases, exchanges, offers
for sale, transports, receives, destroys, or in any manner alters any
historic resource located on state land, under state waters, or removed
from same, except in the course of activities pursued under the
authority of a permit or preservation agreement, or as exempted in RSA
227-C:12, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not
exceeding 
                                             $1,000 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 6
months, or both; shall forfeit to the state all materials appropriated;
and shall reimburse the state for restoration of a defaced or destroyed
property.

**Source.** 1981, 504:5. 1985, 345:3.

State Heritage Collections Committee
------------------------------------

### Section 227-C:18-22

 **227-C:18 to 227-C:22 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 231:2(6), eff.
Dec. 31, 2011.
                                             ]

New Hampshire Heritage Trust Fund
---------------------------------

### Section 227-C:23

 **227-C:23 New Hampshire Heritage Trust Fund. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2002,
254:5, I, eff. July 1, 2002.
                                             ]

New Hampshire Heritage Landmarks
--------------------------------

### Section 227-C:24

 **227-C:24 Review Process Established; Purpose. –** There is hereby
established a review process, which shall be administered by the
director of the division of historical resources, to insure the
protection of designated New Hampshire heritage landmarks. The purpose
of the review process is to protect the environmental integrity of
designated historic landmarks from events which would diminish their
heritage value for future generations as educational and inspirational
assets of the state.

**Source.** 1993, 101:3, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 227-C:25

 **227-C:25 Designation as Heritage Landmark. –** As of July 1, 1993,
all presently designated National Historic Landmarks owned by the state
of New Hampshire are hereby designated New Hampshire heritage landmarks
and afforded the protection of this subdivision. Additional sites shall
be afforded the protection of this chapter upon nomination as National
Historic Landmarks.

**Source.** 1993, 101:3, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 227-C:26

 **227-C:26 Protection Against Development Projects. –** No publicly
funded project having the potential to adversely affect a designated
site shall be undertaken without a determination and analysis of the
effect upon the integrity of the site. The determination and the
analysis shall be conducted under the supervision of the director of the
division of historical resources and shall, at a minimum, include
consideration of visual and aural effects upon visitors at the site,
access to the site, and the traditional setting of the site. The
determination and the analysis shall also include at least one
opportunity for public comment on the proposal; such hearing to be held
in the community or communities most affected by the proposal.

**Source.** 1993, 101:3, eff. July 1, 1993.

Historic Agricultural Structure Matching Grants Program
-------------------------------------------------------

### Section 227-C:27

 **227-C:27 Purpose. –** Historic barns and agricultural structures
symbolize the distinctive New Hampshire values of heritage, hard work,
productivity, and stewardship. They are witnesses to the role of
agriculture in our state's image and its economy, and they serve as
scenic landmarks for residents and visitors alike. They are among our
most highly valued heritage resources, but many can no longer generate
sufficient income to prevent their loss by decay or demolition. In order
to assist the owners who are making an effort to preserve these
irreplaceable assets, it is hereby declared to be public policy and in
the public interest of this state to establish a matching grants program
consisting of funds from private and public sector grants, gifts, and
donations for preserving historic agricultural structures in New
Hampshire.

**Source.** 1999, 285:1, eff. July 1, 1999.

### Section 227-C:28

 **227-C:28 Matching Grants Program Established; Barn Preservation
Fund. –**
                                             
 I. A program of matching grants to preserve historic barns and
agricultural structures in New Hampshire is hereby established.
                                             
 II. There is established a nonlapsing fund in the office of the
state treasurer to be known as the barn preservation fund. The division
of historical resources, department of cultural resources, is authorized
to accept public sector and private sector grants, gifts, or donations
of any kind to be awarded competitively to eligible applicants. All such
moneys shall be deposited in the fund. Moneys in the fund shall be used
for grant awards and necessary program expenses. Grants shall be matched
with an equal or greater value of cash, labor, or materials provided by
the applicant from private, local, state, or federal sources.

**Source.** 1999, 285:1. 2004, 80:1, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 227-C:29

 **227-C:29 Advisory Committee. –**
                                             
 I. For the purpose of soliciting applications, recommending grant
awards, and considering any other matter necessary to the administration
of this subdivision, an advisory committee to the division of historical
resources shall be established, consisting of:
                                             
 (a) The commissioner of cultural resources, or designee.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food, or
designee.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of resources and economic development, or
designee.
                                             
 (d) The chairperson of the state conservation committee, or
designee.
                                             
 (e) The director of the division of historical resources, or
designee, who shall act as or designate the committee chair.
                                             
 (f) The executive director of the New Hampshire Farm Service
Agency, or designee.
                                             
 (g) The director of the New Hampshire Farm Bureau Federation, or
designee.
                                             
 (h) The director of the university of New Hampshire cooperative
extension, or designee.
                                             
 (i) The master of the New Hampshire state grange, or designee.
                                             
 (j) A member of the state historical resources council.
                                             
 (k) A staff member of the division of historical resources
selected by the director.
                                             
 (l) Two individuals actively engaged in agriculture, selected by
the committee.
                                             
 (m) The executive director of the New Hampshire Preservation
Alliance, or designee.
                                             
 II. On or before November 1 of the second year of each biennium, the
committee shall make a report regarding the program to the speaker of
the house of representatives, the senate president, and the governor.

**Source.** 1999, 285:1. 2004, 80:2, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 227-C:30

 **227-C:30 Eligibility. –** In order to qualify for grant
assistance, agricultural buildings and structures shall be listed in the
National Register of Historic Places, or shall be formally determined to
be eligible for the National Register of Historic Places, or shall be
listed or formally determined to be eligible for listing in the New
Hampshire State Register of Historic Places, in accordance with
established procedures of the division of historical resources, prior to
receiving any grant funds. Priority will be given to projects that:
                                             
 (a) Preserve historic building features.
                                             
 (b) Preserve important examples of historic agricultural building
types.
                                             
 (c) Promote productive long-term use of the property.
                                             
 (d) Preserve important local landmarks.
                                             
 (e) Are located on designated scenic and cultural byways.
                                             
 (f) Would accept a preservation agreement or a preservation
restriction, as defined in RSA 477:45.

**Source.** 1999, 285:1. 2004, 80:3, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 227-C:31

 **227-C:31 Recapture. –** If a recipient or subsequent owner takes
any action within 10 years of the grant award with respect to the
assisted building or structure, such as dismantlement, removal, or
substantial alteration, which causes it to no longer be eligible for
listing on the New Hampshire State Register of Historic Places or
National Register of Historic Places, within one year from the date of
loss of eligibility, the preservation grant shall be repaid in full to
the barn preservation fund. The department of cultural resources,
division of historical resources; the historical resources council; or
the National Park Service shall make determinations of non-eligibility.

**Source.** 1999, 285:1. 2004, 80:4, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 227-C:32

 **227-C:32 Receipt of Grant Recorded in Registry of Deeds. –**
Receipt of a grant award under this program and conditions of such award
shall be recorded in a preservation agreement, or in the registry of
deeds for the county in which the historic barn or agricultural
structure is located.

**Source.** 1999, 285:1. 2004, 80:5, eff. July 1, 2004.

New Hampshire State Register of Historic Places
-----------------------------------------------

### Section 227-C:33

 **227-C:33 New Hampshire State Register of Historic Places. –**
                                             
 I. In order to recognize, honor, and promote the state's historical,
cultural, and archaeological heritage, the division of historical
resources, department of cultural resources, shall maintain and
administer the New Hampshire state register of historic places.
Buildings, districts, sites, landscapes, structures, or objects that are
meaningful in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or
traditions of the state may be listed in the state register.
                                             
 II. Properties may be proposed for listing in the state register by
submission of a nomination to the division of historical resources. With
the consent of the property owner, the division shall forward correct
and sufficient nominations of properties that meet the criteria in
paragraph I to the state historical resources council for final approval
and listing.
                                             
 III. Listing a property in the state register does not prohibit any
actions that may otherwise be taken by the property owner with respect
to the listed property.

**Source.** 2012, 58:3, eff. July 13, 2012.
