---
title: 'CHAPTER 227-B MOUNT WASHINGTON COMMISSION'
---

TITLE XIX
                                             
PUBLIC RECREATION
=================

CHAPTER 227-B
                                             
MOUNT WASHINGTON COMMISSION
---------------------------

### Section 227-B:1

 **227-B:1 Commission Established. –** There is hereby established a
Mount Washington Commission consisting of 11 members to manage the
summit of Mount Washington property owned by the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1969, 427:1. 1990, 110:1, eff. June 12, 1990.

### Section 227-B:2

 **227-B:2 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commission'' shall mean the Mount Washington Commission;
                                             
 II. "Summit'' shall mean the Mount Washington summit property owned
by the state.

**Source.** 1969, 427:1, eff. July 2, 1969.

### Section 227-B:3

 **227-B:3 Commission Members, Appointment, Term. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall consist of the following members:
                                             
 (a) One member from the house of representatives, appointed by
the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (b) One member from the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (c) Three members appointed by the governor with the consent of
the council.
                                             
 (d) One member from each of the following groups, or a successor,
shall be appointed through the concurrence of their boards of directors:
the Mount Washington Auto Road; the Mount Washington Observatory;
Citadel Broadcasting Company; and the Mount Washington Cog Railway.
                                             
 (e) One member shall be appointed by the supervisor of the White
Mountain National Forest to represent the same.
                                             
 (f) One member shall be appointed by the president of the
Appalachian Mountain Club to represent said club.
                                             
 (g) The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development, or designee.
                                             
 II. All such members so appointed shall serve a term of 4 years. The
terms of the members of the legislature shall be coterminous with their
terms in office. Members of the commission shall continue to serve until
a successor is appointed by the appointing authority. In the case of a
vacancy other than by expiration of term, the vacancy shall be filled
for the unexpired term in the same manner and by the same body as the
original appointment was made. Seven members of the commission shall
constitute a quorum.

**Source.** 1969, 427:1. 1972, 62:4. 1990, 110:2, 3, eff. June 12, 1990.
2011, 231:15, eff. June 29, 2011. 2012, 245:1, eff. June 18, 2012.

### Section 227-B:4

 **227-B:4 Removal. –** Any member of the commission may be removed
for just cause through a majority vote of the governor and council.

**Source.** 1969, 427:1, eff. July 2, 1969.

### Section 227-B:5

 **227-B:5 Officers and Compensation. –** The commission shall
annually elect one of its members as chairman, one as vice chairman, and
one as secretary-treasurer. The members of the commission shall receive
no compensation for their services, provided that legislative members of
the commission shall receive mileage at the legislative rate when
attending to the duties of the commission, and provided further that
reasonable expenses, incurred by the members in the performance of their
duties shall be paid from the summit operation.

**Source.** 1969, 427:1, eff. July 2, 1969. 2012, 245:2, eff. June 18,
2012.

### Section 227-B:6

 **227-B:6 Powers and Duties. –** The commission shall:
                                             
 I. Prepare a master plan for the summit including but not limited
to:
                                             
 (a) Capital improvements to be made by the state over a 10-year
period;
                                             
 (b) The proposed operation of the summit by the commission
including fees to be charged for the facilities operated by the
commission, the method of collection of such fees, employment of
personnel, franchises to be granted to concessionaires, and any other
items deemed necessary to the proper operation of the summit by said
commission;
                                             
 (c) Promotion of the use of the summit by the public as a
recreational, historic or scientific attraction;
                                             
 (d) Protection of the summit as to its unique flora and other
natural resources;
                                             
 (e) The negotiation of public rights-of-way to the summit over
private lands which benefit from the improvement of facilities on the
summit;
                                             
 (f) Cooperative arrangements between private interests and the
commission relative to the collection of fees, joint personnel, and any
like subject.
                                             
 II. Submit the said master plan to the governor on or before January
1, 2010, and on January 1 every 10 years thereafter, for approval and
for enabling legislation in the New Hampshire legislature.
                                             
 III. Monitor all fees being paid to the state for the use or lease
of state-owned facilities on the summit, such fees to be used by the
commission in its duties and for its expenses.
                                             
 IV. Supervise the work done on capital improvements authorized by
the general court for Mount Washington. The governor and council are to
authorize the expenditure of funds for final design and contract plans
out of funds appropriated for that purpose when requested by the
commission. The governor and council are to authorize the construction
of the capital improvements to the Mount Washington summit authorized by
the general court in a manner consistent with the 10-year master plan
prepared by the commission.
                                             
 V. Cooperate and consult with the division of parks and recreation
of the department of resources and economic development concerning the
daily operation of the summit as carried on by the division of parks and
recreation.
                                             
 VI. Consult and advise with the commissioner of the department of
resources and economic development:
                                             
 (a) In the construction of the buildings and improvements as may
be authorized by the general court;
                                             
 (b) In the operation of the summit by personnel of the division
of parks and recreation or by private interests as may be determined by
the commissioner in accordance with the powers conferred by the general
court;
                                             
 (c) In the negotiations of leases, agreements and franchise
arrangements in the operation of summit facilities; and
                                             
 (d) In the acquisition of privately owned land and buildings as
may be authorized by the general court, including the general oversight
of the development of the 10-year master plan as may be implemented by
the general court.
                                             
 VII. Assist in the promotion of the development and use of the
summit by the public as a recreational, historic and scientific
attraction.
                                             
 VIII. Advise and assist in the protection of the unique flora and
other natural resources of the summit.
                                             
 IX. (a) Submit an annual report beginning October 1, 2012 to the
senate president and the speaker of the house of representatives
detailing the costs of any services provided and any expenses reimbursed
to the legislative members of the commission while in the performance of
their duties for the commission for the prior fiscal year ending June
30.
                                             
 (b) Submit an annual report beginning October 1, 2012 to the
chairpersons of the house and senate finance committees and the
chairpersons of the house and senate executive departments and
administration committees that includes a line-by-line accounting of all
income received and expenses incurred in the prior fiscal year ending
June 30. The report shall include, but not be limited to, all grants,
donations, rents, and toll road and cog railway contributions received
in the prior fiscal year.

**Source.** 1969, 427:1. 1971, 395:1. 1974, 30:4. 1976, 37:4. 1978,
49:25. 1985, 399:3, I, eff. July 1, 1985. 2012, 245:3, 4, eff. June 18,
2012.

### Section 227-B:7

 **227-B:7 Mount Washington Planning Committee. –** As of the
effective date of this chapter, the Mount Washington planning committee
shall be discharged and shall turn over to the commission all records,
reports, data or other information relative to the summit in its
possession.

**Source.** 1969, 427:1, eff. July 2, 1969.

### Section 227-B:8

 **227-B:8 Gifts, Grants or Donations. –** The commission is
authorized to institute a promotional program to solicit and receive any
gifts, grants or donations made for the development of the summit and to
deposit such gifts, grants or donations in the Mount Washington fund.

**Source.** 1971, 395:3. 1974, 30:5, eff. July 1, 1974.

### Section 227-B:9

 **227-B:9 Mount Washington Fund. –** There is hereby established in
the office of the state treasurer a fund to be known as the Mount
Washington fund which shall be kept separate and distinct from all other
funds. Such fund shall be the depository of all fees received from the
commission pursuant to RSA 227-B:6, III and all gifts, grants or
donations made to the commission pursuant to RSA 227-B:8. From such fund
shall be paid the expenses of the commission plus the principal and
interest on any bonds which may be issued in the name of the state for
the purpose of capital improvements to the summit. Any monies in such
fund shall not lapse into the general fund of the state until the fund
balance equals the total bonds, interest and charges outstanding.

**Source.** 1974, 30:3, eff. July 1, 1974.
