---
title: 'CHAPTER 227-D MONADNOCK ADVISORY COMMISSION'
---

TITLE XIX
                                             
PUBLIC RECREATION
=================

CHAPTER 227-D
                                             
MONADNOCK ADVISORY COMMISSION
-----------------------------

### Section 227-D:1

 **227-D:1 Declaration of Policy and Purpose. –** The general court
declares that Mount Monadnock located in the towns of Dublin, Jaffrey,
and Marlborough, Gap Mountain in Troy, and Little Monadnock Mountain in
Fitzwilliam constitute a unique geographical attraction which brings
thousands of visitors to the state each year and requires supervision
and planning by the state of New Hampshire. It has been established that
there is a great need for the state to take jurisdiction over the lands
of Mount Monadnock which are presently open to the public in order that
these unique highlands can be preserved from the ravages of overuse.

**Source.** 1975, 432:1. 1990, 258:2, eff. June 27, 1990.

### Section 227-D:2

 **227-D:2 Agreements for Management and Supervision of Land. –** The
department of resources and economic development is hereby authorized
and directed to negotiate agreements with the Society for the Protection
of New Hampshire Forests, the towns involved, and others, by which such
lands shall be managed and supervised by department personnel. Such
agreements shall include, but are not limited to, provisions for the
exercise of enforcement powers vested in department personnel on such
lands; timber cutting; trail location and maintenance; search and rescue
operations; public liability; restrictive uses such as camping; and all
other aspects of operating said lands for public recreational uses
consistent with the natural environment.

**Source.** 1975, 432:1. 1990, 258:3, eff. June 27, 1990.

### Section 227-D:3

 **227-D:3 Tax Exemption. –** The land presently owned by the Society
for the Protection of New Hampshire Forests on Gap mountain in Troy
shall hereafter be exempt from local property taxes normally imposed by
the town of Troy so long as the Society and the state of New Hampshire
as lessee of the Society for the Protection of New Hampshire Forests
shall use said lands for recreational, wildlife, open space and forestry
purposes only. Any leases adopted under this section shall not preclude
the department of resources and economic development from charging fees
for the use of lands specified in this section.

**Source.** 1975, 432:1, eff. July 1, 1975.

### Section 227-D:4

 **227-D:4 Advisory Commission. –** There is established a Monadnock
advisory commission which shall recommend policies affecting the
recreational use of Mount Monadnock and Gap Mountain. Such commission
shall consist of 2 members from each town of Dublin, Jaffrey,
Marlborough, Fitzwilliam, and Troy, the director of the division of
parks and recreation, the director of the division of forests and lands,
and the president/forester of the Society for the Protection of New
Hampshire Forests or their designees. The town members shall be selected
by the towns, for a term of 3 years, either by appointment by the
selectmen or by the annual town meeting, as determined by the
commission. Vacancies shall be filled by the selectmen for the unexpired
term. The director of the division of parks and recreation shall make
available to the commission such support as shall be necessary for the
commission to discharge its responsibilities.

**Source.** 1975, 432:1. 1990, 258:4, eff. June 27, 1990.

### Section 227-D:5

 **227-D:5 Powers of the Commission. –** The Monadnock advisory
commission shall:
                                             
 I. Guide the department of resources and economic development
planning efforts to ensure that the growing popularity of Mount
Monadnock not be allowed to compromise the integrity of this national
natural landmark and its visitors' experiences.
                                             
 II. Assist the department in the formulation and adoption of a
long-range plan to ensure that the recreational and educational benefits
of Mount Monadnock, Little Monadnock, and Gap Mountain will be developed
so as to assure their perpetual availability.
                                             
 III. Recommend specific management policies and practices to control
use of the resources of Mount Monadnock, Little Monadnock, and Gap
Mountain under the jurisdiction of the department.
                                             
 IV. Assist the department in acquiring lands and rights in land, to
ensure a consistent management over these lands and their connecting
trail corridors.
                                             
 V. Meet at least annually, with a quorum of at least 8 members, to
conduct any business relevant to the purposes of this chapter.
                                             
 VI. Meet at least annually with the commissioner of the department
of resources and economic development and report annually to the
commissioner on its activities in support of this chapter; its
recommendations for acquisitions, easements, and landowner agreements;
and any threats to the integrity of these lands and to their enjoyment
by the public.
                                             
 VII. Issue an annual report to the member communities.

**Source.** 1975, 432:1. 1990, 258:4, eff. June 27, 1990.

### Section 227-D:5-a

 **227-D:5-a Acceptance of Gifts. –** The commission may accept any
gifts, donations, or grants from any source whatsoever, provided said
gifts, donations, or grants so received shall be used exclusively to
further the purposes of this chapter.

**Source.** 1999, 8:1, eff. June 4, 1999.

### Section 227-D:5-b

 **227-D:5-b District Legal Existence. –** In order to establish the
tax exempt status of the Monadnock advisory commission established under
this chapter, such advisory commission is deemed to be a governmental
instrumentality having a distinct legal existence separate from the
state and shall not be considered as a department of state government.
The exercise by the advisory commission of any authority granted by this
section shall be deemed to be the performance of public and essential
governmental functions not otherwise fulfilled by state government.

**Source.** 1999, 8:1, eff. June 4, 1999.

### Section 227-D:6

 **227-D:6 National Natural Landmarks. –** The general court
recognizes the 1987 designation of Mount Monadnock and the Rhododendron
Grove in Fitzwilliam as National Natural Landmarks by the U.S. National
Park Service, and hereby directs the Monadnock advisory commission and
the department of resources and economic development to ensure the
integrity of that designation in its management policies and plans.

**Source.** 1975, 432:1. 1990, 258:4, eff. June 27, 1990.
