---
title: CHAPTER 227 AERIAL TRAMWAYS
---

TITLE XIX
                                             
PUBLIC RECREATION
=================

CHAPTER 227
                                             
AERIAL TRAMWAYS
---------------

Cannon Mountain
---------------

### Section 227:1

 **227:1 Powers. –**
                                             
 The department of resources and economic development shall have
power (1) to construct, maintain, reconstruct and operate an aerial
tramway on Cannon Mountain in Franconia Notch; (2) to acquire, hold, and
dispose of personal property for the purposes hereof; (3) to acquire in
the name of the state, by purchase, condemnation, lease or otherwise,
real property and rights or easements therein, deemed by it necessary or
desirable for the purposes hereof, and to use such property; (4) to
acquire any such real property by the exercise of the power of
condemnation in the manner provided in RSA 4:29-39; (5) to charge and
collect fees, fares and tolls for carriage and other services made
available in connection with the tramway; (6) to make contracts on
behalf of the state, with the United States, other states, public
corporations or bodies existing therein, and private corporations and
individuals; (7) to accept grants, permits and cooperation from the
United States or any agency thereof in the construction, maintenance,
reconstruction, operation, and financing of the tramway and its
appurtenances and to do any and all things necessary in order to avail
itself of such aid and cooperation; (8) to employ, subject to the
regulations of the state personnel commission, such assistants, agents
and servants as it shall deem necessary or desirable for its purposes;
(9) to exercise any of its powers in the public domain of the United
States, unless the exercise of such powers is not permitted by the laws
of the United States; and (10) to do all things necessary or incidental
to the foregoing powers.

**Source.** 1937, 130:4. RL 239:3. 1950, 5, part. 12:12, eff. June 30,
1950.

### Section 227:2

 **227:2 Insurance. –** The department shall procure liability
insurance through the department of administrative services, division of
procurement and support services.

**Source.** 1950, 5, part 24:4. RSA 227:2. 1969, 503:2. 1994, 158:14,
eff. May 23, 1994. 2014, 327:58, eff. Aug. 2, 2014.

### Section 227:3

 **227:3 Plans to be Submitted and Approved. –** Said tramway and its
termini and other appurtenances shall be located in such manner that the
same shall cause no damage to the Old Man of the Mountain and the
immediate surroundings thereof and shall cause no substantial damage to
the general scenic values in Franconia Notch and shall occasion no
unnecessary destruction of forest growth in said area. Plans and
specifications for such tramway, termini and appurtenances shall be
submitted to the governor and council and approved by them as complying
with the provisions of this section, before construction thereof shall
be commenced. No changes shall be made in such plans and specifications
so approved until such changes have been likewise submitted and
approved. Nothing herein shall be construed to restrict in any way the
authority of the department of resources and economic development in the
management, operation, and control of the tramway, nor to limit the
right of the department to enter into contracts for construction or for
other purposes.

**Source.** 1937, 130:5. RL 239:4. 1950, 5, part 12:12, eff. June 30,
1950.

### Section 227:4

 **227:4 Control of Public Lands. –** To the extent that it may be
necessary to carry out the provisions of this subdivision the department
shall have power to use and control public lands of the state. Forthwith
upon the acquisition by the department in the name of the state through
purchase, condemnation, or otherwise of any real property or interest or
easement therein, such property or rights shall, without further action,
and by virtue hereof, be and become dedicated to the uses and purposes
of the department.

**Source.** 1937, 130:6. RL 239:5.

### Section 227:5

 **227:5 Special Fund. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 258:3, eff. July 17,
1987.
                                             ]

### Section 227:6

 **227:6 Application of Law. –** So far as the provisions of this
subdivision are inconsistent with the provisions of laws of 1925, 101,
relative to the use and management of state lands in Franconia Notch
acquired under the provisions thereof, the provisions of this
subdivision shall control.

**Source.** 1937, 130:13. RL 239:8.

Mt. Sunapee
-----------

### Section 227:7

 **227:7 Recreational Project. –** There shall be constructed on Mt.
Sunapee in the town of Newbury a tramway, or other lifting device, in
accordance with the following provisions.

**Source.** 1941, 190:2. RL 239:10. 1945, 153:1, par. 2, eff. May 11,
1945.

### Section 227:8

 **227:8 Maintenance and Operation. –** Upon completion of the
project as hereinbefore provided, the operation and management thereof
shall be under the supervision of the department of resources and
economic development, and for the purpose of said operation and
maintenance said department shall have power to (1) charge and collect
fees, fares and tolls for carriage and other services made available in
connection with said tramway or other lifting device; (2) to make
contracts on behalf of the state with the United States, other states,
public corporations or bodies existing therein, and private corporations
and individuals; (3) to accept grants, permits and cooperation from the
United States or any agency thereof in the maintenance and operation of
said project and its appurtenances, and to do any and all things
necessary in order to avail itself of such aid and cooperation; (4) to
employ, subject to the regulations of the state personnel commission,
such assistants, agents and servants as it shall deem necessary or
desirable for its purposes; (5) to exercise any of its powers in the
public domain of the United States, unless the exercise of such powers
is not permitted by the laws of the United States; (6) to do all things
necessary or incidental to the foregoing powers.

**Source.** 1941, 190:5. 1945, 153:1, par. 5, eff. May 11, 1945.

### Section 227:9

 **227:9 Declaration of Purpose. –** It is hereby declared that the
purposes of this subdivision are to develop, promote, and enhance the
recreational resources of the state and further the public interest
thereby.

**Source.** 1941, 190:1. RL 239:9.

### Section 227:10

 **227:10 Insurance. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1998, 134:10, IV, eff. June 10,
1998.
                                             ]

### Section 227:11

 **227:11 Revenue. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1998, 134:10, V, eff. June 10,
1998.
                                             ]

### Section 227:12

 **227:12 Consultation With White Mountain Region Association. –** In
exercising the functions, powers and duties, transferred to it from the
former New Hampshire aerial tramway commission, and in the construction,
development, and maintenance of projects in the area known as the White
Mountain Region, the department of resources and economic development
shall consult and advise with the directors of the White Mountain Region
Association, so-called, upon all matters of policy involved in the
general development and supervision of public projects in said area and
of its recreational facilities belonging to the state.

**Source.** 1950, 5, part 12:16, eff. June 30, 1950.

Resident Ski Rates
------------------

### Section 227:13

 **227:13 Establishment of Rates. –** The department shall not
exercise its authority pursuant to RSA 227:1 and 8, to establish fees,
fares and tolls at Cannon Mountain so as to discriminate against or to
the detriment of, financially or otherwise, resident skiers, either
directly or indirectly.

**Source.** 1963, 244:1. 1998, 134:9, eff. June 10, 1998.

### Section 227:14

 **227:14 Reduced Rates. –** All season passes, including those for
different age groups or military service, established by the department
for the specific use of the winter facilities at Cannon Mountain aerial
tramway and ski area shall be made available to any resident of this
state at a 25 percent discount. For the purposes of this section,
"resident of this state'' means a person whose domicile is in this
state. To qualify for the discount, a resident shall provide proof of
residency and purchase the pass prior to December 15 of the year in
which the pass becomes effective. Proof of residency shall include a
state issued driver's license; a state issued I.D. card with a
photograph or information including name, sex, date of birth, height,
weight and color of eyes; a United States passport; an affidavit
certifying residency from the municipal clerk of the purchasers' town or
city of residence; or, for a person less than 18 years of age, proof of
a parent's or guardian's residency provided by the resident parent or
guardian. The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development shall make quarterly reports on season passes issued under
this section to the senate president, the speaker of the house of
representatives, and the governor and council.

**Source.** 1967, 352:2. 1971, 137:1; 492:1. 1973, 72:32. 1975, 205:1.
1993, 358:15. 1998, 134:9, eff. June 10, 1998. 2011, 188:1, eff. June
14, 2011. 2012, 247:25, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.
