---
title: 'CHAPTER 547-B PUBLIC GUARDIANSHIP AND PROTECTION PROGRAM'
---

TITLE LVI
                                             
PROBATE COURTS AND DECEDENTS' ESTATES
=====================================

CHAPTER 547-B
                                             
PUBLIC GUARDIANSHIP AND PROTECTION PROGRAM
------------------------------------------

### Section 547-B:1

 **547-B:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to provide
guardianship and protection services where such services are required by
law and are otherwise unavailable.

**Source.** 1983, 409:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1983.

### Section 547-B:2

 **547-B:2 Program Established. –** There is hereby established a
public guardianship and protection program which shall operate in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1983, 409:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1983.

### Section 547-B:3

 **547-B:3 Appointment of Guardian. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, when
nomination of a guardian is required under RSA 135-C:60 or RSA 171-A:10,
and there is no relative, friend, or other interested person available,
willing, and able to serve in such a capacity, the probate court may
appoint the public guardianship and protection program as guardian of
the person, estate, or both person and estate, as may be deemed
appropriate.
                                             
 II. In other instances when guardianship services are required and
there is no relative, friend, or other interested person available,
willing, and able to serve in such a capacity, the probate court may
appoint the public guardianship and protection program as guardian of
the person, estate, or both person and estate, as may be deemed
appropriate, provided that there are funds available to pay for such
services.

**Source.** 1983, 409:1. 1994, 248:6, eff. June 2, 1994.

### Section 547-B:4

 **547-B:4 Powers and Duties. –** Except as limited by law or court
order, the public guardianship and protection program shall have the
same powers and duties as those granted to private guardians or
conservators, pursuant to RSA 464-A. The public guardianship and
protection program shall file annual reports with the probate court for
each person for whom it is appointed guardian or co-guardian as provided
in RSA 547-B:5. The reports shall be reviewed by the court to insure
that the public guardianship and protection program is complying with
all requirements of state and federal law, that the ward is receiving
appropriate care and services, and that the highest ethical standards
are being maintained.

**Source.** 1983, 409:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1983.

### Section 547-B:5

 **547-B:5 Appointment of Co-Guardian. –** At the request of a
relative, friend, or other interested party, the public guardianship and
protection program may, in the discretion of the probate court, be
appointed co-guardian. Both co-guardians shall make themselves readily
available to each other to consult with each other, to gather and share
all relevant information, and to plan and decide procedures which
execute the powers and duties assigned by the appointing court.
Disagreements shall be resolved upon petition by decision of the court,
prior to which emergency decisions by the public guardianship and
protection program shall prevail. Absence or unavailability of either
co-guardian empowers the other to act in the capacity of guardian.

**Source.** 1983, 409:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1983.

### Section 547-B:6

 **547-B:6 Contract for Program Services. –**
                                             
 I. The department of health and human services, with the approval of
the governor and council, shall contract with one or more organizations
approved by the New Hampshire supreme court which shall be designated
the public guardianship and protection program and which shall provide
guardianship services pursuant to RSA 464-A, as required by RSA 135-C:60
and RSA 171-A:10. The contract shall fix the cost per guardianship and
shall permit the contracting organization to subcontract for such
consulting services as may be necessary to carry out the program's
guardianship responsibilities. The compensation for operation of the
public guardianship and protection program shall be such sums as may be
fixed by the contract, subject to the appropriations made therefor.
                                             
 II. The contract may provide for protection services other than
guardianship services when such services are consistent with the intent
of RSA 464-A. The contract shall set forth an appropriate rate for such
services, if provided. Such protective services may include, but not be
limited to, power of attorney, client representation, or service as a
conservator, representative or protective payee, but shall not include
direct service delivery.

**Source.** 1983, 291:1, I; 409:1. 1994, 248:7. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov.
1, 1995.

### Section 547-B:7

 **547-B:7 Services to Other Clients. –** Nothing in this chapter
shall prevent an organization designated as a public guardianship and
protection program from providing guardianship or other services to any
individual when such services are not mandated by RSA 135-C:60 or RSA
171-A:10, except that no funds furnished under a contract entered into
pursuant to RSA 547-B:6 shall be expended for services provided to such
other individuals.

**Source.** 1983, 409:1. 1994, 248:8, eff. June 2, 1994.

### Section 547-B:8

 **547-B:8 Costs of Services. –** Except in cases of indigency as
determined by the probate court, the cost of services rendered under
this chapter shall be borne solely by the person or the estate of such
person receiving such services. The office of reimbursements established
by RSA 126-A:33 is hereby authorized to seek reimbursement from such
person or the estate of such person for the actual cost to the state of
services rendered.

**Source.** 1983, 409:1. 1995, 310:14, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.
