---
title: CHAPTER 550 CITATIONS AND NOTICE
---

TITLE LVI
                                             
PROBATE COURTS AND DECEDENTS' ESTATES
=====================================

CHAPTER 550
                                             
CITATIONS AND NOTICE
--------------------

### Section 550:1

 **550:1 Petitions. –** All proceedings in the court of probate shall
be begun by petition to the judge, briefly setting forth the ground of
the application.

**Source.** RS 152:1. CS 161:1. GS 173:1. GL 192:1. PS 185:1. PL 296:1.
RL 349:1.

### Section 550:2

 **550:2 Citation to Fiduciary. –** The judge of probate may on his
own motion issue a citation directed to any fiduciary appointed by or
responsible to the probate court, requiring such fiduciary to appear
before him to inform the court concerning any matters related to his
trust over which the court has jurisdiction, and upon due notice and
hearing, may make such order or decree as appears to the judge to be
proper.

**Source.** 1947, 264:7. RL 349:1-a.

### Section 550:3

 **550:3 Service of Citation. –** Service of citation under the
preceding section shall be sufficient if made by registered mail, return
receipt requested, at the address of record of the fiduciary. Any
expenses incidental to carrying out the provisions of this or the
preceding section shall be charged against the estate, and may, in the
discretion of the judge of probate, be deducted from any fee or other
compensation due the fiduciary.

**Source.** 1947, 264:7. RL 349:1-b.

### Section 550:4

 **550:4 Cases Requiring No Notice. –** The probate court may, at the
discretion of the judge, proceed without notice in the following cases:
                                             
 I. In the probate of wills in common form.
                                             
 II. In the appointment of the person entitled to such trust, or of
the person by him nominated, as administrator.
                                             
 III. In the appointment of appraisers of estates.
                                             
 IV. In licensing the sale of personal estate.
                                             
 V. In licensing the sale of real estate whenever the heirs at law or
devisees consent thereto in writing, or it is of less than five hundred
dollars in value.
                                             
 VI. In the appointment of commissioners of insolvent estates.
                                             
 VII. In the appointment of guardians of minors.
                                             
 VIII. In granting allowances to widows.
                                             
 IX. In the assignment of the homestead right.
                                             
 X. In making orders for suits upon probate bonds.
                                             
 XI. In changing the names of persons who reside in the county and
who apply therefor.
                                             
 XII. In the appointment of trustees named in wills.
                                             
 XIII. In licensing the mortgage of real estate pursuant to RSA
554:30-35.
                                             
 XIV. In allowing the payment of a sum not exceeding five hundred
dollars for the perpetual care of a cemetery lot and the monuments
thereon where the decedent is buried.
                                             
 XV. When an accounting is filed by a guardian who is a parent of or
a person standing in loco parentis to a minor having his home with such
guardian.

**Source.** RS 155:1. 1843, 34:14. CS 164:1. GS 173:2. GL 192:2. PS
185:2. PL 296:2. RL 349:2. RSA 550:4. 1957, 167:2. 1963, 165:1, 2. 1971,
179:13, 14. 1997, 100:10, 11, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 550:5

 **550:5 Citation to Parties Interested. –** In all cases in which
notice is required a citation shall be issued, or an order of notice
made to the parties interested, to appear at the court at a day and
place therein appointed, that they may be heard if they see cause.

**Source.** RS 155:2. CS 164:2. GS 173:3. GL 192:3. PS 185:3. PL 296:3.
RL 349:3.

### Section 550:6

 **550:6 Service. –** Every citation or order of court to an
individual, requiring him to perform a particular duty, shall be served
by giving to him in person or leaving at his abode a certified copy
thereof, if he resides in this state, twelve days at least before the
day of hearing.

**Source.** RS 155:3. CS 164:3. GS 173:4. GL 192:4. 1881, 20:1. PS
185:4. PL 296:4. RL 349:4.

### Section 550:7

 **550:7 Service Outside the State, etc. –** Every citation or order
of notice to a person residing out of the state, or to the widow, heirs,
devisees, legatees, creditors or persons interested in an estate, in
general terms, to be present at a proceeding relative to the estate,
shall be served by giving to each person to whom it is directed or
leaving at his abode, twelve days at least before the day appointed for
such proceedings, a certified copy of the citation or order of notice or
by publication.

**Source.** RS 155:4. CS 164:4. GS 173:5. GL 192:5. 1881, 20:1. PS
185:5. PL 296:5. RL 349:5.

### Section 550:8

 **550:8 Additional Notice. –** In addition to the notice prescribed
in the preceding sections, the judge may order personal notice, or
notice sent by mail, to any person interested, or notice by publication
in a newspaper printed elsewhere, as he shall deem proper in the case.

**Source.** RS 155:5. CS 164:5. GS 173:6. GL 192:6. PS 185:6. PL 296:6.
RL 349:6.

### Section 550:9

 **550:9 Exceptions; Other Notice. –** Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter, no publication or service of any petition,
motion, pleading, or other proceeding, shall be required as to any party
or person who has filed, or for whom there has been filed, in the
probate registry, an appearance in writing, and notice shall be
sufficient if a copy of such petition, motion, or other proceeding,
together with notice of the time and place of hearing, shall be mailed
to such party or person, or the attorney of record for such party or
person, at the address specified in the appearance.

**Source.** 1947, 140:1. RL 349:6-a.

### Section 550:10

 **550:10 Publication of Notice in Newspaper. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, whenever notice is
required to be published in a newspaper by any provision of this title,
the register of probate shall cause such notice to be published 2 weeks
successively in a newspaper which circulates in the town or city in
which the person whose estate is involved last resided, or in the county
whose court has jurisdiction, or otherwise as ordered by the judge.
                                             
 II. The register of probate may select the newspaper for
publication, provided only that it is a newspaper in the English
language, unless the judge shall otherwise order. The register may
publish a notice in a newspaper in other than the English language,
provided that he also publishes the same notice in a newspaper in the
English language at the same time. The first such publication shall be
at least 2 weeks before the day or thing of which notice is given and
the second publication shall be at least 7 days before the day or thing
of which notice is given, unless otherwise ordered by the judge.
                                             
 III. The register of probate may publish in one notice the necessary
information pertaining to more than one estate, provided, however, that
each separate subject matter such as the appointment of a fiduciary, a
hearing on an account, a hearing on a license to sell real estate, or
any other designated subject matter shall have a specific designation
within each such notice.
                                             
 IV. Prior to such publication, the fiduciary of the estate concerned
shall advance and pay to the register of probate the cost of such
publication as determined by the register, and a fee to the register as
established by the supreme court under RSA 490:27. The fiduciary shall
be allowed said sums so paid to the register in his account.

**Source.** 1851, 1119:1. CS 164:6. GS 173:7. 1877, 35:1. GL 192:7. PS
185:7. PL 296:7. RL 349:7. RSA 550:10. 1967, 429:1. 1979, 337:1. 1981,
310:5, eff. Sept. 14, 1981.

### Section 550:11

 **550:11 Accounts; Notice to Beneficiaries. –**
                                             
 I. In this section, "fiduciary'' means any:
                                             
 (a) Executor;
                                             
 (b) Administrator, including voluntary administrator, special
administrator, administrator with will annexed, and administrator de
bonis non; or
                                             
 (c) Trustee.
                                             
 II. Whenever any fiduciary files an account in the probate court,
the fiduciary shall contemporaneously forward the following to all
persons beneficially interested as defined in RSA 550:12, and all
parties appearing of record:
                                             
 (a) A copy of the account; and
                                             
 (b) A notice that the account may be approved unless a written
objection, containing the specific factual or legal basis for the
objection, is filed within 30 days after the date the account is filed
in the probate court. This notice requirement is waived if all assents
are filed pursuant to paragraph IV.
                                             
 III. The fiduciary shall certify to the probate court that the
requirements of paragraph II have been complied with.
                                             
 IV. If the fiduciary files, pursuant to RSA 550:13, assents to the
account from all persons beneficially interested as defined in RSA
550:12, and all parties appearing of record, the account may be approved
earlier than 30 days after the date the account is filed in the probate
court, at the discretion of the court.

**Source.** 1947, 264:6, par. 8. RL 349:8. RSA 550:11. 1971, 256:1.
1991, 190:2. 1998, 155:6, eff. July 8, 1998.

### Section 550:12

 **550:12 Person Beneficially Interested Defined. –** A person is
beneficially interested if the person is:
                                             
 I. An heir or distributee of an intestate estate;
                                             
 II. A residuary legatee under a will;
                                             
 III. A specific legatee under a will, but has not received the
legacy;
                                             
 IV. A beneficiary having a vested interest in a trust;
                                             
 V. The attorney general in estates involving charitable trusts;
                                             
 VI. A ward, or a minor under guardianship who is 14 years of age or
older;
                                             
 VII. An heir, or legatee under a will of a deceased ward;
                                             
 VIII. A creditor who is known to the fiduciary and has not been
paid; or
                                             
 IX. The trustee of a trust which is a beneficiary of the estate.

**Source.** 1947, 264:6, par. 9. RL 349:9. RSA 550:12. 1977, 597:1.
1979, 291:1. 1998, 155:7. 2003, 82:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 550:13

 **550:13 Dispensation of Citation and Notice. –** The citation and
notice required to be given to any person in any proceeding may be
dispensed with upon written assent by such person to such proceeding or
upon his written waiver of such citation and notice. A duly appointed
guardian ad litem may give assent or waive citation or notice as
aforesaid.

**Source.** 1953, 97:1. RSA 550:13. 1963, 165:3. 1967, 429:2, eff. Sept.
5, 1967.
