---
title: CHAPTER 552 PROBATE OF WILLS
---

TITLE LVI
                                             
PROBATE COURTS AND DECEDENTS' ESTATES
=====================================

CHAPTER 552
                                             
PROBATE OF WILLS
----------------

### Section 552:1

 **552:1 Requirement. –** No will shall be effectual to pass either
real or personal estate unless duly proved and allowed in the court of
probate; and the probate of a will devising real estate shall be
conclusive as to its due execution, as in case of a will of personal
estate.

**Source.** RS 157:1. CS 166:1. GS 175:1. GL 194:1. PS 187:1. PL 298:1.
RL 351:1.

### Section 552:2

 **552:2 Delivery of Will. –** Every person having the custody of a
will shall, within 30 days after he has knowledge of the decease of the
testator, deliver it to the court of probate, or to the person named
therein as executor.

**Source.** RS 157:2. CS 166:2. GS 175:2. GL 194:2. 1883, 61:5. PS
187:2. PL 298:2. RL 351:2. RSA 552:2. 1977, 274:2, eff. Aug. 21, 1977.

### Section 552:3

 **552:3 Duty of Executor. –** The person named as executor of a will
shall, within 30 days after the decease of the testator, or within 30
days after the person has knowledge of being so named, whichever is
later, file the will in the probate court. If the estate contains any
assets, the named executor shall cause the will to be proved or shall
file a written refusal to accept the trust. If the estate contains no
assets, the named executor shall provide a certificate of death for the
decedent and shall file the will with no administration.

**Source.** RS 157:3. CS 166:3. GS 175:3. GL 194:3. PS 187:3. PL 298:3.
RL 351:3. 1999, 100:7. 2001, 195:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

### Section 552:4

 **552:4 Forfeit for Neglect. –** Any person who shall neglect any
duty required by RSA 552:2 and 552:3 shall, unless he gives an excuse
satisfactory to the court of probate, forfeit the sum of twenty dollars
for each month he shall so neglect after said thirty days, to be
recovered by any person having an interest in the will.

**Source.** RS 157:4. CS 166:4. GS 175:4. GL 194:4. PS 187:4. PL 298:4.
RL 351:4.

### Section 552:5

 **552:5 Neglect After Citation. –** If a person having in his
custody a will neglects to deliver it to the court of probate, after
being duly cited for that purpose, he may be imprisoned by warrant
issued by the court until he shall deliver it.

**Source.** RS 157:5. CS 166:5. GS 175:5. GL 194:5. PS 187:5. PL 298:5.
RL 351:5.

### Section 552:5-a

 **552:5-a Names of Heirs. –** The executor named in the will or any
person presenting the will for probate shall, with his petition for
appointment, file a list of the names of the surviving spouse and known
heirs at law of the testator, their relationships, and their addresses,
if known.

**Source.** 1959, 70:1, eff. June 22, 1959.

### Section 552:5-b

 **552:5-b Self-Proved Will. –** Any will meeting the requirements of
RSA 551:2-a, RSA 551:5, II, or RSA 551-A:10 is self-proved and shall be
allowed as such by the probate court.

**Source.** 1985, 200:3. 1999, 100:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 552:6

 **552:6 Proof, Common Form. –** If the probate of a will is not
contested the judge may allow and approve it in common form, upon the
testimony of one of the subscribing witnesses, though the others are
living and within process of the court, or upon the assent of the
surviving spouse, legatees, devisees, heirs at law and, in the case of
an unnamed charitable interest, the assent of the director of charitable
trusts, without the need for a witness to appear.

**Source.** RS 157:6. CS 166:6. GS 175:6. GL 194:6. PS 187:6. PL 298:6.
RL 351:6. RS 552:6. 1983, 255:4. 1985, 200:4, eff. Jan. 1, 1986. 2013,
67:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 552:6-a

 **552:6-a Self-Proved Will. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 200:5, I, eff. Jan.
1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 552:6-b

 **552:6-b Proof of Will, Generally. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 200:5, II,
eff. Jan. 1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 552:7

 **552:7 Proof, Solemn Form; Issues to Court. –** Any party
interested may have the probate of a will which has been proved without
notice re-examined, and the will proved in solemn form before the court
of probate at any time within 6 months of such probate. Any issue
related to the execution of a will, testamentary capacity, or fraud,
duress, or undue influence shall be tried to the court of probate, and
any party interested may request the same within 6 months of such
probate.

**Source.** RS 157:7. CS 166:7. GS 175:7. GL 194:7. PS 187:7. PL 298:7.
RL 351:7. RSA 552:7. 1959, 114:9. 1975, 395:9. 1992, 284:61, eff. Jan.
1, 1993.

### Section 552:8

 **552:8 Petition and Hearing. –** A petition for that purpose may be
presented to the judge, and notice thereof shall be given to the
executor, personally, if practicable, and shall be published. If, upon
hearing and re-examination, the probate shall not be confirmed, the will
and probate shall be void.

**Source.** RS 157:8. CS 166:8. GS 175:8. GL 194:8. PS 187:8. PL 298:8.
RL 351:8.

### Section 552:9

 **552:9 Right of Minors, etc. –** A minor, insane person or person
out of the United States, or their legal representatives, may have the
probate of a will proved without notice re-examined at any time within
one year after the removal of the disability.

**Source.** RS 157:9. CS 166:9. GS 175:9. GL 194:9. PS 187:9. PL 298:9.
RL 351:9.

### Section 552:10

 **552:10 Failure to Present. –** If a will filed in the probate
office shall not be presented for probate by the executor, or by a
person interested therein, the judge, on application of the widow or an
heir of the deceased, and due notice, may approve and allow or disallow
it; and the decree so made shall be of the same force as if made on
application of the executor, or of a person interested in the will.

**Source.** RS 157:10. CS 166:10. GS 175:10. GL 194:10. PS 187:10. PL
298:10. RL 351:10.

### Section 552:11

 **552:11 Appointment of Guardians, Etc. –** No decree approving and
allowing or disallowing a will shall be made in solemn form until
guardians have been appointed for all minors and others interested
therein who are incapacitated to take care of their estates, and until
agents have been appointed by the judge for all persons interested who
reside out of the state or are unknown.

**Source.** RS 157:11. CS 166:11. GS 175:11. GL 194:11. PS 187:11. PL
298:11. RL 351:11.

### Section 552:12

 **552:12 If Witness Becomes Incompetent or Unavailable. –** If the
attesting witnesses, after the execution of a will, become incompetent
from any cause, or if the court determines that the testimony of such
witnesses is unavailable under the circumstances, the will may be proved
and allowed upon other satisfactory evidence.

**Source.** RS 157:12. CS 166:12. GS 175:12. GL 194:12. PS 187:12. PL
298:12. RL 351:12. 1945, 13:1, eff. Feb. 13, 1945.

### Section 552:13

 **552:13 Foreign Will. –** A duly authenticated copy of a will made
out of this state, which has been proved and allowed by a court of
probate or by a court of similar powers in one of the United States, or
in a foreign country, and a duly authenticated copy of the probate of
such will, upon the written application of a party in interest, and upon
such citation and notice as the court shall order, may, by a decree of
the court of probate, be filed and recorded in the probate office; and
thereupon the will shall have the same effect as if executed with the
formalities required by the laws of this state and duly proved and
allowed.

**Source.** RS 157:13. CS 166:13. GS 175:13. 1868, 1:50. GL 194:13.
1883, 106:1. PS 187:13. PL 298:13. RL 351:13.

### Section 552:14

 **552:14 Petition to File Foreign Will. –** The executor, or any
person interested, may produce such copies to the judge of any county in
which there is estate on which the same may operate, and may in writing
request the same to be filed and recorded; and if, upon due notice, no
sufficient objection is made such copies shall be decreed to be so filed
and recorded.

**Source.** RS 157:14. CS 166:14. GS 175:14. GL 194:14. PS 187:14. PL
298:14. RL 351:14.

### Section 552:15

 **552:15 Notice to Legatees and Heirs at Law. –** Every executor
shall, within sixty days after his appointment, notify each legatee
specifically named in the will of the fact that such legatee appears to
be interested therein, and shall notify the surviving spouse and heirs
at law, if known, that the will has been proved, and shall, within
ninety days after his appointment, certify to the judge that notice as
herein required has been given, stating in what manner and to whom.

**Source.** 1915, 76:1. PL 298:15. RL 351:15. RSA 552:15. 1959, 70:2,
eff. June 22, 1959.

### Section 552:16

 **552:16 Form of Service. –** The notice shall be in form prescribed
by the probate court, and shall be delivered by such executor to such
legatee, surviving spouse and heirs at law in person or by sending the
same by mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known place of
residence or place of business of such legatee, surviving spouse and
heirs at law. When the legatee is a corporation, association or
institution notice shall be given to the president or treasurer thereof.

**Source.** 1915, 76:1. PL 298:16. RL 351:16. RSA 552:16. 1959, 70:3,
eff. June 22, 1959.

### Section 552:17

 **552:17 By Mail. –** If such legatee shall not be living, or such
corporation, association or institution shall have discontinued
business, notice by mail as herein required shall be sufficient.

**Source.** 1915, 76:1. PL 298:17. RL 351:17.

### Section 552:18

 **552:18 Proof of Will During Life. –**
                                             
 I. During his or her life, an individual may commence a judicial
proceeding to determine the validity of his or her will, subject only to
the will's subsequent modification or revocation. For purposes of
commencing the proceeding under this section, the individual must be
domiciled in this state or own real property located in this state. A
person acting as an individual's guardian, conservator, or
attorney-in-fact shall not commence the proceeding on behalf of the
individual.
                                             
 II. If the petitioner is domiciled in this state, then the venue for
the judicial proceeding shall be in the county where the petitioner has
his or her domicile. If the petitioner is not domiciled in this state
but owns real property located in this state, then the venue for the
judicial proceeding shall be in the county where any of that real
property is located.
                                             
 III. In addition to the petitioner, each of the following persons is
an interested person in the judicial proceeding:
                                             
 (a) The petitioner's spouse;
                                             
 (b) The persons who, if the petitioner had died on the date of
filing the petition, would be the petitioner's heirs;
                                             
 (c) The legatees and devisees under the terms of the will;
                                             
 (d) The executors nominated in the will;
                                             
 (e) If a charitable organization is a legatee or devisee or the
will contains any charitable interest, the director of charitable
trusts; and
                                             
 (f) Any other persons who, if the petitioner had died on the date
of filing the petition, would be interested parties in a judicial
proceeding to prove the petitioner's will.
                                             
 IV. For the purposes of this section, each of the interested parties
shall be deemed possessed of inchoate property rights.
                                             
 V. Notice shall be given to each of the interested parties. The
court may order notice be given to other persons. In connection with the
judicial proceeding, a person may represent and bind another person in
accordance with Article 3 of RSA 564-B.
                                             
 VI. In the judicial proceeding, the petitioner is the proponent of
the will, the will shall be proved in solemn form, and the burden of
proof and presumptions shall be the same as in a proceeding to prove the
will in solemn form. After a hearing, the court shall declare whether
the will is valid or invalid, and it may make other findings of fact and
conclusions of law that are appropriate under the circumstances.
                                             
 VII. After the individual's death, the will for which there is a
declaration of validity under this section shall have full legal effect
as the individual's will and, upon request, shall be admitted to probate
and conclusively deemed proved, except to the extent that the will is
modified or revoked after the court's declaration.
                                             
 VIII. A will for which there is a declaration of validity under this
section may be modified or revoked in the same manner as a will for
which there is no declaration of validity under this section.
                                             
 IX. An individual's failure to commence a judicial proceeding under
this section shall not be construed as evidence or an admission that the
individual's will is invalid for any reason.

**Source.** 2014, 195:4, eff. July 1, 2014.
