---
title: CHAPTER 559 LICENSE TO SELL REAL ESTATE
---

TITLE LVI
                                             
PROBATE COURTS AND DECEDENTS' ESTATES
=====================================

CHAPTER 559
                                             
LICENSE TO SELL REAL ESTATE
---------------------------

### Section 559:1

 **559:1 When License Granted. –** The judge, on application of the
administrator, may grant a license for the sale of the real estate of
any person deceased, or of lands purchased or set off to the
administrator in payment of debts due to the estate, when the personal
property shall be insufficient to pay the just demands by law chargeable
to the estate.

**Source.** RS 164:1. CS 173:1. GS 182:1. GL 192:2; 201:1. PS 194:1. PL
305:1. RL 358:1.

### Section 559:2

 **559:2 Sale of Reversions, etc. –** The license may extend to the
reversion of the homestead right and of any interest in land whatever;
but any other estate than a present fee shall be particularly specified
in the application, notice and license.

**Source.** RS 164:2. CS 173:2. GS 182:2. GL 201:2. PS 194:2. PL 305:2.
RL 358:2. RSA 559:2. 1971, 179:17, eff. Aug. 10, 1971.

### Section 559:3

 **559:3 Sales of Whole. –** If the real estate is so situate that a
part thereof cannot be sold without injury to the persons interested
therein license may, on application, be granted to sell the whole,
though it may be more than sufficient for the payment of said demands.

**Source.** RS 164:3. CS 173:3. GS 182:3. GL 201:3. PS 194:3. PL 305:3.
RL 358:3.

### Section 559:4

 **559:4 Wood and Timber. –** The judge may grant license to the
administrator to sell the timber or wood growing or standing on any real
estate of the deceased, whenever the sale thereof, separate from the
real estate, will be beneficial to the persons interested; and such
timber or wood shall be deemed real estate.

**Source.** RS 164:6. CS 173:6. GS 182:6. GL 201:6. PS 194:4. PL 305:4.
RL 358:4.

### Section 559:5

 **559:5 Sale by Consent. –** Whenever it shall be necessary to sell
real estate for the payment of debts the judge, on application of the
administrator, with the assent of the widow or surviving husband, if
any, and, if there is no widow or surviving husband, then with the
assent of the guardian of the minor children, if any, may grant license
for the sale of the whole real estate of the deceased, including the
homestead right and any other interest therein, and the reversions
thereof.

**Source.** 1854, 1532:1. GS 182:15. GL 201:15. PS 194:5. PL 305:5. RL
358:5. RSA 559:5. 1971, 179:18, eff. date Aug. 10, 1971.

### Section 559:6

 **559:6 Distribution of Proceeds. –** The proceeds of any sale made
under such license shall be accounted for and distributed as provided in
RSA 559:19.

**Source.** 1854, 1532:2. GS 182:16. GL 201:16. PS 194:6. PL 305:6. RL
358:6. RSA 559:6. 1963, 165:9, eff. Aug. 19, 1963.

### Section 559:7

 **559:7 Bond From Heirs, etc. –** No license shall be granted if the
heirs or devisees will give to the judge a bond, with sufficient
sureties, for the payment of such just demands and to indemnify the
administrator therefrom.

**Source.** RS 164:4. CS 173:4. GS 182:4. GL 201:4. PS 194:7. PL 305:7.
RL 358:7.

### Section 559:8

 **559:8 Bond From Administrator. –** The judge, either before or
after a license to sell real estate is granted, may require from the
administrator a bond, with sufficient sureties, to account for the
proceeds of the sale in such manner as the judge shall order.

**Source.** RS 164:7. CS 173:7. GS 182:7. GL 201:7. PS 194:8. PL 305:8.
RL 358:8.

### Section 559:9

 **559:9 Manner of Sale. –** Such sale may be made either at auction
or private sale as is deemed most beneficial to the estate, and the
license issued by the judge shall designate the manner in which the sale
is to be made, or may authorize the administrator to sell in either mode
he deems to be for the best interest of the estate.

**Source.** RS 164:9. CS 173:9. GS 182:9. GL 201:9. PS 194:9. 1895, 4:1.
PL 305:9. RL 358:9.

### Section 559:10

 **559:10 Oath. –** The administrator, before a license for sale of
real estate at public auction shall be granted, shall take the following
oath, and shall file a certificate thereof in the probate office: I . .
. . . . . . . . do solemnly swear that, in disposing of such estate of .
. . . . . . . . . deceased as I may be licensed to sell, I will use my
best judgment in fixing and advertising the time and place of sale, and
will exert my utmost endeavor that the same shall be sold in such manner
as will be of the greatest advantage to the persons interested in said
estate, without any sinister or selfish view or motive whatever. So help
me God. Before receiving a license to sell at private sale the
administrator shall take the foregoing oath, omitting the words "in
fixing and advertising the time and place of sale.''

**Source.** RS 164:8. CS 173:8. GS 182:8. GL 201:8. PS 194:10. 1895,
4:2. 1917, 66:1. PL 305:10. RL 358:10.

### Section 559:11

 **559:11 Conveyance. –** The administrator, so authorized, having
made oath and sold according to the terms of his license, may execute
and deliver a valid conveyance of the estate to the purchaser.

**Source.** 1895, 4:3. 1917, 66:2. PL 305:11. RL 358:11.

### Section 559:12

 **559:12 License to Foreign Executor, etc. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1963,
165:10, eff. Aug. 19, 1963.
                                             ]

### Section 559:13

 **559:13 Bond; Oath, etc. –** He shall give bond, with sufficient
sureties resident in the state, make oath, and in all other respects be
entitled to the same rights and subject to the same liabilities as if
appointed in this state.

**Source.** 1854, 1529:1. GS 182:17. GL 201:17. PS 194:11. PL 305:13. RL
358:13.

### Section 559:14

 **559:14 Duration of License. –** No license shall be available to
sustain a sale made by an administrator under it, unless made within two
years from the granting thereof.

**Source.** RS 164:14. CS 173:14. GS 182:14. GL 201:14. PS 194:12. PL
305:14. RL 358:14.

### Section 559:15

 **559:15 Return; Record. –** Every person who has sold real estate
by virtue of a license from a judge shall, within one year after the
sale, return the license to the probate court with an account of the
sale and with an affidavit showing the times, places and manner of
giving notice of sale, subscribed and sworn to by himself or by a person
employed to give the notice; and, if approved by the judge, the account
and affidavit shall be recorded, and the record, or a certified copy of
it, shall be prima facie evidence that the notice was duly given.

**Source.** 1857, 1966:1. GS 182:19. GL 201:19. PS 194:13. PL 305:15. RL
358:15.

### Section 559:16

 **559:16 Contracts for Sales. –** When a person deceased had
contracted in writing to convey real estate, and the party contracted
with has performed or is ready to perform the conditions of the
contract, or if the contract was verbal and the party contracted with
has performed or partly performed its conditions, the judge may license
the administrator to make such conveyance as the deceased if alive would
be bound to make.

**Source.** RS 164:10. CS 173:10. GS 182:10. GL 201:10. PS 194:14. PL
305:16. RL 358:16.

### Section 559:17

 **559:17 License, Special Sale. –** When it shall appear by the will
of a person deceased to have been his intention that his executor should
dispose of his real estate for any lawful purpose, the judge may license
the administrator to sell it for the purpose and in the manner intended
by the testator.

**Source.** RS 164:11. CS 173:11. GS 182:11. GL 201:11. PS 194:15. PL
305:17. RL 358:17.

### Section 559:18

 **559:18 Sale of Real Estate. –** Unless the will otherwise
provides, an administrator or executor with the written consent of the
widow or widower and the heirs at law or devisees, or the guardians or
conservators of such of them as are under disability, may sell the whole
or any part of the real estate of a decedent, conducting the sale with
fidelity and impartiality. The administrator, so authorized, may execute
and deliver a valid conveyance of the estate to the purchaser. If there
are heirs or legatees under disability, or whose whereabouts are
unknown, or unknown heirs, the judge may appoint a guardian ad litem to
represent their interests; said guardian ad litem to have authority to
consent to a sale if, in his opinion, the best interests of his ward
would be served thereby.

**Source.** 1929, 68:1. 1933, 171:1. RL 358:18. RSA 559:18. 1971, 230:1.
1977, 310:3, eff. Aug. 26, 1977.

### Section 559:19

 **559:19 Title; Accounting. –** Any sale made under RSA 559:18 shall
convey title to said real estate free from all claims of creditors of
the decedent and of all other persons claiming under the decedent or
under his will, but the claims of all such persons shall be a charge
upon the proceeds of the sale. The proceeds of such sale shall be
accounted for to the probate court and, except for such deductions as
the court may make for the payment of debts, legacies, inheritance
taxes, and expenses of administration, shall be paid over on
distribution of the estate to the person or persons who would have been
entitled to such real estate and in the proportions to which they would
have been entitled had it not been sold.

**Source.** 1929, 68:1. 1933, 171:2. RL 358:19. RSA 559:19. 1977, 310:4,
eff. Aug. 26, 1977.

### Section 559:20

 **559:20 Breach of Bond. –** Fraudulent conduct in the sale of real
estate, misappropriation of the proceeds thereof, or refusal to account
for the same, shall be a breach of the administrator's bond.

**Source.** RS 164:12. CS 173:12. GS 182:12. GL 201:12. PS 194:16. PL
305:18. RL 358:20.

### Section 559:21

 **559:21 Perpetuation of Evidence. –** Any administrator, purchaser,
or person interested may petition the judge to perpetuate the evidence
of any facts set forth in a petition relative to any proceeding
connected with administration, and the judge, after due notice, may
decree that all or any of the facts are proved, and such decree shall be
conclusive evidence of those facts.

**Source.** RS 164:13. CS 173:13. GS 182:13. GL 201:13. PS 194:17. PL
305:19. RL 358:21.
