---
title: 'CHAPTER 563-C UNIFORM TRANSFER ON DEATH'
---

TITLE LVI
                                             
PROBATE COURTS AND DECEDENTS' ESTATES
=====================================

CHAPTER 563-C
                                             
UNIFORM TRANSFER ON DEATH
-------------------------

### Section 563-C:1

 **563-C:1 Title. –** This act shall be known as the uniform transfer
on death (TOD) security registration act.

**Source.** 1997, 231:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 563-C:2

 **563-C:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Beneficiary form'' means a registration of a security which
indicates the present owner of the security and the intention of the
owner regarding the person who will become the owner of the security
upon the death of the owner.
                                             
 II. "Person'' means an individual, corporation, organization, or
other legal entity.
                                             
 III. "POD'' means "pay on death.''
                                             
 IV. "Register,'' including its derivatives, means to issue a
certificate showing the ownership of a certified security or, in the
case of an uncertificated security, to initiate or transfer an account
showing ownership of securities.
                                             
 V. "Registering entity'' means a person who originates or transfers
a security title by registration, and includes a broker, a bank defined
in RSA 383-A:2-201(a)(3) which engages in business in this state and
maintains security accounts for customers, a transfer agent or other
person acting for or as an issuer of securities.
                                             
 VI. "Security'' means a share, participation, or other interest in
property, in a business, or in an obligation of an enterprise or other
issuer, and includes a certificated security, an uncertificated
security, and a security account.
                                             
 VII. "Security account'' means:
                                             
 (a) A reinvestment account associated with a security, a
securities account with a broker, a cash balance in a brokerage account,
cash, interest, earnings, or dividends earned or declared on a security
in an account, a reinvestment account, or a brokerage account, whether
or not credited to the account before the owner's death; or
                                             
 (b) A cash balance or other property held for or due to the owner
of a security as a replacement for or product of an account security,
whether or not credited to the account before the owner's death.
                                             
 VIII. "TOD'' means "transfer on death.''

**Source.** 1997, 231:1. 2006, 320:46, eff. Aug. 19, 2006. 2015, 272:36,
eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 563-C:3

 **563-C:3 Registration in Beneficiary Form; Sole or Joint Tenancy
Ownership. –** Only individuals whose registration of a security shows
sole ownership by one individual or multiple ownership by 2 or more with
right of survivorship, rather than as tenants in common, may obtain
registration in beneficiary form. Multiple owners of a security
registered in beneficiary form hold as joint tenants with right of
survivorship, as tenants by the entireties, or as owners of community
property held in survivorship form, and not as tenants in common.

**Source.** 1997, 231:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 563-C:4

 **563-C:4 Registration in Beneficiary Form; Applicable Law. –** A
security may be registered in beneficiary form if the form is authorized
by this or a similar statute of the state of organization of the issuer
or registering entity, the location of the registering entity's
principal office, the office of its transfer agent or its office making
the registration, or by this or a similar statute of the law of the
state listed as the owner's address at the time of registration. A
registration governed by the law of a jurisdiction in which this or
similar legislation is not in force or was not in force when a
registration in beneficiary form was made is nevertheless presumed to be
valid and authorized as a matter of contract law.

**Source.** 1997, 231:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 563-C:5

 **563-C:5 Origination of Registration in Beneficiary Form. –** A
security, whether evidenced by certificate or account, is registered in
beneficiary form when the registration includes a designation of a
beneficiary to take the ownership at the death of the owner or the
deaths of all multiple owners.

**Source.** 1997, 231:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 563-C:6

 **563-C:6 Form of Registration in Beneficiary Form. –** Registration
in beneficiary form may be shown by the words "transfer on death'' or
the abbreviation "TOD'', or by the words "pay on death'' or the
abbreviation "POD'', after the name of the registered owner and before
the name of a beneficiary.

**Source.** 1997, 231:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 563-C:7

 **563-C:7 Effect of Registration in Beneficiary Form. –** The
designation of a TOD beneficiary on a registration in beneficiary form
has no effect on ownership until the owner's death. A registration of a
security in beneficiary form may be cancelled or changed at any time by
the sole owner or all then surviving owners without the consent of the
beneficiary.

**Source.** 1997, 231:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 563-C:8

 **563-C:8 Ownership on Death of Owner. –** On a death of a sole
owner or the last to die of all multiple owners, ownership of securities
registered in beneficiary form passes to the beneficiary or
beneficiaries who survive all owners. On proof of death of all owners
and compliance with any applicable requirements of the registering
entity, a security registered in beneficiary form may be reregistered in
the name of the beneficiary or beneficiaries who survived the death of
all owners. Until division of the security after the death of all
owners, multiple beneficiaries surviving the death of all owners hold
their interests as tenants in common. If no beneficiary survives the
death of all owners, the security belongs to the estate of the deceased
sole owner or the estate of the last to die of all multiple owners.

**Source.** 1997, 231:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 563-C:9

 **563-C:9 Protection of Registering Entity. –**
                                             
 I. A registering entity is not required to offer or to accept a
request for security registration in beneficiary form. If a registration
in beneficiary form is offered by a registering entity, the owner
requesting registration in beneficiary form assents to the protections
given to the registering entity by this chapter.
                                             
 II. By accepting a request for registration of a security in
beneficiary form, the registering entity agrees that the registration
will be implemented on death of the deceased owner as provided in this
chapter.
                                             
 III. A registering entity is discharged from all claims to a
security by the estate, creditors, heirs, or devisees of a deceased
owner if it registers a transfer of the security in accordance with RSA
563-C:8 and does so in good faith reliance:
                                             
 (a) On the registration;
                                             
 (b) On this chapter; and
                                             
 (c) On information provided to it by affidavit of the personal
representative of the deceased owner, or by the surviving beneficiary or
by the surviving beneficiary's representatives, or other information
available to the registering entity.
                                             
 IV. The protections of this chapter do not extend to a registration
or payment made after a registering entity has received written notice
from any claimant to any interest in the security objecting to
implementation of a registration in beneficiary form. No other notice or
other information available to the registering entity affects its right
to protection under this chapter. The protection provided by this
chapter to the registering entity of a security does not affect the
rights of beneficiaries in disputes between themselves and other
claimants to ownership of the security transferred or its value or
proceeds.

**Source.** 1997, 231:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 563-C:10

 **563-C:10 Nontestamentary Transfer on Death. –**
                                             
 I. A transfer on death resulting from a registration in beneficiary
form is effective by reason of the contract regarding the registration
between the owner and the registering entity and this chapter and is not
testamentary.
                                             
 II. This chapter does not limit the rights of creditors of security
owners against beneficiaries and other transferees under other laws of
this state.

**Source.** 1997, 231:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 563-C:11

 **563-C:11 Terms, Conditions, and Forms for Registration. –**
                                             
 I. A registering entity offering to accept registrations in
beneficiary form may establish the terms and conditions under which it
will receive requests (i) for registrations in beneficiary form, and
(ii) for implementation of registrations in beneficiary form, including
requests for cancellation of previously registered TOD beneficiary
designations and requests for reregistration to effect a change of
beneficiary. The terms and conditions so established may provide for
proving death, avoiding or resolving any problems concerning fractional
shares, designating primary and contingent beneficiaries, and
substituting a named beneficiary's descendants to take in the place of
the named beneficiary in the event of the beneficiary's death.
Substitution may be indicated by appending to the name of the primary
beneficiary the letters LDPS, standing for "lineal descendants per
stirpes''. This designation substitutes a deceased beneficiary's
descendants who survive the owner for a beneficiary who fails to so
survive, the descendants to be identified and to share in accordance
with the law of the beneficiary's domicile at the owner's death
governing inheritance by descendants of an intestate. Other forms of
identifying beneficiaries who are to take on one or more contingencies,
and rules for providing proofs and assurances needed to satisfy
reasonable concerns by registering entities regarding conditions and
identities relevant to accurate implementation of registrations in
beneficiary form, may be contained in a registering entity's terms and
conditions.
                                             
 II. The following are illustrations of registrations in beneficiary
form which a registering entity may authorize:
                                             
 (a) Sole owner-sole beneficiary: John S Brown TOD (or POD) John S
Brown Jr.
                                             
 (b) Multiple owner-sole beneficiary: John S Brown Mary B Brown JT
TEN TOD John S Brown Jr.
                                             
 (c) Multiple owners-primary and secondary (substituted)
beneficiaries: John S Brown Mary B Brown JT TEN TOD John S Brown Jr SUB
BENE Peter Q Brown; or John S Brown Mary B Brown JT TEN TOD John S Brown
Jr LDPS.

**Source.** 1997, 231:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 563-C:12

 **563-C:12 Application of Chapter. –** This chapter applies to
registrations of securities in beneficiary form made before or after
January 1, 1998, by decedents dying on or after January 1, 1998.

**Source.** 1997, 231:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.
