---
title: 'CHAPTER 563-B UNIFORM DISCLAIMER OF PROPERTY INTERESTS ACT'
---

TITLE LVI
                                             
PROBATE COURTS AND DECEDENTS' ESTATES
=====================================

CHAPTER 563-B
                                             
UNIFORM DISCLAIMER OF PROPERTY INTERESTS ACT
--------------------------------------------

### Section 563-B:1

 **563-B:1 Right to Disclaim Interest in Property. –** A person,
including but not limited to any executor, administrator, trustee,
guardian, conservator, holder of a power of attorney or any other
fiduciary, to whom any property or interest therein devolves, by
whatever means, may disclaim it in whole or in part by delivering a
written disclaimer under this chapter. The right to disclaim exists
notwithstanding any limitation on the interest of the disclaimant in the
nature of a spendthrift provision or similar restriction.

**Source.** 1996, 265:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 563-B:2

 **563-B:2 Time of Disclaimer-Delivery. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph III, if the property or interest
has devolved to the disclaimant under a testamentary instrument or by
the laws of intestacy, the disclaimer shall be delivered, as to a
present interest, not later than 9 months after the death of the
deceased owner or deceased donee of a power of appointment and, as to a
future interest, not later than 9 months after the event determining
that the taker of the property or interest has become finally
ascertained and the taker's interest is indefeasibly vested. The
disclaimer shall be delivered in person or mailed by registered or
certified mail to any personal representative, or other fiduciary, of
the decedent or the donee of the power, to the holder of the legal title
to which the interest relates, or to the person entitled to the property
or interest in the event of disclaimer. A copy of the disclaimer shall
be filed in the probate court of the county in which proceedings for the
administration of the estate of the deceased owner or deceased donee of
the power have been commenced.
                                             
 II. Except as provided in paragraph III, if the property or interest
has devolved to the disclaimant under a nontestamentary instrument or
contract, the disclaimer shall be delivered, as to a present interest,
not later than 9 months after the effective date of the nontestamentary
instrument or contract and, as to a future interest, not later than 9
months after the event determining that the taker of the property or
interest has become finally ascertained and the taker's interest
indefeasibly vested. If the person entitled to disclaim does not have
actual knowledge of the existence of the interest, the disclaimer shall
be delivered not later than 9 months after the taker had actual
knowledge of the existence of the interest. The effective date of a
revocable instrument or contract is the date on which the maker no
longer has power to revoke it or to transfer to the maker or another the
entire legal and equitable ownership of the interest. The disclaimer
shall be delivered in person or mailed by registered or certified mail
to the person who had legal title to or possession of the interest
disclaimed.
                                             
 III. In any case, as to a transfer creating an interest in the
disclaimant made after December 31, 1976, and subject to tax under
chapter 11, 12, or 13 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended,
a disclaimer intended as a qualified disclaimer thereunder must
specifically so state and must be delivered not later than 9 months
after the later of the date the transfer is made or the day on which the
person disclaiming attains age 21.
                                             
 IV. A surviving joint tenant may disclaim as a separate interest any
property or interest therein devolving to a surviving joint tenant by
right of survivorship. A surviving joint tenant may disclaim the entire
interest in any property or interest therein that is the subject of a
joint tenancy devolving to the surviving joint tenant, if the joint
tenancy was created by act of a deceased joint tenant and to the extent
that the survivor did not contribute to the joint tenancy.
                                             
 V. If real property or an interest therein is disclaimed, a copy of
the disclaimer shall be recorded in the registry of deeds of the county
in which the property or interest disclaimed is located.

**Source.** 1996, 265:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 563-B:3

 **563-B:3 Form of Disclaimer. –** The disclaimer shall:
                                             
 I. Describe the property or interest disclaimed;
                                             
 II. Declare the disclaimer and extent thereof, and
                                             
 III. Be signed by the disclaimant.

**Source.** 1996, 265:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 563-B:4

 **563-B:4 Effect of Disclaimer. –**
                                             
 I. If the property or interest devolved to a disclaimant under a
testamentary instrument or under the laws of intestacy and the deceased
owner or donee of a power of appointment has not provided for another
disposition, it devolves as if the disclaimant had predeceased the
decedent or, if the disclaimant was designated to take under a power of
appointment exercised by a testamentary instrument, as if the
disclaimant had predeceased the donee of the power. Any future interest
that takes effect in possession or enjoyment after the termination of
the estate or interest disclaimed takes effect as if the disclaimant had
died before the event determining that the taker of the property or
interest had become finally ascertained and the taker's interest is
indefeasibly vested. A disclaimer relates back for all purposes to the
date of death of the decedent, or of the donee of the power, or the
determinative event, as the case may be.
                                             
 II. If the property or interest devolved to a disclaimant under a
nontestamentary instrument or contract and the instrument or contract
does not provide for another disposition, (1) it devolves as if the
disclaimant had died before the effective date of the instrument or
contract; and (2) a future interest that takes effect in possession or
enjoyment at or after the termination of the disclaimed interest takes
effect as if the disclaimant had died before the event determining that
the taker of the property or interest had become finally ascertained and
the interest indefeasibly vested. A disclaimer relates back for all
purposes to the effective date of the instrument or contract or the date
of the determinative event, as the case may be.
                                             
 III. The disclaimer or the written waiver of the right to disclaim
is binding upon the disclaimant or person waiving and all persons
claiming through or under said disclaimant or person.

**Source.** 1996, 265:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 563-B:5

 **563-B:5 Waiver and Bar. –** The right to disclaim property or an
interest therein is barred by:
                                             
 I. An assignment, conveyance, encumbrance, pledge, or transfer of
the property or interest, or a contract therefor;
                                             
 II. A written waiver of the right to disclaim;
                                             
 III. An acceptance of the property or interest or a benefit
thereunder; or
                                             
 IV. A sale of the property or interest under judicial sale made
before the disclaimer is effected.

**Source.** 1996, 265:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 563-B:6

 **563-B:6 Remedy Not Exclusive. –** This chapter does not abridge
the right of a person to waive, release, disclaim, or renounce property
or an interest therein under any other statute.

**Source.** 1996, 265:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 563-B:7

 **563-B:7 Application. –** An interest in property that exists on
January 1, 1997, as to which, if a present interest, the time for
delivering a disclaimer under this chapter, has not expired or, if a
future interest, the interest has not become indefeasibly vested or the
taker finally ascertained, may be disclaimed within 9 months after
January 1, 1997.

**Source.** 1996, 265:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 563-B:8

 **563-B:8 Uniformity of Application and Construction. –** This
chapter shall be applied and construed to effectuate its general purpose
to make uniform the law with respect to the subject of this chapter
among states enacting it.

**Source.** 1996, 265:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 563-B:9

 **563-B:9 Short Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the Uniform
Disclaimer of Property Interests Act.

**Source.** 1996, 265:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.
