---
title: 'CHAPTER 563-A UNIFORM TESTAMENTARY ADDITIONS TO TRUSTS ACT'
---

TITLE LVI
                                             
PROBATE COURTS AND DECEDENTS' ESTATES
=====================================

CHAPTER 563-A
                                             
UNIFORM TESTAMENTARY ADDITIONS TO TRUSTS ACT
--------------------------------------------

### Section 563-A:1

 **563-A:1 Testamentary Additions to Trusts. –**
                                             
 I. A will may validly devise or bequeath property to the trustee of
a trust established or to be established:
                                             
 (a) During the testator's lifetime by the testator, by the
testator and some other person, or by some other person including a
funded or unfunded life insurance trust, although the trustor has
reserved any or all rights of ownership of the insurance contracts, or
                                             
 (b) At the testator's death by the testator's devise to the
trustee, if the trust is identified in the testator's will and its terms
are set forth in a written instrument, other than a will, executed
before, concurrently with, or after the execution of the testator's will
or in another individual's will if that other individual has predeceased
the testator, regardless of the existence, size, or character of the
corpus of the trust. The devise or bequest is not invalid because the
trust is amendable or revocable, or because the trust was amended after
the execution of the will or the testator's death.
                                             
 II. Unless the testator's will provides otherwise, property devised
or bequeathed to a trust described in paragraph I is not held under a
testamentary trust of the testator but it becomes a part of the trust to
which it is devised or bequeathed, and must be administered and disposed
of in accordance with the provisions of the governing instrument setting
forth the terms of the trust, including any amendments thereto made
before or after the testator's death.
                                             
 III. Unless the testator's will provides otherwise, a revocation or
termination of the trust before the testator's death causes the devise
or bequest to lapse.

**Source.** 1996, 200:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 563-A:2

 **563-A:2 Effect on Existing Wills. –** This chapter shall apply to
a will of a testator who dies after January 1, 1997.

**Source.** 1996, 200:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 563-A:3

 **563-A:3 Uniformity of Application and Construction. –** This
chapter shall be applied and construed to effectuate its general purpose
to make uniform the law with respect to the subject of this chapter
among states enacting it.

**Source.** 1996, 200:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 563-A:4

 **563-A:4 Short Title. –** This act may be cited as the Uniform
Testamentary Additions to Trusts Act.

**Source.** 1996, 200:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.
