---
title: CHAPTER 566 POWERS OF APPOINTMENT
---

TITLE LVI
                                             
PROBATE COURTS AND DECEDENTS' ESTATES
=====================================

CHAPTER 566
                                             
POWERS OF APPOINTMENT
---------------------

### Section 566:1

 **566:1 Definitions. –** A power of appointment, whether or not
coupled with an interest, and whether or not existing at the time this
section takes effect, and whether the power is held by the donee in an
individual or in a fiduciary capacity, may be released, wholly or
partially, by the donee thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided in
the instrument creating the power. As used in this chapter, the term
power of appointment includes all powers which are in substance and
effect powers of appointment regardless of the language used in creating
them and whether they are: (a) general, special, or otherwise; (b) in
gross, appendant, simply collateral, in trust, or otherwise; (c)
exercisable by will, deed, deed or will, or instrument amending a trust,
or otherwise; (d) exercisable presently or in the future.

**Source.** 1947, 248:1, par. 1. RL 364-A:1.

### Section 566:1-a

 **566:1-a Special Power of Appointment. –** As a clarification of
existing law, unless a testamentary power of appointment expressly
states that it is a general power of appointment or expressly authorizes
the donee to exercise the power of appointment in favor of one or more
of the donee's creditors, the donee's estate or the creditors of the
donee's estate, the power of appointment shall be construed as a special
power of appointment, and the donee may not appoint in favor of the
donee's creditors, the donee's estate or the creditors of the donee's
estate. For the purposes of this section, the term "testamentary power
of appointment'' shall mean a power to appoint property exercisable only
at the death of the donee of the power, whether by the donee's will or
otherwise.

**Source.** 1999, 118:1, eff. June 10, 1999.

### Section 566:2

 **566:2 Release. –**
                                             
 I. A power releasable according to RSA 566:1, or under common law,
may be released, wholly or partially, by the delivery of a written
release executed by the donee of the power for consideration or under
seal to any person who could be adversely affected by the exercise of
the power, or to any person who alone or with another or others holds in
trust property subject to the power, or, in the case of a power created
by will, by the filing of such release in the registry of probate in the
county in which such will was proved or allowed.
                                             
 II. No release of a power of appointment shall be valid as to land
in this state subject to such power, except as against the releasor and
persons having actual notice of the release, unless (a) in case of a
power created by will or other written instrument, the release is
acknowledged in the manner required in the case of deeds of land to
entitle them to be recorded and is recorded in the registry of deeds for
the county in which the land lies, or (b) in case of a power created by
will, the release is filed in the registry of probate in the county in
which such will was proved or allowed.

**Source.** 1947, 248:1, par. 2. RL 364-A:2.

### Section 566:3

 **566:3 Effect. –** A release executed by the donee of a power
releasable according to RSA 566:1, or under common law, and delivered or
filed in accordance with RSA 566:2, I, shall, subject to RSA 566:2, II,
be effective to release the power to the extent in such release
provided, whether it in substance provides for the release of all right
of the donee to exercise the power, or for the release of all right of
the donee to exercise the power otherwise than in respect of a part,
therein defined, of the property subject to the power, or for the
release of all right of the donee to exercise the power otherwise than
to or for the benefit of, in trust for, or in favor of a person or
persons or class or classes of persons, therein specified, or an object
or objects or class or classes of objects, therein defined.

**Source.** 1947, 248:1, par. 3. RL 364-A:3.

### Section 566:4

 **566:4 Two or More Donees. –** If a power of appointment releasable
according to RSA 566:1, or under common law, is or may be exercisable by
two or more persons in conjunction with one another or successively, a
release or disclaimer of the power, in whole or in part, executed, and
delivered or filed, in accordance with RSA 566:2, I, by any one of the
donees of the power, shall, subject to RSA 566:2, II, be effective to
release or disclaim, to the extent therein provided, all right of such
person to exercise or to participate in the exercise of the power, but,
unless the instrument creating the power otherwise provides, shall not
prevent or limit the exercise or participation in the exercise thereof
by the other donee or donees thereof.

**Source.** 1947, 248:1, par. 4. RL 364-A:4.

### Section 566:5

 **566:5 Definition of Release. –** The word "release,'' as used in
RSA 566:1-4, shall include (1) an instrument wherein the person who
executes it in substance states that he wholly releases, or agrees in no
respect to exercise or participate in the exercise of, a power of
appointment, and (2) an instrument wherein the person who executes it in
substance states that he releases all right to exercise or participate
in the exercise of a power of appointment otherwise than within limits
therein defined or agrees not to exercise or participate in the exercise
of a power of appointment otherwise than within limits therein defined.

**Source.** 1947, 248:1, par. 5. RL 364-A:5.

### Section 566:6

 **566:6 Limitation. –** Release of a power of appointment otherwise
releasable shall not be prevented merely by provisions in restraint of
alienation or anticipation contained in the instrument creating the
power.

**Source.** 1947, 248:1, par. 6. RL 364-A:6.

### Section 566:7

 **566:7 Construction. –** RSA 566:1-6, shall so far as possible be
deemed to be declaratory of the common law of this state. Said sections
shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate the intent that all
powers of appointment whatsoever shall be releasable unless otherwise
expressly provided in the instrument creating the power.

**Source.** 1947, 248:1, par. 7. RL 364-A:7.

### Section 566:8

 **566:8 Donee May Disclaim. –** A donee of a power of appointment
may disclaim the same at any time, wholly or in part, in the same manner
and to the same extent as he might release it.

**Source.** 1947, 248:1, par. 8. RL 364-A:8.

### Section 566:9

 **566:9 Other Releases. –** Nothing in RSA 566:1-8, shall prevent
the release in any lawful manner of any releasable power of appointment
or the disclaimer in any lawful manner of any power of appointment.

**Source.** 1947, 248:1, par. 9. RL 364-A:9.
