---
title: CHAPTER 672 GENERAL PROVISIONS
---

TITLE LXIV
                                             
PLANNING AND ZONING
===================

CHAPTER 672
                                             
GENERAL PROVISIONS
------------------

Purpose
-------

### Section 672:1

 **672:1 Declaration of Purpose. –** The general court hereby finds
and declares that:
                                             
 I. Planning, zoning and related regulations have been and should
continue to be the responsibility of municipal government;
                                             
 II. Zoning, subdivision regulations and related regulations are a
legislative tool that enables municipal government to meet more
effectively the demands of evolving and growing communities;
                                             
 III. Proper regulations enhance the public health, safety and
general welfare and encourage the appropriate and wise use of land;
                                             
 III-a. Proper regulations encourage energy efficient patterns of
development, the use of solar energy, including adequate access to
direct sunlight for solar energy uses, and the use of other renewable
forms of energy, and energy conservation. Therefore, the installation of
solar, wind, or other renewable energy systems or the building of
structures that facilitate the collection of renewable energy shall not
be unreasonably limited by use of municipal zoning powers or by the
unreasonable interpretation of such powers except where necessary to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare;
                                             
 III-b. Agriculture makes vital and significant contributions to the
food supply, the economy, the environment and the aesthetic features of
the state of New Hampshire, and the tradition of using the land resource
for agricultural production is an essential factor in providing for the
favorable quality of life in the state. Natural features, terrain and
the pattern of geography of the state frequently place agricultural land
in close proximity to other forms of development and commonly in small
parcels. Agricultural activities are a beneficial and worthwhile feature
of the New Hampshire landscape. Agritourism, as defined in RSA 21:34-a,
is undertaken by farmers to contribute to both the economic viability
and the long-term sustainability of the primary agricultural activities
of New Hampshire farms. Agricultural activities and agritourism shall
not be unreasonably limited by use of municipal planning and zoning
powers or by the unreasonable interpretation of such powers;
                                             
 III-c. Forestry, when practiced in accordance with accepted
silvicultural principles, constitutes a beneficial and desirable use of
New Hampshire's forest resource. Forestry contributes greatly to the
economy of the state through a vital forest products industry; and to
the health of the state's forest and wildlife resources through
sustained forest productivity, and through improvement of wildlife
habitats. New Hampshire's forests are an essential component of the
landscape and add immeasurably to the quality of life for the state's
citizens. Because New Hampshire is a heavily forested state, forestry
activities, including the harvest and transport of forest products, are
often carried out in close proximity to populated areas. Further, the
harvesting of timber often represents the only income that can be
derived from property without resorting to development of the property
for more intensive uses, and, pursuant to RSA 79-A:1, the state of New
Hampshire has declared that it is in the public interest to encourage
preservation of open space by conserving forest and other natural
resources. Therefore, forestry activities, including the harvest and
transport of forest products, shall not be unreasonably limited by use
of municipal planning and zoning powers or by the unreasonable
interpretation of such powers;
                                             
 III-d. For purposes of paragraphs III-a, III-b, III-c, and III-e,
"unreasonable interpretation'' includes the failure of local land use
authorities to recognize that agriculture and agritourism as defined in
RSA 21:34-a, forestry, renewable energy systems, and commercial and
recreational fisheries, when practiced in accordance with applicable
laws and regulations, are traditional, fundamental and accessory uses of
land throughout New Hampshire, and that a prohibition upon these uses
cannot necessarily be inferred from the failure of an ordinance or
regulation to address them;
                                             
 III-e. All citizens of the state benefit from a balanced supply of
housing which is affordable to persons and families of low and moderate
income. Establishment of housing which is decent, safe, sanitary and
affordable to low and moderate income persons and families is in the
best interests of each community and the state of New Hampshire, and
serves a vital public need. Opportunity for development of such housing
shall not be prohibited or unreasonably discouraged by use of municipal
planning and zoning powers or by unreasonable interpretation of such
powers;
                                             
 III-f. New Hampshire commercial and recreational fisheries make
vital and significant contributions to the food supply, the economy, the
environment, and the aesthetic features of the state of New Hampshire,
and the tradition of using marine resources for fisheries production is
an essential factor in providing for economic stability and a favorable
quality of life in the state. Many traditional commercial and
recreational fisheries in New Hampshire's rivers and estuarine systems
are located in close proximity to coastal development. Such fisheries
are a beneficial and worthwhile feature of the New Hampshire landscape
and tradition and should not be discouraged or eliminated by use of
municipal planning and zoning powers or the unreasonable interpretation
of such powers.
                                             
 IV. The citizens of a municipality should be actively involved in
directing the growth of their community;
                                             
 V. The state should provide a workable framework for the fair and
reasonable treatment of individuals;
                                             
 V-a. The care of up to 6 full-time preschool children and 3
part-time school age children in the home of a child care provider makes
a vital and significant contribution to the state's economy and the
well-being of New Hampshire families. The care provided through
home-based day care closely parallels the activities of any home with
young children. Family based care, traditionally relied upon by New
Hampshire families, should not be discouraged or eliminated by use of
municipal planning and zoning powers or the unreasonable interpretation
of such powers; and
                                             
 VI. It is the policy of this state that competition and enterprise
may be so displaced or limited by municipalities in the exercise of the
powers and authority provided in this title as may be necessary to carry
out the purposes of this title.

**Source.** 1983, 447:1. 1985, 68:1; 335:3; 369:1. 1989, 42:1; 170:1.
1990, 174:1; 180:1, 2. 1991, 198:1. 2002, 73:1. 2008, 299:3, eff. Jan.
1, 2010; 357:2, 3, eff. July 11, 2009. 2016, 267:2, 3, eff. June 16,
2016.

Words and Phrases Defined
-------------------------

### Section 672:2

 **672:2 Definition of Words and Phrases. –** The following words and
phrases when used in Title LXIV shall have the meanings given to them in
this chapter.

**Source.** 1983, 447:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1984.

### Section 672:3

 **672:3 Abutter. –** "Abutter'' means any person whose property is
located in New Hampshire and adjoins or is directly across the street or
stream from the land under consideration by the local land use board.
For purposes of receiving testimony only, and not for purposes of
notification, the term "abutter'' shall include any person who is able
to demonstrate that his land will be directly affected by the proposal
under consideration. For purposes of receipt of notification by a
municipality of a local land use board hearing, in the case of an
abutting property being under a condominium or other collective form of
ownership, the term abutter means the officers of the collective or
association, as defined in RSA 356-B:3, XXIII. For purposes of receipt
of notification by a municipality of a local land use board hearing, in
the case of an abutting property being under a manufactured housing park
form of ownership as defined in RSA 205-A:1, II, the term "abutter''
includes the manufactured housing park owner and the tenants who own
manufactured housing which adjoins or is directly across the street or
stream from the land under consideration by the local land use board.

**Source.** 1983, 447:1. 1986, 33:2. 2002, 216:1, eff. July 15, 2002.

### Section 672:4

 **672:4 District Commissioners. –** "District commissioners'' means
the board of commissioners of a village district or precinct.

**Source.** 1983, 447:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1984.

### Section 672:5

 **672:5 Ex Officio Member. –** "Ex Officio member'' means any member
who holds office by virtue of an official position and who shall
exercise all the powers of regular members of a local land use board.

**Source.** 1983, 447:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1984.

### Section 672:6

 **672:6 Local Governing Body. –** "Local governing body'' means, in
addition to any other appropriate title:
                                             
 I. Board of selectmen in a town;
                                             
 II. City council or board of aldermen in a city;
                                             
 III. Village district commissioners in a village district; or
                                             
 IV. County commissioners in a county in which there are located
unincorporated towns or unorganized places.

**Source.** 1983, 447:1. 1989, 266:7, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 672:7

 **672:7 Local Land Use Board. –** "Local land use board'' means a
planning board, historic district commission, inspector of buildings,
building code board of appeals, zoning board of adjustment, or other
board or commission authorized under RSA 673 established by a local
legislative body.

**Source.** 1983, 447:1. 2010, 226:4, eff. Aug. 27, 2010.

### Section 672:8

 **672:8 Local Legislative Body. –** "Local legislative body'' means
one of the following basic forms of government utilized by a
municipality:
                                             
 I. Council, whether city or town;
                                             
 II. Mayor--council;
                                             
 III. Mayor--board of aldermen;
                                             
 IV. Village district or precinct;
                                             
 V. Town meeting; or
                                             
 VI. County convention.

**Source.** 1983, 447:1. 1985, 103:18. 1989, 266:8, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 672:9

 **672:9 Mayor. –** "Mayor'' means the chief executive officer of the
municipality, whether the official designation of the office is mayor of
a city, city or town manager, the board of selectmen of a town, the
board of commissioners of a village district, the county commissioners
of a county in which there are located unincorporated towns or
unorganized places, or any other title or any official designated in the
municipal charter to perform the duties of "mayor.''

**Source.** 1983, 447:1. 1989, 266:8. 1991, 377:3, eff. Aug. 31, 1991.

### Section 672:10

 **672:10 Municipality. –** "Municipality'' or "municipal'' means,
includes and relates to cities, towns, village districts, and counties
in which there are located unincorporated towns or unorganized places.

**Source.** 1983, 447:1. 1989, 266:8, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 672:11

 **672:11 Planning Board. –** "Planning board'' means and includes
city, town, village district, and county planning boards, in counties
which contain unincorporated towns or unorganized places, established
under the provisions of RSA 673.

**Source.** 1983, 447:1. 1989, 266:8, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 672:12

 **672:12 Selectmen. –** "Selectmen'' means the board of selectmen of
a town and the county commissioners of a county in which there are
located unincorporated towns or unorganized places.

**Source.** 1983, 447:1. 1989, 266:8, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 672:13

 **672:13 Street. –** "Street'' means, relates to and includes
street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, alley, viaduct, highway, freeway
and other ways.

**Source.** 1983, 447:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1984.

### Section 672:14

 **672:14 Subdivision. –**
                                             
 I. "Subdivision'' means the division of the lot, tract, or parcel of
land into 2 or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease,
condominium conveyance or building development. It includes
resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the
process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided.
                                             
 II. The division of a parcel of land held in common and subsequently
divided into parts among the several owners shall be deemed a
subdivision under this title.
                                             
 III. The grant of an easement in gross to a public utility for the
purpose of placing and maintaining overhead and underground facilities
necessary for its transmission or distribution network such as poles,
wires, cable, conduit, manholes, repeaters and supporting apparatus,
including any unstaffed structure which is less than 500 square feet,
shall not be construed as a subdivision under this title, and shall not
be deemed to create any new division of land for any other purpose.
                                             
 IV. The rent, lease, development, or grant of an easement to a
person for the purpose of placing and maintaining a wireless
communications facility shall not be construed as a subdivision under
this title, and shall not be deemed to create any new division of land
for any other purpose. For purposes of this paragraph, "wireless
communications facilities'' means any towers, poles, antennas, or other
unstaffed structure of less than 500 square feet intended for use in
connection with licensed transmission or receipt of radio or television
signals, or any other licensed spectrum-based transmissions or
receptions. This paragraph shall not be deemed to affect other local
zoning, site plan, or regulatory authority over wireless communications
facilities.

**Source.** 1983, 447:1. 1988, 75:1. 1998, 299:1, 2, eff. June 1, 1999.
