---
title: CHAPTER 678 COMMUNITY SERVICES AND CARE PLANNING BOARDS
---

TITLE LXIV
                                             
PLANNING AND ZONING
===================

CHAPTER 678
                                             
COMMUNITY SERVICES AND CARE PLANNING BOARDS
-------------------------------------------

### Section 678:1

 **678:1 Declaration of Purpose and Findings. –** The general court
hereby finds and declares that:
                                             
 I. New Hampshire has a rich history of neighbors helping neighbors
and residents of municipalities actively participating and organizing
themselves to take care of their fellow residents and improve their
communities. It also serves the public good and general welfare for the
state to support, maintain, and strengthen these locally-based practices
and traditions.
                                             
 II. There is a critical need for the proper and continuous
assessment of the community service needs of all residents and the
development of local plans, projects, support systems, and other
mechanisms to enhance the public health, prosperity, quality of life,
safety, and general welfare of all citizens.

**Source.** 2008, 20:1, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 678:2

 **678:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means a community services and care planning board
established under this chapter.
                                             
 II. "Community services master plan'' or "CSMP'' means an assessment
of the availability, adequacy, and accessibility of the human services
systems in each community and shall include the following elements:
                                             
 (a) A list and description of the specific community assets and
programs in existence to serve and support citizens of all ages and
abilities;
                                             
 (b) An analysis of specific improvements to community assets and
programs, in priority order that the board recommends be made over the
next 5 years and the specific issues these improvements address. These
improvements shall be as measurable as possible and include
consideration of improvements to all health and human services provided
to residents and funded all or in part by the state and other public
sources;
                                             
 (c) The community assets available and needed to achieve each
improvement, the most important barriers that must be overcome to
achieve each improvement, and an assessment of the feasibility and cost
of achieving each improvement;
                                             
 (d) An overall strategy and problem-solving approach and process
for achieving the improvements and a description of the rationale for
using these strategies; and
                                             
 (e) A 5-year plan of action with annual updates as required,
which follow the strategy to achieve the improvements. These action
steps shall include describing each step, establishing measurable
objectives and benchmarks for achieving each step, setting up timelines
and the process and methods for achieving each step, and identifying the
agencies and persons responsible for accomplishing each step.
                                             
 III. "Community services'' means all the health and social services
and supports provided and available to residents in a municipality
including those provided by charitable, for profit, and proprietary
providers; individuals and groups; and agencies and other providers
funded in all or part by the department of health and human services or
other state, county, and governmental entities.
                                             
 IV. "Community well-being index'' means an aggregate measure
consisting of individual measures of specific aspects of the physical
and social well-being of all residents of a municipality that is adopted
by the board for use in its annual assessment and state of the community
report and to develop its CSMP. The index may include measures of the
health of residents and their quality of health care; the quality of
housing and prevalence of homelessness; the sense of community and
belonging, as measured by participation in community events and
decisions; successful mobility; safe and well-managed schools;
volunteering and other contributions by residents to the community and
their neighbors; children and youth thriving and transitioning
successfully into adulthood; youth and adults avoiding dangerous and
risky behaviors; elders and residents with disabilities living in
dignity and included in community life; the breadth and vitality of
community activities, institutions, traditions, and celebrations; shared
vision and common purpose; and commitment to building community for the
future and ensuring that fellow residents get the care they need.

**Source.** 2008, 20:1, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 678:3

 **678:3 Establishment of Community Services and Care Planning
Boards. –**
                                             
 I. The legislative body of any municipality may establish a
community services and care planning board.
                                             
 II. The community services and care planning board shall consist of
no fewer than 3 and no more than 9 members who shall be residents of the
municipality, and appointed in a manner as prescribed by the legislative
body of the municipality.
                                             
 III. No more than 5 alternate members may be appointed. When an
alternate sits in the absence or the disqualification of a regular
member, the alternate shall have full voting powers. Members of a
community services and care planning board may also serve on other
municipal boards and commissions, including a conservation commission
established under RSA 36-A, a historic district commission established
under RSA 673:4, or a heritage commission established under RSA 673:4-a.

**Source.** 2008, 20:1, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 678:4

 **678:4 Duties of the Board. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be the duty of every board established under RSA 678:3
to prepare and amend from time to time a CSMP to guide the development
of community services and support systems and the provision of health
and social services and community supports to residents that affect
community well-being. A CSMP may include consideration of any areas
outside the boundaries of the municipality which in the judgment of the
board bear a relationship to or have an impact on the planning of the
municipality. Every board shall update and amend the adopted CSMP with
funds appropriated for that purpose by the local legislative body. In
preparing, amending, and updating the master plan:
                                             
 (a) The board shall have responsibility for promoting interest
in, and understanding of, the CSMP of the municipality. In order to
promote this interest and understanding, the board may publish and
distribute copies of the community services master plan, or copies of
any report relating to the community services master plan, hold public
forums and meetings, and employ such other means of publicity and
education as it deems advisable.
                                             
 (b) The board shall also have authority to make any inventories
of community assets, investigations of community social issues,
evaluations of the availability and accessibility of health and social
services and support systems, and necessary recommendations.
                                             
 II. It shall be the duty of every board established under RSA 678:3
to prepare an annual state of the community report which shall be
included in the municipality's annual report. The report shall include
the community well-being index as defined in RSA 678:2, IV and
information explaining all its components, how it was devised, and any
other sections the board deems necessary to describe and explain the
social services and support systems of the municipality and trends in
the municipality.
                                             
 III. The board may report and recommend to the appropriate public
officials and public agencies programs for the development, protection,
and improvement of the social services and support systems of the
municipality. Each program shall include recommendations for its
financing. The board may consult with and advise public officials and
agencies; health and human services providers and funders; civic and
charitable groups, networks, and associations; schools; educational,
professional, advocacy, and research groups; and other organizations.
The board may also consult with citizens, for the purposes of
implementing the CSMP and making recommendations for developing the
social services and support systems of the municipality.
                                             
 IV. Members of the board, when duly authorized by the board as a
whole, may attend planning conferences or meetings, or hearings upon
pending municipal planning legislation. The board may by majority vote
authorize the payment of reasonable expenses incident to such
attendance.
                                             
 V. The board may recommend to the governing body amendments or
additions to local ordinances, services, and programs to improve the
community's social services and support systems.
                                             
 VI. In general, the board may be given such powers by the
municipality as are necessary to enable the board to fulfill its
functions.

**Source.** 2008, 20:1, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 678:5

 **678:5 Terms of Board Members. –** Terms of board members shall be
3 years, except that all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term. In the first year of a community services and care planning
board's existence, members shall be appointed to the following terms: at
least one member to a one-year term, at least one member to a 2-year
term, and at least one member to a 3-year term.

**Source.** 2008, 20:1, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 678:6

 **678:6 Abolishment of Board. –**
                                             
 I. The local legislative body of a city, of a county in which there
are located unincorporated towns or unorganized places, or of a town
operating under the town council form of government, shall determine the
manner in which the board may be abolished.
                                             
 II. In all other towns, upon a petition to abolish the board, signed
by 100 or more voters or 1/10 of the registered voters in town,
whichever number is less, the board shall submit the proposal to the
town or village district in the same manner prescribed in RSA 675:4.
                                             
 III. The question put to the voters shall be in substantially the
following form: "Are you in favor of abolishing the community services
and care planning board as proposed by petition of the voters of this
town (village district)?''

**Source.** 2008, 20:1, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 678:7

 **678:7 Transfer of Documents Upon Abolition of Board. –** If the
board is abolished, the records shall be transferred to the city or town
clerk.

**Source.** 2008, 20:1, eff. July 11, 2008.
