---
title: CHAPTER 92 TENURE AND OATH OF OFFICE IN CERTAIN CASES
---

TITLE VI
                                             
PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
=============================

CHAPTER 92
                                             
TENURE AND OATH OF OFFICE IN CERTAIN CASES
------------------------------------------

### Section 92:1

 **92:1 Tenure. –** All officers hereafter appointed by the governor
and council, excepting judicial and military officers, and those whose
terms are otherwise fixed by law, shall hold office for 5 years and be
commissioned accordingly.

**Source.** Const. II, 73. RS 15:3. CS 15:3. GS 17:3. GL 18:3. PS 19:3.
PL 18:3. RL 26:3.

### Section 92:2

 **92:2 Oath Required. –** No person chosen or appointed to any
public office or to any position where an oath is required, under any
law, shall exercise such office or position or perform any act therein
until he shall make and subscribe the oath or declaration as prescribed
by part 2, article 84 of the constitution of New Hampshire, and any such
person who violates said oath after taking the same shall be forthwith
dismissed from the office or position involved.

**Source.** Const. II, 84. RS 15:4. CS 15:4. GS 17:4. GL 18:4. PS 19:4.
PL 18:4. RL 26:4. RSA 92:2. 1969, 372:1, eff. Aug. 31, 1969.

### Section 92:3

 **92:3 Affirmation in Lieu of. –** If any person is conscientiously
scrupulous of swearing, the word "*affirm*'' may be substituted for
"*swear*,'' in the form of the oath; and the words "*This you do under
the pains and penalties of perjury,*'' instead of "*So help you God.*''
Such affirmation shall, for all purposes, be and constitute an oath.

**Source.** Const. II, 84. RS 15:5. CS 15:5. GS 17:5. GL 18:5. PS 19:5.
PL 18:5. RL 26:5.

### Section 92:4

 **92:4 Ceremony. –** No other ceremony shall be deemed necessary, in
swearing, than holding up the right hand.

**Source.** RS 15:6. CS 15:6. GS 17:6. GL 18:6. PS 19:6. PL 18:6. RL
26:6.

### Section 92:5

 **92:5 Who May Administer. –** Official oaths may be administered as
follows: To the clerk of any court, by any 2 justices thereof, or by any
2 justices of the peace; to all military officers above the rank of
field officers, and to all other officers appointed by the governor and
council, by any 2 members of the council, or by any member of the
council with a justice of the peace, or by any 2 justices of the peace
or by any justice of the peace with any notary public; to all other
officers, by any justice of the peace within his or her county; to town
officers in town meeting, by the moderator, or at any time by the town
clerk, one of the selectmen, or a justice of the peace; to officers of
school districts, in school meeting, by the moderator, or at any time by
the clerk, one of the school board of the district, or a justice of the
peace; and to the moderator of the district, by any legal voter of the
district.

**Source.** RS 15:7; 35:1. 1848, 624:1. 1850, 981:1. CS 15:7; 74:9, 10.
GS 17:7. GL 18:7. PS 19:7. PL 18:7. RL 26:7. 2007, 331:2, eff. July 16,
2007.

### Section 92:6

 **92:6 Certification and Recording. –** Official oaths shall be
certified by the person administering the same and returned forthwith to
the recording officer of the body making the election or appointment.

**Source.** RS 15:8. CS 15:8. GS 17:8. GL 18:8. PS 19:8. PL 18:8. RL
26:8. RSA 92:6. 1969, 372:2, eff. Aug. 31, 1969.
