---
title: 'CHAPTER 93-A UNIFORM FACSIMILE SIGNATURES OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS'
---

TITLE VI
                                             
PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
=============================

CHAPTER 93-A
                                             
UNIFORM FACSIMILE SIGNATURES OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS
------------------------------------------------

### Section 93-A:1

 **93-A:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Public security'' means a bond, note, certificate of
indebtedness, or other obligation for the payment of money, issued by
this state or by any of its departments, agencies, or other
instrumentalities or by any of its political subdivisions.
                                             
 II. "Instrument of payment'' means a check, draft, warrant, or order
for the payment, delivery, or transfer of funds.
                                             
 III. "Authorized officer'' means any official of this state or any
of its departments, agencies, or other instrumentalities or any of its
political subdivisions whose signature to a public security or
instrument of payment is required or permitted.
                                             
 IV. "Facsimile signature'' means a reproduction by engraving,
imprinting, stamping, or other means of the manual signature of an
authorized officer.

**Source.** 1959, 217:1, eff. Aug. 11, 1959.

### Section 93-A:2

 **93-A:2 Facsimile Signature. –** Any authorized officer may execute
or cause to be executed with a facsimile signature in lieu of his manual
signature:
                                             
 I. Any public security, provided that the security contains at least
one manually subscribed signature required or permitted to be placed
thereon, or the manually subscribed signature of an authorized signer of
a bank, trust company or other banking or financial institution acting
as trustee, authenticating agent, transfer agent or similar agent; and
                                             
 II. Any instrument of payment.
                                             
 Upon compliance with this chapter by the authorized officer, his
facsimile signature has the same legal effect as his manual signature.

**Source.** 1959, 217:1. 1983, 365:2, eff. June 19, 1983.

### Section 93-A:3

 **93-A:3 Use of Facsimile Seal. –** When the seal of this state or
any of its departments, agencies, or other instrumentalities or of any
of its political subdivisions is required in the execution of a public
security or instrument of payment, the authorized officer may cause the
seal to be printed, engraved, stamped or otherwise placed in facsimile
thereon. The facsimile seal has the same legal effect as the impression
of the seal.

**Source.** 1959, 217:1, eff. Aug. 11, 1959.

### Section 93-A:4

 **93-A:4 Violation and Penalty. –** Any person who with intent to
defraud uses on a public security or an instrument of payment:
                                             
 I. A facsimile signature, or any reproduction of it, of any
authorized officer, or
                                             
 II. Any facsimile seal, or any reproduction of it, of this state or
any of its departments, agencies, or other instrumentalities or of any
of its political subdivisions shall, be guilty of a class B felony if a
natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1959, 217:1. 1973, 528:30, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 93-A:5

 **93-A:5 Uniformity of Interpretation. –** This chapter shall be so
construed as to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform the law
of those states which enact it.

**Source.** 1959, 217:1, eff. Aug. 11, 1959.

### Section 93-A:6

 **93-A:6 Short Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the Uniform
Facsimile Signature of Public Officials Act.

**Source.** 1959, 217:1, eff. Aug. 11, 1959.

### Section 93-A:7

 **93-A:7 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.

**Source.** 1959, 217:1, eff. Aug. 11, 1959.
