---
title: CHAPTER 95 PERSONAL INTEREST IN BUSINESS TRANSACTIONS WITH PUBLIC
---

TITLE VI
                                             
PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
=============================

CHAPTER 95
                                             
PERSONAL INTEREST IN BUSINESS TRANSACTIONS WITH PUBLIC
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 95:1

 **95:1 Public Officials Barred From Certain Private Dealings. –** No
person holding a public office, as such, in state or any political
subdivision governmental service shall, by contract or otherwise, except
by open competitive bidding, buy real estate, sell or buy goods,
commodities, or other personal property of a value in excess of 
                                             $200 at
any one sale to or from the state or political subdivision under which
he holds his public office.

**Source.** 1941, 85:1. RL 43:1. RSA 95:1. 1969, 310:1. 1975, 71:1, eff.
June 6, 1975.

### Section 95:1-a

 **95:1-a Public Officials Barred From Insurance Dealings. –** With
respect to any public works or construction contracts of any type that
are paid for by public funds of the state or by any of its political
subdivisions, or of any public authority, it is unlawful for any officer
or employee of the state, or of any of its political subdivisions, or of
any public authority, either directly or indirectly to require the
builder or the bidder to make application to or to get any surety bond
or contract of insurance specified in the building or construction
contract from a particular surety or insurance company, agent, or
broker. It is unlawful for any officer or employee of the state, of any
of its political subdivisions, or of any public authority, or for any
person who purports to act for such an officer or employee to negotiate,
make application for, or to get any such a surety bond or contract of
insurance which can be obtained by the builder, bidder, contractor, or
subcontractor on the building or construction contract. This section
does not prevent any such an officer or employee of the state from
exercising the state's right to approve the form, sufficiency, or manner
of execution of the surety bonds or contracts of insurance furnished by
the surety or insurance company selected by the bidder to underwrite
surety bonds or insurance contracts.

**Source.** 1967, 297:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1967.

### Section 95:2

 **95:2 Penalty. –** Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction there shall
automatically be a vacancy in the office held by the person convicted
which shall be filled as otherwise provided by law.

**Source.** 1941, 85:2. RL 43:2. RSA 95:2. 1967, 297:2. 1973, 529:15,
eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.
