---
title: CHAPTER 97 REEMPLOYMENT OF VETERANS
---

TITLE VI
                                             
PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
=============================

CHAPTER 97
                                             
REEMPLOYMENT OF VETERANS
------------------------

### Section 97:1

 **97:1 Veterans Guaranteed Reemployment. –** Each county, town,
city, precinct, school board or other political subdivision of the state
shall reemploy a veteran of any branch of the military service of the
United States who has been placed on inactive status or been given a
discharge other than dishonorable and who, within 90 days after being so
made inactive or discharged, in writing, notifies the treasurer or other
fiscal agent of such political subdivision that he desires to be
reinstated in the position he held with such political subdivision at
the time he entered said military service.

**Source.** 1945, 20:1, eff. Feb. 20, 1945.

### Section 97:2

 **97:2 Compensation; Term of Employment. –** Such political
subdivision shall, upon receiving the foregoing notification and being
satisfied that the applicant has been placed on inactive status or holds
a discharge other than dishonorable, reinstate such veteran in the
position he held at the time of entering the military service as of the
date when said notification is received and shall pay said veteran not
less than and as frequently as he was paid when he entered the service.
Such employment shall be for a period of not less than one year,
provided such veteran shall be of good behavior and wishes to remain so
long employed. A veteran giving the notice required by RSA 97:1, upon
being notified in writing by such political subdivision that it is
satisfied he has been placed on inactive status or holds said discharge,
shall present himself forthwith for said reemployment and failing so to
do he may be considered as not of good behavior.

**Source.** 1945, 20:2, eff. Feb. 20, 1945.

### Section 97:3

 **97:3 Equitable Treatment of Civilians. –** In the event that the
position held by said veteran at the time he entered the service is held
by another when the notification required under RSA 97:1 is received,
the political subdivision may continue to pay the person whom the
veteran replaces for such time as is reasonable under the circumstances.

**Source.** 1945, 20:3, eff. Feb. 20, 1945.

### Section 97:4

 **97:4 Discontinued Offices. –** In the event the position held by
said veteran at the time he entered the service has been abolished or
discontinued the political subdivision shall reemploy such veteran as
provided hereunder and assign to him duties as nearly comparable as
circumstances permit.

**Source.** 1945, 20:4, eff. Feb. 20, 1945.

### Section 97:5

 **97:5 Optional Provisions. –** Nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent a political subdivision from paying a veteran more than he was
receiving upon entering the service nor employing him, if he wishes, in
a different capacity provided he is paid at least as much and as often.

**Source.** 1945, 20:5, eff. Feb. 20, 1945.

### Section 97:6

 **97:6 Subdivision Borrowings. –** Any political subdivision lacking
an appropriation providing funds from which to carry out the terms of
this chapter, may borrow the amount necessary from the state paying,
therefor, interest at the rate of one percent per annum. The state
treasurer shall advance the sums necessary from time to time to enable a
political subdivision to carry out the provisions hereof upon receiving
from its treasurer or other fiscal agent his certificate and the note of
the political subdivision signed by him. All such notes shall be binding
obligations of the political subdivision payable at its pleasure but in
any event within 5 years from the date thereof.

**Source.** 1945, 20:6, eff. Feb. 20, 1945.

### Section 97:7

 **97:7 Jurisdiction of Superior Court. –** This chapter shall be
liberally construed in favor of a veteran and the superior court shall
have original jurisdiction on any question arising hereunder.

**Source.** 1945, 20:7, eff. Feb. 20, 1945.
