---
title: 'CHAPTER 99-E SUGGESTION AND EXTRAORDINARY SERVICE AWARD PROGRAM'
---

TITLE VI
                                             
PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
=============================

CHAPTER 99-E
                                             
SUGGESTION AND EXTRAORDINARY SERVICE AWARD PROGRAM
--------------------------------------------------

### Section 99-E:1

 **99-E:1 State Suggestion and Extraordinary Service Award Evaluation
Committee. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a state suggestion and extraordinary
service award evaluation committee, the duties of which shall be to:
                                             
 (a) Review suggestions made by state employees under this chapter
for possible reward or recognition.
                                             
 (b) Review extraordinary service by state employees for possible
award or recognition.
                                             
 (c) Recommend to the governor and executive council the making of
monetary awards in accordance with this chapter.
                                             
 (d) Recommend to the governor and executive council the provision
of, or itself provide for, non-monetary recognition of state employees
in accordance with this chapter.
                                             
 II. The state suggestion and extraordinary service award evaluation
committee shall consist of:
                                             
 (a) The director of personnel, who shall serve as chairperson.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner of administrative services, or designee.
                                             
 (c) Three state employee members, appointed by the governor, one
of whom shall be selected from a list provided by a certified public
employee bargaining unit, who shall serve 2-year terms, unless the
member ceases to be an employee of the state, in which case his or her
term shall automatically expire and a successor shall be appointed for a
2-year term.
                                             
 (d) One member of the senate, appointed by the senate president,
who shall serve a term coterminous with the member's legislative term.
                                             
 (e) One member of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives, who shall serve a term
coterminous with the member's legislative term.
                                             
 III. In addition to such other communications to governor and
council as are provided in this chapter, the state suggestion and
extraordinary service award evaluation committee shall submit to the
governor and council, the speaker of the house of representatives, and
the president of the senate an annual report of its activities,
including employees recognized and rewarded and the reasons for
recognition or recommended award, together with a list or copy of all
proposals submitted to it, whether or not implemented or recommended.
The report shall be submitted by October 1 of each year.
                                             
 IV. State suggestion and extraordinary service award evaluation
committee members shall serve without compensation and no member shall
participate in making any recommendation that may result in an award or
recognition to himself or herself.

**Source.** 2005, 258:1. 2008, 89:2, eff. July 20, 2008.

### Section 99-E:2

 **99-E:2 Departmental Award Evaluation Committees. –**
                                             
 I. Each department, as defined in RSA 21-G:5, VI, shall establish a
departmental award evaluation committee, the duty of which shall be to
make recommendations for awards and recognition to the state suggestion
and extraordinary service award evaluation committee in accordance with
this chapter.
                                             
 II. Each departmental award evaluation committee shall consist of 3
employees of the department, appointed by the commissioner of the
department.
                                             
 III. The term of departmental award evaluation committee members
shall be 2 years, unless the member ceases to be an employee of the
department or is replaced by the appointing commissioner, in which case
his or her term shall automatically expire and a successor shall be
appointed for a 2-year term. Departmental award evaluation committee
members shall serve without compensation and no member shall participate
in making any recommendation that may result in an award or recognition
to himself or herself.
                                             
 IV. In addition to such other communications to the state suggestion
and extraordinary service award evaluation committee as are provided in
this chapter, departmental award evaluation committees shall, by August
1 of each year, submit to the state suggestion and extraordinary service
award evaluation committee a list of all award submissions or
nominations received within the department in the preceding calendar
year, whether or not still pending, with the date of receipt, the name
of the person making the submission, the name of the person making the
suggestion or performing the service, and a description of the
submission or nomination and its status.

**Source.** 2005, 258:1, eff. Sept. 14, 2005.

### Section 99-E:3

 **99-E:3 Eligible Employees. –** State employees eligible for awards
or recognition under this chapter shall be classified executive branch
employees.

**Source.** 2005, 258:1, eff. Sept. 14, 2005.

### Section 99-E:4

 **99-E:4 Submission and Evaluation Procedures. –**
                                             
 I. Any person wishing to submit a suggestion for consideration under
the suggestion and extraordinary service award program, or wishing to
nominate a state employee for a suggestion or extraordinary service
award, shall do so by submitting a written submission or nomination to
the award evaluation committee in the department in which the nominee or
person making the suggestion is employed.
                                             
 II. The written submission or nomination shall include at least the
following information:
                                             
 (a) The name of the person who made the suggestion or performed
the service.
                                             
 (b) The job title or position of the person who made the
suggestion or performed the service.
                                             
 (c) The department, division, section, and office, if any, in
which the person making the suggestion or performing the service is
employed.
                                             
 (d) The name of the immediate supervisor of the person making the
suggestion or performing the service.
                                             
 (e) The name, job title, and department of the person making the
submission or nomination, if that person is someone other than the
person who made the suggestion or performed the service.
                                             
 (f) A detailed description of the suggestion or the service
performed.
                                             
 (g) If the submission or nomination involves a suggestion made by
an employee:
                                             
 (1) The approximate date that the suggestion was first made.
                                             
 (2) The person to whom the suggestion has been conveyed.
                                             
 (3) Whether or not the suggestion has been implemented and, if
so, a description of the results of such implementation, including any
savings realized or revenue generated and the method of calculation
thereof.
                                             
 (h) If the person making the submission or nomination is someone
other than the person who made the suggestion or performed the service,
whether the person who made the suggestion or performed the service is
being recommended for a monetary award or for non-monetary recognition.
                                             
 (i) Whether or not the suggestion or service is one for which the
employee has been nominated for, or has received, some other form of
award, and the nature or amount of the award received.
                                             
 (j) The date and time of the filing of the submission or
nomination.
                                             
 III. Employees may jointly submit one submission or nomination, and
may be jointly nominated for an award or recognition, provided that the
submission or nomination clearly states that it is a joint submission.
                                             
 IV. If the same suggestion or service nomination is submitted more
than once, the first submission or nomination relating to the suggestion
or service that is received by the departmental award evaluation
committee shall be the submission or suggestion considered for an award
or recognition, unless the committee making the determination, in its
discretion, concludes that consideration of the first submission or
nomination would result in significant injustice.
                                             
 V. Within 60 days of receiving a submission or nomination, a
departmental award evaluation committee shall inform the person
submitting the nomination or suggestion, in writing:
                                             
 (a) Whether or not the committee recommends an award or
recognition; or
                                             
 (b) That additional time is required for the committee to make
its determination, specifying the amount of time required; and/or
                                             
 (c) That additional information is needed. If additional
information is needed, the committee shall specify the information
required and, unless the additional information relates to the
implementation of a suggestion under RSA 99-E:5, III, shall specify the
date by which the information is to be provided. If the additional
information is not received by the date specified, or any extended
period of time allowed by the committee, the committee may decline to
recommend the issuance of any award or recognition.
                                             
 VI. Upon reaching a conclusion on a submission or nomination, or
after failing to receive additional information in response to a
request, a departmental award evaluation committee shall forward a copy
of its recommendation to the state suggestion and extraordinary service
award evaluation committee, with a complete copy of all documents
contained in the award nomination file, including, at a minimum, those
specified in paragraph XII. If the final determination is that an award
or recognition is recommended, the departmental award evaluation
committee shall include in its determination the amount or nature of the
monetary award or non-monetary recognition recommended.
                                             
 VII. The state suggestion and extraordinary service award evaluation
committee shall, within 60 days of receiving a determination from a
departmental award evaluation committee, if any, or within 60 days of
receiving a submission or nomination from another person, indicate in
writing, with a copy to the person making the submission or nomination
and the departmental award evaluation committee, if any, whether or not
it concurs with the determination of the departmental award evaluation
committee and:
                                             
 (a) If it recommends an award or recognition, the nature or
amount of the award or recognition recommended; or
                                             
 (b) If it does not recommend an award or recognition, the reason
therefor, which may include reliance upon the determination of any
departmental award evaluation committee; or
                                             
 (c) If it believes that the suggestion or nomination should be
forwarded to the governor and council without determination or
recommendation in accordance with paragraph IX, that the submission or
nomination will be so forwarded; or
                                             
 (d) If it believes that additional time is required for the
committee to make its determination, the amount of additional time
required to make the determination; or
                                             
 (e) If it believes that additional information is needed, a
specification of the information required and, unless the additional
information relates to the implementation of a suggestion under RSA
99-E:5, III, the date by which the information is to be provided. Unless
otherwise specified, any additional information requested by the
committee shall be gathered by the committee that forwarded the
determination for review, or if no lower-level committee has forwarded
the determination for review, by the person making the submission or
nomination to the committee. If the additional information is not
received by the date specified, or any extended period of time allowed
by the committee, the committee may decline to recommend the issuance of
any award or recognition.
                                             
 VIII. Final written determinations of the state suggestion and
extraordinary service award evaluation committee that recommend a
monetary award or that recommend recognition by the governor and council
shall be forwarded to the governor and council within 30 days of
issuance.
                                             
 IX. The state suggestion and extraordinary service award evaluation
committee may, in the alternative to either recommending or declining to
recommend a submission or nomination for award or recognition, or as an
alternative to requesting additional information, forward the submission
or nomination to the governor and council without determination or
recommendation, with a complete copy of all documents contained in the
award nomination file and a written explanation of the reasons why the
committee has either not recommended, declined to recommend, or
requested additional information. The governor, with the consent of
council, shall take such action, if any, on the nomination or submission
that they, within their discretion, deem appropriate.
                                             
 X. If the state suggestion and extraordinary service award
evaluation committee, in its discretion, concludes that a suggestion
that has been successfully implemented in a single department, division,
office, or other subdivision of the state may result in additional
benefit if implemented on a larger scale, the committee may so state in
its submission to the governor and executive council. In such a case, an
employee may, on one additional occasion, be considered for further or
additional award or recognition for the suggestion.
                                             
 XI. Any person believing that there is good cause for not submitting
a submission or nomination to the departmental award evaluation
committee may submit his or her submission or nomination to the state
suggestion and extraordinary service award evaluation committee. The
state committee shall determine whether, in its discretion, it believes
that there is good cause for not submitting the submission or nomination
to the lower-level committee. If such good cause is found, the state
suggestion and extraordinary service award evaluation committee shall
consider the submission or nomination in the first instance. If such
good cause is not found, the committee shall refer the matter to the
lower-level committee for initial determination.
                                             
 XII. An award evaluation committee shall include in its file
relative to a suggestion or nomination at least the following:
                                             
 (a) The original written submission or nomination.
                                             
 (b) All recommendations of award evaluation committees relative
to the submission or nomination.
                                             
 (c) Any calculations as to savings or increase in revenue, or
other information, which the committee believes may be of assistance in
determining the appropriate nature or amount of award, if any.
                                             
 XIII. Files of award committees and documents contained therein
shall not be deemed to be public documents or records within the meaning
of, or subject to disclosure under, RSA 91-A, and meetings of award
evaluation committees shall not be subject to the public meeting
requirements of RSA 91-A, provided, however, that final written
determinations and recommendations of award committees shall be subject
to disclosure under RSA 91-A to the extent that such documents do not
contain otherwise privileged or confidential information.
                                             
 XIV. A quorum of the state suggestion and extraordinary service
award evaluation committee shall be 4 members. If the absence of a
quorum precludes the committee from acting within the time periods
specified under paragraph VII, those time periods shall not apply and
the committee shall instead act at a later meeting at which a quorum is
present.

**Source.** 2005, 258:1. 2008, 89:3, eff. July 20, 2008.

### Section 99-E:5

 **99-E:5 Suggestion Award Standard. –**
                                             
 I. A departmental award evaluation committee shall recommend such
monetary or non-monetary recognition as it, within its discretion,
concludes is appropriate for original suggestions that the committee
concludes may, if implemented, accomplish any of the following:
                                             
 (a) Improve government cost savings.
                                             
 (b) Improve government efficiency.
                                             
 (c) Increase revenue to the state by a means other than the
establishment of a new, or an increase in an existing, tax.
                                             
 II. The state suggestion and extraordinary service award evaluation
committee shall recommend to the governor and council such monetary
awards as it, within its discretion, concludes are appropriate for
original suggestions that may, if implemented, accomplish the ends
specified in paragraph I. The state suggestion and extraordinary service
award evaluation committee shall either recommend to the governor and
council such non-monetary recognition as the committee, within its
discretion, believes is appropriate for original suggestions that, if
implemented, may accomplish the ends specified in paragraph I, or itself
issue such non-monetary recognition.
                                             
 III. Prior to making a recommendation for award, or recommending or
issuing non-monetary recognition, either a departmental award evaluation
committee or the state suggestion and extraordinary service award
evaluation committee may recommend that a suggestion be implemented and
may defer its determination pending receipt of information relative to
that implementation. If a suggestion has been implemented prior to the
time that it has been submitted or nominated for award, the committee
may defer its determination relative to award pending receipt of
information on the success of such implementation, including, if
applicable, the amount of any savings or revenue realized and the method
of calculation. If the state suggestion and extraordinary service award
evaluation committee concludes, in its discretion, that it is
appropriate to do so, that committee may recommend or suggest
implementation of a suggestion in units beyond those in which
implementation has been accomplished or suggested and may, in its
discretion, defer its determination relative to award pending receipt of
information relative to that implementation.
                                             
 IV. A suggestion shall not be eligible for award or recognition if
the award evaluation committee determines, in its discretion, that the
suggestion:
                                             
 (a) Is of the type that is expected to be made as part of the
employee's regularly-assigned duties or job responsibilities;
                                             
 (b) Was under consideration by the state prior to the time that
the suggestion was made by the employee;
                                             
 (c) Was previously made by another individual, whether or not
previously submitted to an award evaluation committee; or
                                             
 (d) Except as provided in RSA 99-E:4, X, is one for which the
employee has previously been nominated for, or has received, a monetary
award from the state under this chapter or its predecessor chapters.

**Source.** 2005, 258:1, eff. Sept. 14, 2005.

### Section 99-E:6

 **99-E:6 Extraordinary Service Award Standard. –**
                                             
 I. A departmental award evaluation committee shall recommend such
monetary or non-monetary recognition as it, within its discretion,
concludes is appropriate for extraordinary service in the interest of
the state that is either:
                                             
 (a) Outside of or beyond the scope of an employee's regular job
responsibilities or functions and involves circumstances where only
immediate action by the employee could avoid or avert probable harm to
an individual, to property, or to the financial interests of the state;
or
                                             
 (b) Within the scope of an employee's regular job
responsibilities or functions and involved the demonstration of
abilities or efforts greatly above and beyond any standard of
performance expected of the employee.
                                             
 II. The state suggestion and extraordinary service award evaluation
committee shall recommend to the governor and council such monetary
awards as it, within its discretion, concludes are appropriate for
extraordinary service that meets the criteria of paragraph I. The state
suggestion and extraordinary service award evaluation committee shall
either recommend to the governor and council such non-monetary
recognition as the committee, within its discretion, concludes is
appropriate for service that meets the criteria of paragraph I, or
itself issue appropriate non-monetary recognition for such service.

**Source.** 2005, 258:1, eff. Sept. 14, 2005.

### Section 99-E:7

 **99-E:7 Amount of Monetary Awards. –**
                                             
 I. The amount of any monetary award recommended by a committee in
regard to any one suggestion or service shall not be greater than

                                             $5,000.
                                             
 II. If an award evaluation committee determines, in its discretion,
that an appropriate measure of award would be the amount of any savings
or increase in revenue realized by the state as the result of a service
performed by an employee, or as the result of a suggestion which has
been implemented, the amount of a monetary award recommended by the
committee may not exceed 10 percent of the amount of the savings or
increase in revenue to the state during the first fiscal year of the
implementation of the suggestion, or the fiscal year in which the
service was performed, nor may it exceed the amount of 
                                             $5,000.
                                             
 III. If a monetary award is issued by the governor and council based
upon the amount of savings or increase under paragraph II, an amount
equal to the monetary award may, in the discretion of the governor and
council, be paid from the budget of the specific department or the
departments believed to have received the benefit of the suggestion or
service during the first fiscal year of implementation of a suggestion,
or during the fiscal year in which the service was performed. Any
remaining savings or increases resulting from the suggestion or service
shall lapse to the general fund. If the unit from which the award is
paid is self-funding, the award shall be paid from the unit's operating
budget. The commissioner of a department from which an award is to be
paid under this paragraph, shall certify any amounts so appropriated to
the director of personnel for transfer and payment to the employee.
                                             
 IV. If a suggestion which has previously been submitted or nominated
for award is again submitted or nominated under RSA 99-E:4, X as the
result of larger-scale implementation, the amount of any additional
monetary award recommended shall be in such amount as the committee, in
its discretion, believes is proper, but shall not, in any event, exceed

                                             $5,000.
                                             
 V. The total amount of monetary awards recommended by the state
suggestion and extraordinary service award evaluation committee between
October 1 of one year and September 30 of the following year shall not
exceed 
                                             $10,000.
                                             
 VI. There is hereby established in the office of the governor a
special fund in the amount of 
                                             $10,000, which shall be used for employee
suggestion and extraordinary service awards, if any. If the entire
appropriation is not used for employee suggestion and extraordinary
service awards in any fiscal year, the amount appropriated for the fund
in the next fiscal year shall be only such amount as is necessary to
bring the total amount of the fund to 
                                             $10,000.
                                             
 VII. This chapter shall not be construed to limit the availability
of any employee award or recognition not arising pursuant to this
chapter
                                             
 VIII. The governor, with the consent of council, is hereby
authorized to draw a warrant for monetary awards under this chapter out
of any money contained in the fund established under paragraph VI. The
governor and council shall not approve expenditures from the fund in
excess of 
                                             $10,000 in any fiscal year, shall not issue any single award
in excess of the amount indicated in paragraph I, or, in case of
additional awards under paragraph IV, shall not issue any award in
excess of the amount set forth in paragraph IV. In issuing awards or
recognition, the governor and council shall not be limited by any
recommendation of the state suggestion and extraordinary service award
evaluation committee. The decision of whether to issue a monetary award
for suggestions and services under this chapter, and the amount thereof,
if any, shall, with the foregoing limitations, be solely within the
discretion of the governor and council.
                                             
 IX. Award evaluation committees recommending monetary awards may
consider, but shall not be required to make recommendations according
to, the following suggested ranges of award for the following types of
suggestions or services:
                                             
 (a) For suggestions to improve government cost savings, 
                                             $500 to

                                             $2,500, or a percentage of the amount of savings as specified under
paragraph II.
                                             
 (b) For suggestions to improve government efficiency, 
                                             $250 to

                                             $1,500, or a percentage of the amount of savings or revenue increase as
specified under paragraph II.
                                             
 (c) For suggestions to increase revenue to the state by a means
other than the establishment of a new, or an increase in an existing,
tax, 
                                             $250 to 
                                             $1,500 or a percentage of the amount of increase as
specified under paragraph II.
                                             
 (d) For services outside of or beyond the scope of an employee's
regular job responsibilities or functions involving circumstances where
only immediate action by the employee could avoid or avert probable harm
to an individual, to property, or to the financial interests of the
state, 
                                             $500 to 
                                             $2,500, or a percentage of the amount of increase or
savings as specified under paragraph II.
                                             
 (e) For services within the scope of an employee's regular job
responsibilities or functions involving the demonstration of abilities
or efforts greatly above and beyond any standard of performance expected
of the employee, 
                                             $250 to 
                                             $1,500 or a percentage of the amount of
increase or savings as specified under paragraph II.

**Source.** 2005, 258:1, eff. Sept. 14, 2005.

### Section 99-E:8

 **99-E:8 Non-monetary Recognition. –** A departmental award
evaluation committee may, in its discretion, recommend, and the state
suggestion and extraordinary service award evaluation committee may, in
its discretion, issue or recommend, non-monetary recognition in lieu of,
or in addition to, recommending a monetary award under this chapter.
Non-monetary recognition shall be in such form as the committee, in its
discretion, believes is appropriate for the service rendered or
suggestion made.

**Source.** 2005, 258:1, eff. Sept. 14, 2005.

### Section 99-E:9

 **99-E:9 No Entitlement to Award. –**
                                             
 I. This chapter shall not be construed to confer any procedural or
substantive rights upon persons submitting nominations or submissions,
or persons making suggestions or rendering services, and no person shall
have any right or vested right whatsoever to any award or recognition
under this chapter. Whether or not to recommend any award or to
recommend or issue any recognition shall be solely within the discretion
of the award evaluation committee or other entity charged under this
chapter with the making of award or recognition determinations, or
charged with issuing the same.
                                             
 II. Assessments of submissions and nominations by award evaluation
committees shall not be subject to the provisions of RSA 541-A:29 and
determinations of award evaluation committees shall not be subject to
the institution of adjudicative proceedings under RSA 541-A:31.

**Source.** 2005, 258:1, eff. Sept. 14, 2005.

### Section 99-E:10

 **99-E:10 Filings Not Required. –** Members of the state suggestion
and extraordinary service award evaluation committee, and members of any
departmental award evaluation committee, shall not, unless otherwise
required by virtue of another position held by the member, be subject to
the financial reporting requirements of RSA 15-A.

**Source.** 2005, 258:1. 2008, 89:4, eff. July 20, 2008.
