---
title: |
    CHAPTER 99-F VETERANS' AND DISABLED VETERANS' PREFERENCE IN PUBLIC
    EMPLOYMENT
---

TITLE VI
                                             
PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
=============================

CHAPTER 99-F
                                             
VETERANS' AND DISABLED VETERANS' PREFERENCE IN PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT
----------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 99-F:1

 **99-F:1 Veterans' Preference in Public Employment. –** The state of
New Hampshire shall grant a preference in hiring to veterans and
disabled veterans.

**Source.** 2014, 264:2, eff. July 28, 2014.

### Section 99-F:2

 **99-F:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Active duty'' means full-time duty under Title 10 of the United
States Code as an enlisted member, or as a commissioned or warrant
officer, in any branch of the armed forces of the United States. Active
duty shall not include attendance at a school under military orders,
except schooling incident to an active enlistment or a regular tour of
duty, or normal military training as a reserve officer or member of an
organized reserve or a national guard unit.
                                             
 II. "Armed forces'' means the United States Army, Navy, Marine
Corps, Air Force, and Coast Guard, including:
                                             
 (a) The Army Reserve.
                                             
 (b) The Navy Reserve.
                                             
 (c) The Marine Corps Reserve.
                                             
 (d) The Air Force Reserve.
                                             
 (e) The Coast Guard Reserve.
                                             
 (f) The Army National Guard of the United States.
                                             
 (g) The Air National Guard of the United States.
                                             
 III. "Combat zone'' means an area designated by the President of the
United States by executive order in which, on the dates designated by
executive order, the armed forces of the United States are or have
engaged in combat.
                                             
 IV. "Disabled veteran'' means:
                                             
 (a) A person entitled to disability compensation under the laws
administered by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs;
                                             
 (b) A person whose discharge or release from active duty was for
a disability incurred or aggravated in the line of duty; or
                                             
 (c) A person who was awarded the Purple Heart for wounds received
in combat.
                                             
 V. "Public employer'' means the state or any department of the state
and any person authorized to act on behalf of the state or any
department of the state with respect to control, management, or
supervision of any employee.
                                             
 VI. "Veteran'' means a person who:
                                             
 (a) Served on active duty with the armed forces of the United
States:
                                             
 (1) For more than 178 consecutive days and was honorably
discharged or released from active duty;
                                             
 (2) For 178 days or less and was honorably discharged or
released from active duty; or
                                             
 (3) For at least one day in a combat zone and was honorably
discharged or released from active duty; or
                                             
 (b) Received a combat or campaign ribbon for service in the armed
forces of the United States.

**Source.** 2014, 264:2, eff. July 28, 2014.

### Section 99-F:3

 **99-F:3 Eligibility for Employment Preference. –**
                                             
 I. A veteran or disabled veteran may use the preference for a
position for state employment at any time after discharge or release
from service in the armed forces of the United States.
                                             
 II. A veteran or disabled veteran may claim the preference an
unlimited number of times.

**Source.** 2014, 264:2, eff. July 28, 2014.

### Section 99-F:4

 **99-F:4 Application Process. –**
                                             
 I. At each stage of the application process, a public employer shall
grant a preference to an otherwise qualified veteran or disabled veteran
who successfully completes an initial application screening and an
application examination, or a state employment test administered by the
public employer to establish eligibility for a vacant position for state
employment.
                                             
 II. For an initial application screening used to develop a list of
persons for interviews, the public employer shall add 5 preference
points to a veteran's score and 10 preference points to a disabled
veteran's score.
                                             
 III. For an application examination, administered after the initial
application screening that results in a score, the public employer shall
add 5 preference points to a veteran's and 10 preference points to a
disabled veteran's total combined examination score without allocating
the points to any single feature or part of the examination. The veteran
or disabled veteran shall pass the examination with a qualifying score
to be eligible to receive the veterans' preference.
                                             
 IV. If a public employer uses an application examination that does
not result in a score, the public employer shall devise and apply
methods by which it gives special consideration in the hiring decision
to veterans and disabled veterans.

**Source.** 2014, 264:2, eff. July 28, 2014.

### Section 99-F:5

 **99-F:5 Appointment to a Position. –**
                                             
 I. A public employer shall appoint an otherwise qualified veteran or
disabled veteran to a vacant position for state employment if the
results of a veteran's or disabled veteran's application examination,
when combined with the veteran's or disabled veteran's preference, are
equal to or higher than the results of an application examination for an
applicant who is not a veteran or disabled veteran.
                                             
 II. A public employer may base a decision not to appoint the veteran
or disabled veteran solely on the veteran's or disabled veteran's merits
or qualifications with respect to the vacant position for state
employment.
                                             
 III. A public employer that does not appoint a veteran or disabled
veteran to a vacant position for state employment, shall upon written
request of the veteran or disabled veteran, provide an explanation of
its decision.

**Source.** 2014, 264:2, eff. July 28, 2014.

### Section 99-F:6

 **99-F:6 Proof of Eligibility. –**
                                             
 I. A public employer shall require an applicant, at the time of
application, to provide proof that the applicant is an eligible veteran
or disabled veteran in order to be eligible for the veterans' or
disabled veterans' preference.
                                             
 II. An applicant for a position with a public employer who claims a
veteran's or disabled veteran's preference shall submit as proof of
eligibility:
                                             
 (a) A copy of a qualifying document as outlined in RSA 21:50,
I(b) with the application for employment; and
                                             
 (b) Disabled veterans shall submit a copy of their veteran's
summary of benefits letter from the United States Department of Veterans
Affairs, unless the information is included in the appropriate federal
discharge documents.
                                             
 III. If an applicant's record appears to show service qualifying for
the preference, the public employer may provisionally designate an
applicant as an eligible veteran or disabled veteran. However, before
the applicant can be appointed, he or she shall submit proof of
entitlement to the preference.

**Source.** 2014, 264:2, eff. July 28, 2014.

### Section 99-F:7

 **99-F:7 Rulemaking. –** The department of administrative services
shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A to implement the provisions of
this chapter.

**Source.** 2014, 264:2, eff. July 28, 2014.
