---
title: 'CHAPTER 466-A WOLF HYBRIDS'
---

TITLE XLV
                                             
ANIMALS
==========

CHAPTER 466-A
                                             
WOLF HYBRIDS
--------------

### Section 466-A:1

 **466-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. "Canine'' means a member of a species of mammal consisting of
dogs, wolves, jackals, foxes, and coyotes.
                                             
 III. "Hybrid'' means an offspring of 2 animals of different species
or genera.
                                             
 IV. "Owner'' means any person keeping, harboring, or having charge
or control of a hybrid, or permitting any hybrid to habitually be or
remain on, or be lodged or fed within such person's house, yard, or
premises. This term shall not apply to veterinarians or kennel operators
temporarily maintaining on their premises hybrids owned by other
persons.
                                             
 V. "Person'' means any individual, partnership, company,
association, trust, corporation, governmental unit or agency, or any
other legal entity.
                                             
 VI. "Wolf'' means any canine classified as Canis lupis or Canis
rufus.
                                             
 VII. "Wolf hybrid'' means any canine which has had a wolf ancestor
within the previous 4 generations. This definition shall include a wolf
or wolf hybrid as either a sire or dam, grandsire or dam,
great-grandsire or dam or great-great grandsire or dam. An animal shall
also be considered a wolf hybrid if it has been represented by its owner
or former owner as having wolf ancestry.

**Source.** 1994, 265:1. 1995, 91:1. 1998, 309:4, eff. June 26, 1998.

### Section 466-A:2

 **466-A:2 General Applicability. –** The provisions of RSA 466, RSA
436:99-109 and RSA 644:8, shall apply to wolf hybrids, except as
modified by the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1994, 265:1. 1995, 91:1, eff. Sept. 29, 1995.

### Section 466-A:3

 **466-A:3 Prohibitions. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall sell or resell, offer for sale or resale, or
release or cause to be released a wolf hybrid in the state of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 II. (a) A person may import a wolf hybrid provided the wolf hybrid
is spayed or neutered and has proper documentation of the spaying or
neutering.
                                             
 (b) A person may bring a wolf hybrid into the state temporarily
for competitive events.
                                             
 III. Any person possessing a wolf hybrid shall keep accurate
licensing and vaccination records, as required by RSA 466-A:2 and
neutering records, as provided in RSA 466-A:3, II, which shall be
available for inspection by an animal control officer or law enforcement
officer.

**Source.** 1994, 265:1. 1995, 91:3-6. 1998, 309:1, eff. June 26, 1998.

### Section 466-A:4

 **466-A:4 Vaccination. –** The owner of a wolf hybrid shall be
required by the veterinarian administering the rabies vaccination, as
required by RSA 436:100, to sign an affidavit in the presence of a
veterinarian indicating awareness that the use of the canine-approved
vaccine on wolf hybrids is experimental and acknowledging that neither
the veterinarian administering the vaccine nor the manufacturer of the
vaccine shall be liable in the event the wolf hybrid contracts rabies.
The commissioner of the department of agriculture, markets, and food
shall determine the form and content of this affidavit by rules adopted
pursuant to RSA 541-A. If the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and
food makes a determination that the rabies vaccine is proven to be
effective when administered to wolf hybrids, then the signing of this
affidavit shall no longer be required.

**Source.** 1994, 265:1. 1995, 130:4, 5, eff. July 23, 1995.

### Section 466-A:5

 **466-A:5 Confinement. –** Each wolf hybrid shall be under the
physical control of the owner or confined in an enclosure or structure
sufficient to prohibit escape. Adequate facilities and shelter, clean of
waste and debris and free of infestation, shall be provided for keeping
such animal.

**Source.** 1994, 265:1, eff. June 6, 1994.

### Section 466-A:5-a

 **466-A:5-a Rulemaking Authority. –** The commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A,
relative to standards for confinement and control under RSA 466-A:5.

**Source.** 1998, 309:2, eff. June 26, 1998. 2012, 171:25, eff. Aug. 10,
2012.

### Section 466-A:6

 **466-A:6 Penalty; Administrative Fines. –**
                                             
 I. Any person in violation of this chapter or any rule adopted under
this chapter shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or any
rule or order of the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food,
shall be subject to the imposition of an administrative fine levied by
the commissioner, not to exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation.

**Source.** 1994, 265:1. 1998, 309:3, eff. June 26, 1998.
