---
title: CHAPTER 467 RUNNING AT LARGE
---

TITLE XLV
                                             
ANIMALS
==========

CHAPTER 467
                                             
RUNNING AT LARGE
----------------

### Section 467:1

 **467:1 Bull. –** An owner or keeper of a bull more than 6 months
old, who willfully or negligently permits such bull to run at large, out
of the enclosure of such owner or keeper, shall be guilty of a
violation, and any fine collected hereunder shall inure to the use of
the town in which the offense was committed, and shall also be liable to
a party injured for the damage done by such bull while running at large.

**Source.** 1911, 25:1. PL 150:45. RL 180:45. RSA 467:1. 1973, 531:129,
eff. Oct. 31, 1973.

### Section 467:1-a

 **467:1-a Stallions. –** Any owner or keeper of a stallion more than
12 months old, who willfully or negligently permits such stallion to run
at large, out of the enclosure of such owner or keeper, shall be guilty
of a violation. The fine imposed shall be for the use of the town in
which the offense was committed, and the guilty party shall also be
liable to the party injured and for damage done by such stallion running
at large.

**Source.** 1973, 41:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 467:2

 **467:2 Ram. –** If any person shall willfully or negligently suffer
any ram belonging to him, or in his care, to go at large out of his
enclosure between August 1 and December 1 in any year he shall be guilty
of a violation for each offense.

**Source.** RS 128:3. CS 134:3. GS 105:18. GL 115:21. PS 118:17. PL
150:44. RL 180:44. RSA 467:2. 1973, 531:130, eff. Oct. 31, 1973.

### Section 467:3

 **467:3 Wild Boar. –** Any person or corporation owning or
possessing wild boar in this state shall at all times keep such wild
boar in a safe and suitable enclosure so that they may not run at large
or damage the person or property of others.

**Source.** 1949, 294:1, eff. July 22, 1949.

### Section 467:4

 **467:4 Abatement. –** Any person or corporation owning or having
introduced wild boar into this state who shall have suffered, permitted,
or otherwise failed to prevent the escape of such wild boar shall abate,
at his or its own expense, the public nuisance resulting therefrom on or
before April 1, 1950, by employing all reasonable means to capture or
exterminate such wild boar and their progeny. Persons suffering damage
to their lands, property or person after April 1, 1950, caused by wild
boar at large as specified in this section, and which are not captured
or exterminated as herein provided within the specified time limit, may
recover such damage in an action of trespass against the said owner, or
person or corporation having introduced the same into this state.

**Source.** 1949, 294:2, eff. July 22, 1949.

### Section 467:5

 **467:5 Liability. –** Any person or corporation owning or
possessing wild boar in this state who shall violate the provisions of
RSA 467:3 shall be liable in an action of trespass for all damage done
by said wild boar to the lands, properties or persons of others.

**Source.** 1949, 294:3, eff. April 1, 1950.

### Section 467:6

 **467:6 Nature of Remedy. –** The remedies created and duties
imposed by RSA 467:4 and 467:5 shall be deemed cumulative and are not
intended to modify or supersede any remedy available or duty imposed at
common law.

**Source.** 1949, 294:4, eff. July 22, 1949.
