---
title: 'CHAPTER 422-C ABANDONED AIRCRAFT'
---

TITLE XXXIX
                                             
AERONAUTICS
============

CHAPTER 422-C
                                             
ABANDONED AIRCRAFT
------------------

### Section 422-C:1

 **422-C:1 Authority to Take. –** The commissioner of transportation,
any police employee of the department of safety, any police officer,
sheriff, deputy sheriff or selectman upon discovery of any aircraft or
aircraft parts apparently abandoned, or of any aircraft without a
currently effective state of New Hampshire or federal registration
certificate, whether situated within any public, municipal airfield or
private airfield open for public use, for a period in excess of 3 years,
may take such aircraft or component aircraft into his custody and may
cause the same to be taken away and stored in some suitable place out of
public view.

**Source.** 1973, 33:1. 1985, 402:31.

### Section 422-C:2

 **422-C:2 Exemption from Liability. –** No such custodian shall be
liable to the owner for any damages of such aircraft or aircraft
component while it is in his custody.

**Source.** 1973, 33:1, eff. May 14, 1973.

### Section 422-C:3

 **422-C:3 Lien. –** All charges necessarily incurred by such
custodian in the performance of carrying out the provisions of RSA
422-C:1 shall be a lien upon such aircraft or aircraft component. The
custodian or manager of any hangar, airport facility or other place
where such aircraft or aircraft component may be stored shall have a
lien upon such aircraft or aircraft component for his storage charges.

**Source.** 1973, 33:1, eff. May 14, 1973.

### Section 422-C:4

 **422-C:4 Owner May Reclaim. –** The owner of an aircraft or
aircraft component so placed in storage may reclaim the same before any
sale by paying the charges incurred.

**Source.** 1973, 33:1, eff. May 14, 1973.

### Section 422-C:5

 **422-C:5 Notice to Commissioner. –** If the owner of such aircraft
or aircraft component fails to so reclaim such within 30 days from the
time of storage, the owner or manager of such hangar, airport facility
or other place of storage shall, within 40 days of the date when such
aircraft or aircraft component was placed in storage with him, send a
written notice to the commissioner stating the make, factory or
identification number of such aircraft or aircraft component, the date
when the same was left in storage and by whom, and the aircraft
registration number, if any. Such notice shall be placed on file by the
commissioner and shall be subject to public inspection.

**Source.** 1973, 33:1. 1985, 402:6, I(c)(3).

### Section 422-C:6

 **422-C:6 Sale Authorized. –** If such aircraft or aircraft
component shall have been so stored for a period of 90 days, the
custodian or airport manager may sell the same at his place of business,
at public auction, for cash. No sale under the provisions hereof shall
be valid unless the notice required by RSA 422-C:5 shall have been
given.

**Source.** 1973, 33:1, eff. May 14, 1973.

### Section 422-C:7

 **422-C:7 Notice of Sale. –** Notice of such sale shall be given by
posting notices thereof in 2 or more public places in the town where the
property is stored, 14 days at least before the sale, and, if the value
of the aircraft or aircraft component exceeds 
                                             $100, by publishing the
notice in a newspaper of local circulation. If the last place of abode
of the owner of such aircraft or aircraft component is known to, or may
be ascertained by, such custodian or manager by the exercise of
reasonable diligence, a notice of the time and place of said sale shall
be given said owner by registered mail, at least 14 days prior to said
sale.

**Source.** 1973, 33:1, eff. May 14, 1973.

### Section 422-C:8

 **422-C:8 Application of Proceeds. –** The balance of the proceeds
of sale, if any, after payment of the amount of liens and the reasonable
expenses incident to the sale, shall be paid to the owner of such
aircraft or aircraft component or his legal representative, if claimed
at any time within one year from the date of such sale. If such balance
shall not be claimed within said period it shall be paid into the state
treasury for the use of the state.

**Source.** 1973, 33:1, eff. May 14, 1973.
