---
title: CHAPTER 423 MUNICIPAL AIRPORTS
---

TITLE XXXIX
                                             
AERONAUTICS
============

CHAPTER 423
                                             
MUNICIPAL AIRPORTS
------------------

### Section 423:1

 **423:1 Acquisition of Land by Towns. –** Towns are authorized and
empowered to construct, own, manage, or provide by contract or otherwise
for the management of aircraft landing areas, either within or beyond
the boundaries of the town, and for that purpose any town may take land
in fee by gift or purchase, or by right of eminent domain as hereinafter
provided, or may lease the same, and may erect thereon and maintain such
buildings or other structures as may be necessary more fully to carry
out the purpose hereof. Two or more towns may join in such action.

**Source.** 1929, 90:1. RL 51:72.

### Section 423:2

 **423:2 Land in the Town. –** The officials of towns authorized by
law to take land in the town for highway purposes are authorized and
empowered to take land by eminent domain for the purposes of aircraft
landing areas, following the same procedure as respects notice,
assessment and payment of damages, and appeal as is provided for in the
case of taking land for highway purposes.

**Source.** 1929, 90:1. RL 51:73.

### Section 423:3

 **423:3 Land Outside the Town. –** Whenever a town finds it
necessary to acquire land for the purposes hereof beyond its boundaries
and is unable to acquire it for a reasonable price by purchase or lease,
the town may institute eminent domain proceedings by petition to the
county commissioners, and the procedure followed by the commissioners as
respects notice, assessment and payment of damages, entry and appeal
shall, so far as applicable, be the same as that prescribed for the
public utilities commission in the case of taking land by a public
utility as provided in RSA 371:1-13, inclusive.

**Source.** 1929, 90:1. RL 51:74.

### Section 423:4

 **423:4 Adjoining Lands. –** The provisions of RSA 423:2 and 423:3
shall apply to the acquisition of partial rights in lands adjoining the
landing areas in order to prevent any use of such lands as would hinder
the proper use and development of the landing field.

**Source.** 1929, 90:1. RL 51:75.

### Section 423:5

 **423:5 Use of Landing Fields. –** Any town acquiring aviation
facilities under the provisions hereof is authorized to provide for the
use thereof by contract or lease to individuals or corporations, and may
establish reasonable tolls, charges, rents, or fees for such use.

**Source.** 1929, 90:1. RL 51:76.

### Section 423:6

 **423:6 Authorization, Use and Transfer of Town or City Aeronautical
Funds. –** Towns and cities are hereby authorized to establish an
aeronautical fund for the purposes hereinafter set forth. All tolls,
charges, rents or other fees collected by towns or cities for the use of
the landing area under the provisions of this chapter and all unexpended
balances of appropriations for aeronautical purposes shall be paid into
said fund. The moneys in said aeronautical fund shall be kept in a
separate account and not intermingled with other funds of the
municipality. Said town or city aeronautical fund shall not lapse and
the unexpended balance of said fund shall be carried forward and added
to the appropriation for the subsequent year.

**Source.** 1951, 188:1, par. 76-a.

### Section 423:7

 **423:7 Restricted Use of Town or City Aeronautical Funds. –** These
funds shall be used solely for aeronautical purposes, including but not
limited to the acquisition, construction, maintenance, operation and
management of any air navigation facility jointly, individually or
severally owned or operated in whole or in part by the town or city or
an instrumentality thereof, the state or any political subdivision
thereof or the United States or its instrumentalities or political
subdivisions.

**Source.** 1951, 188:1, par. 76-b, eff. July 25, 1951.

### Section 423:8

 **423:8 Transfer of Aeronautical Funds. –** Any town may, by vote at
the annual meeting, authorize the transfer of any part of its
aeronautical fund to the department of transportation for use for
purposes authorized under RSA 423:7. The town or city transferring such
funds may specify the purpose for which such funds may be expended. A
city may authorize such transfer by vote of the city council.

**Source.** 1951, 188:1, par. 76-c. RSA 423:8. 1985, 402:6, I(c)(3).
1996, 23:4, eff. June 14, 1996.

### Section 423:9

 **423:9 Tax Exemption. –** All property and rights acquired by a
city or town outside its boundaries, as provided in RSA 423:1-4,
inclusive, or as provided in any other statute relative to aeronautical
facilities hereinbefore or hereinafter enacted, if said property and
rights are not leased for profit, shall be exempt from taxation therein;
but the city or town shall make payments, on or before December 1 in
each year, to each city or town in which such property or rights are
located, of such sums as would have been assessed against said property
and rights if the same had been included in the tax invoice for such
year at the tax valuation of the same on April 1, 1940; provided that in
case improvements have been made on said property between April 1, 1940,
and the date when acquired for aeronautical facilities, the payments to
the city or town in which such property or rights are located shall be
based upon the assessed value as of April 1 following such improvements.

**Source.** 1941, 117:1. RL 51:77.

### Section 423:10

 **423:10 Acquisition by State. –** Whenever the state shall acquire
any airport, aircraft landing area, or other aeronautical facility which
has been owned by one municipality in another municipality upon which
the former has made payments pursuant to RSA 423:9, then the state shall
continue to make payment in the same manner to the municipality in which
such facility lies as was made by the municipality from which the state
acquired it.

**Source.** 1953, 194:1, eff. June 2, 1953.

Rural Airport Capital Revolving Loan Fund
-----------------------------------------

### Section 423:11

 **423:11 Rural Airport Capital Revolving Loan Fund. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established in the office of the state treasurer
a fund to be known as the rural airport capital revolving loan fund
which shall be kept separate and distinct from all other funds. Moneys
in the fund shall be nonlapsing and shall be continually appropriated to
the department of transportation, and shall be used to provide loans to
enhance and rehabilitate all non-commercial service airports open to the
public in municipalities with populations of 14,000 or less. Loans to
airports from this fund shall be subject to the approval of the governor
and council.
                                             
 II. The operator of the rural airport provided a loan under this
section shall furnish assurance to the director of the division of
aeronautics, rail, and transit by a signed agreement that the rural
airport intends to operate as an airport and will remain open to the
public for the life of the capital improvement.
                                             
 III. The operator of the rural airport shall repay any loan made
pursuant to this section upon such terms and conditions as are
recommended by the department of transportation, director of the
division of aeronautics, rail, and transit. The term of the loan shall
be no less than 5 years and no longer than 20 years, and shall to the
extent possible consistent with this section be determined so as to
match the useful life of the improvements funded by the loan. The terms
and conditions shall be contained in the binding agreement between the
state and the operator of the rural airport and shall be sufficient to
fully reimburse the state for the principal and interest payments on
that portion of the bonds authorized to fund the loan. All money
received through reimbursement shall be deposited by the state treasurer
in the rural airport capital revolving loan fund.
                                             
 IV. A lien on the property of the rural airport shall be created in
favor of the state in an amount which equals the sum of principal and
interest to be repaid by the owner or sponsor of the rural airport. The
lien shall be recorded in the registry of deeds of the county or
counties in which the property is situated and shall not supersede any
pre-existing lien created by a mortgage affecting such property. The
lien shall expire only when the loan has been fully repaid.
                                             
 V. To provide funds for the revolving loan fund established pursuant
to this section, the state treasurer, as may be requested from time to
time by the division of aeronautics, rail, and transit, department of
transportation, is authorized to borrow from time to time upon the
credit of the state such amounts so that the total state obligation
shall at no time exceed 
                                             $750,000 and for said purposes may issue bonds
and notes at such time in the name and on behalf of the state of New
Hampshire in accordance with the provisions of RSA 6-A. The department
shall request and the treasurer shall issue bonds only for such amounts
from time to time as are required for the purposes of this section and
provided that the principal and interest payments can be satisfied from
sums in the fund established in paragraph I.
                                             
 VI. The payments of principal and interest on the bonds issued under
paragraph V shall be made when due from the special fund established by
paragraph I.

**Source.** 1997, 306:2, eff. Aug. 19, 1997. 2004, 257:30, eff. July 1,
2004.
