---
title: CHAPTER 617 FORFEITURES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
---

TITLE LX
                                             
CORRECTION AND PUNISHMENT
=========================

CHAPTER 617
                                             
FORFEITURES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
--------------------------------

### Section 617:1

 **617:1 Seizure. –** Whenever personal property is forfeited for
violation of law, any officer or person by law authorized to seize the
same may take and retain it until he shall deliver it to a proper
officer having a warrant to detain it.

**Source.** RS 212:1. CS 225:1. GS 249:1. GL 267:1. PS 258:1. PL 372:1.
RL 432:1.

### Section 617:1-a


                                             


                                             [RSA 617:1-a effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **617:1-a Criminal Forfeiture; Property Subject to Forfeiture. –**
                                             
 I. Subsequent to a criminal conviction pursuant to a statute that
authorizes forfeiture, including but not limited to RSA 318-B:17-b, the
court may order the person convicted to forfeit:
                                             
 (a) Property the person derived from the commission of the
crime;
                                             
 (b) Property directly traceable to property derived from the
commission of the crime; and
                                             
 (c) Instrumentalities the person used in the commission of the
crime.
                                             
 II. When a conviction or agreement of the parties is not possible
due to the person's death, incompetence, unavailability, or not being
within the jurisdiction of the court, or the person to be charged cannot
be identified, forfeiture proceedings may be commenced.
                                             
 III. Property may be forfeited if the state establishes that the
property is forfeitable by clear and convincing evidence.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section shall prevent property from being
forfeited by plea agreement approved by the presiding criminal court or
other agreement of the parties.
                                             
 V. At the request of any party, the civil portion of the forfeiture
proceeding may be stayed by the court.

**Source.** 2016, 329:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 617:2

 **617:2 Libel. –** The person making or directing a seizure pursuant
to RSA 617:1 shall, without unnecessary delay, file a libel before a
district court or a municipal court in towns and cities in which there
is such court if the property does not exceed in value 
                                             $500, and in
other cases in the office of the clerk of the superior court, stating
the cause and praying for a decree of forfeiture.

**Source.** RS 212:2. CS 225:2. GS 249:2. GL 267:2. PS 258:2. PL 372:2.
RL 432:2. 1951, 224:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1951.

### Section 617:3

 **617:3 Warrant. –** Upon the filing, before or after seizure, of a
libel for a forfeiture, a warrant shall be issued to the proper officer,
requiring him to take such property into his custody and to detain it
until it is legally disposed of.

**Source.** RS 212:3. CS 225:3. GS 249:3. GL 267:3. PS 258:3. PL 372:3.
RL 432:3.

### Section 617:4

 **617:4 Notice. –** Notice of the libel shall be given to the owner,
if known; otherwise, a notice shall be published to all persons
interested, to appear at the time and place appointed for trial, and to
show cause why a decree of forfeiture should not be passed.

**Source.** RS 212:4. CS 225:4. GS 249:4. GL 267:4. PS 258:4. PL 372:4.
RL 432:4.

### Section 617:4-a


                                             


                                             [RSA 617:4-a effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **617:4-a Innocent Owner. –**
                                             
 In addition to any other remedy provided by law, any person claiming
to be an innocent owner of property seized for purposes of forfeiture
may petition the court, after 10 days from the date of seizure, for
return of the property. No item or property interest shall be subject to
forfeiture unless the alleged innocent owner thereof was a consenting
party to the crime. This section shall not apply to property seized as
evidence in a pending criminal investigation or prosecution.

**Source.** 2016, 329:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 617:5

 **617:5 Sale. –** If a person interested shall appear and claim the
property, it may be sold by consent of the parties or upon examination
and certificate of its perishable nature or of its being expensive to
keep, as in case of sale of like property attached, unless it is
provided by law that it shall be destroyed, or unless the court shall
otherwise order.

**Source.** RS 212:5. CS 225:5. GS 249:5. GL 267:5. PS 258:5. PL 372:5.
RL 432:5.

### Section 617:6

 **617:6 Delivery to Claimant. –** If the claimant requests it, the
property may be appraised and delivered to him in the same manner as
property attached, upon his giving bond to pay to the persons entitled
thereto the appraised value thereof, and costs, in case a decree of
forfeiture is made.

**Source.** RS 212:6. CS 225:6. GS 249:6. GL 267:6. PS 258:6. PL 372:6.
RL 432:6.

### Section 617:7

 **617:7 Trial. –** The case may be tried by a jury, if in the
superior court, upon the request of either party, otherwise by the
court; and, the cause of forfeiture alleged being proved, the court or
justice shall make a decree for the forfeiture and disposition of the
property and a distribution of its proceeds according to law.

**Source.** RS 212:7. CS 225:7. GS 249:7. GL 267:7. PS 258:7. PL 372:7.
RL 432:7.

### Section 617:8

 **617:8 Costs. –** Costs may be awarded to the libelant if a
reasonable cause for seizure appears, in which shall be included the
necessary expenses of the seizure, detention and sale of the property;
otherwise, reasonable costs and damages shall be awarded to the
claimant.

**Source.** RS 212:8. CS 225:8. GS 249:8. GL 267:8. PS 258:8. PL 372:8.
RL 432:8.

### Section 617:9

 **617:9 Appeal. –** An appeal may be claimed by either party from a
decree made by a justice of a district court or municipal court in the
same manner as in other civil actions, and like proceedings may be had
therein as in the case of libels originally filed in the superior court.

**Source.** RS 212:9. CS 225:9. GS 249:9. GL 267:9. PS 258:9. PL 372:9.
RL 432:9.

### Section 617:10

 **617:10 Order for Destruction. –** The court, unless otherwise
specially provided, may order that any property which has been forfeited
shall be destroyed, whenever the public good requires it, and it may
direct how and by whom it shall be done.

**Source.** PS 258:10. PL 372:10. RL 432:10.

### Section 617:11


                                             


                                             [RSA 617:11 effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **617:11 Disposition of Property and Proceeds. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, at any time when
unclaimed property or contraband held for evidentiary purposes is no
longer needed for that purpose, the court may order the state to deliver
any unclaimed property, other than currency, to the commissioner of the
department of administrative services, to deliver any currency to the
state treasurer, and to destroy any contraband within 30 days.
                                             
 II. If the forfeiture is granted, the court may order the state to
deliver any currency to the state treasurer and any other property to
the commissioner of the department of administrative services within 30
days. The commissioner of the department of administrative services
shall dispose of the forfeited property at public auction.
                                             
 III. Upon motion, the court may order that a portion of the currency
seized or proceeds from public auction be used to pay reasonable
nonpersonnel expenses of the seizure, storage, and maintenance of
custody of any forfeited items.
                                             
 IV. The auction proceeds and forfeited currency shall be forwarded
to the state treasurer and shall be used first to pay all outstanding
recorded liens on the forfeited property, then to comply with an order
of the court to pay reasonable nonpersonnel expenses, with all remaining
funds to be deposited into the drug forfeiture fund.

**Source.** 2016, 329:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.
