---
title: 'CHAPTER 621-A YOUTH SERVICES CENTER'
---

TITLE LX
                                             
CORRECTION AND PUNISHMENT
=========================

CHAPTER 621-A
                                             
YOUTH SERVICES CENTER
---------------------

### Section 621-A:1

 **621-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 III. "Detention'' means the care of a child in a physically
restricted facility while awaiting further action by a court.

**Source.** 1995, 181:17, eff. July 1, 1995. 2001, 286:12, eff. Sept.
14, 2001.

### Section 621-A:2

 **621-A:2 Establishment. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2001, 286:21, III, eff.
Sept. 14, 2001.
                                             ]

### Section 621-A:3

 **621-A:3 Commissioner; Appointment; Qualification; Compensation.
–** 
                                             [Repealed 2001, 286:21, IV, eff. Sept. 14, 2001.
                                             ]

### Section 621-A:4

 **621-A:4 Powers and Duties of Commissioner. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall maintain the youth services center for
such purposes as the commissioner shall determine, which may include,
but are not limited to, the purposes described in RSA 621-A:5.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall adopt rules under RSA 541-a relative to:
                                             
 (a) The discharge of any child admitted to the center when
further detention is either unnecessary or undesirable.
                                             
 (b) The return of the child to such custody as may be determined
appropriate or as ordered by the court.

**Source.** 1995, 181:17. 1998, 184:3. 1999, 219:14, eff. July 6, 1999.
2001, 286:13, eff. Sept. 14, 2001.

### Section 621-A:5

 **621-A:5 Purposes. –** The youth services center may be used for
the following purposes:
                                             
 I. Receiving facility for the temporary detention of children who
are awaiting disposition of the court pursuant to RSA 169-B:14.
                                             
 II. Receiving facility for children determined educationally
disabled pursuant to RSA 186-C.

**Source.** 1995, 181:17, eff. July 1, 1995.

### Section 621-A:6

 **621-A:6 Admission. –**
                                             
 I. Children, subject to proceedings in juvenile court, may be
admitted to the youth services center for temporary detention while
awaiting disposition of the court pursuant to RSA 169-B:14, for
educational services pursuant to RSA 186-C, RSA 169-B, RSA 169-C, or RSA
169-D, only upon prior approval of the commissioner.
                                             
 II. Prior to a child's detention at the youth services center, the
department or an arresting law enforcement agency shall complete a
detention risk assessment instrument to determine whether there is:
                                             
 (a) Probable cause to believe that the child will pose a risk to
public safety if released to the community prior to the court hearing or
disposition; or
                                             
 (b) A need to hold the child in order to assure the child's
appearance before the court, as demonstrated by the child's previous
failure to respond to the court.
                                             
 III. The department shall review and submit a monthly report to the
general court on those cases, also known as "overrides,'' in which
children are confined at the Sununu Youth Services Center contrary to
the results of the detention risk assessment instrument. Beginning with
the fourth such report, the department shall include recommendations for
the appropriate rate of overrides.

**Source.** 1995, 181:17, eff. July 1, 1995. 2001, 286:14, eff. Sept.
14, 2001. 2016, 303:6, eff. June 30, 2016.

### Section 621-A:7

 **621-A:7 Records. –**
                                             
 I. Full and complete records shall be kept by the commissioner of
the care and study of each child admitted to the youth services center.
The records shall not be open to the inspection of any persons not on
the staff of the commissioner except that such records shall be
available, by court order, to any court having competent jurisdiction of
the child in any matter pending in this state or to such person or
persons as may be authorized by the court. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, exchange of medical or psychiatric records between the
Philbrook center and the department shall be permitted.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
disclosure by the commissioner to the legislature or the public of the
generalized facts relating to the children admitted to the youth
services center, together with conclusions as to the proper means for
the control and child guidance for such children, provided that the
names and identities of particular children shall not be disclosed.

**Source.** 1995, 181:17, eff. July 1, 1995.

### Section 621-A:8

 **621-A:8 Rulemaking. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2001, 286:21, VI, eff. Sept.
14, 2001.
                                             ]

Advisory Board
--------------

### Section 621-A:9

 **621-A:9 Juvenile Justice Advisory Board Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a juvenile justice advisory board.
The board shall act in an advisory capacity and make recommendations to
the commissioner relative to programs and services provided to children
at the youth development center and the youth services center.
                                             
 II. The board shall be composed of the following members:
                                             
 (a) Four members from the house of representatives, one of whom
shall be a member of the house finance committee, 2 of whom shall be
members of the children and family law committee, and one of whom shall
be a member of the criminal justice and public safety committee,
appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (b) One member from the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (c) The director of the unit of juvenile justice services within
the department.
                                             
 (d) A representative of the department of health and human
services who is responsible for mental health services, designated by
the commissioner of health and human services.
                                             
 (e) The commissioner of the department of education or designee.
                                             
 (f) One district or family court judge, appointed by the
administrative justice of the district courts.
                                             
 (g) Two human services administrators, one from an urban county
and one from a rural county, appointed by the executive director or
other appropriate appointing authority of the New Hampshire Association
of Counties.
                                             
 (h) Seven members, appointed by the governor with the advice and
consent of the council, which shall include 2 members representing the
interests of business and industry, 2 parents of children who are
receiving or have received services from the department, one member of
state or local law enforcement, and 2 members from the general public.
                                             
 (i) One juvenile probation and parole officer, appointed by the
commissioner of the department of health and human services.
                                             
 (j) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. Members of the advisory board shall serve without compensation
provided that legislative members shall receive mileage at the
legislative rate while attending to the duties of the board.

**Source.** 2000, 294:6, eff. July 1, 2000. 2001, 30:1-3, eff. June 8,
2001. 2001, 286:15-17, eff. Sept. 14, 2001. 2009, 272:1, eff. July 29,
2009. 2010, 368:28, IX, eff. Dec. 31, 2010.

### Section 621-A:10

 **621-A:10 Terms of Office; Organization. –**
                                             
 I. The legislative members and the members listed in RSA 621-A:9,
II(c)-- (e) shall serve terms which are coterminous with their terms in
office. The remaining members shall serve 3-year terms.
                                             
 II. Each appointed member of the advisory board shall hold office
until a successor is appointed and qualified. The appointment of
successors for the filling of vacancies for unexpired terms shall be by
appointment in the same manner as the original appointment.
Non-legislative appointed members shall not serve more than 2
consecutive terms.
                                             
 III. The advisory board shall elect its own chairperson and officers
annually. The board shall meet as deemed necessary, provided that the
board shall meet at least 4 times per year.

**Source.** 2000, 294:6, eff. July 1, 2000. 2009, 272:1, eff. July 29,
2009.

### Section 621-A:11

 **621-A:11 Duties of the Advisory Board. –**
                                             
 I. The advisory board shall act in an advisory capacity to assist
the commissioner of the department of health and human services relative
to juvenile justice programs and services provided to children at the
youth development center and other juvenile justice facilities. The
board may also provide advice and input on fiscal and budgetary matters
related to such facilities, the availability of state and federal
grants, business partnerships, and other funding sources available to
the department for such facilities.
                                             
 I-a. The board shall seek information from the director of the
division of juvenile justice services in the department of health and
human services concerning the successes and challenges relative to the
state's juvenile justice programs and services.
                                             
 I-b. The board shall be available to address emergent issues
identified by the commissioner of health and human services, the
director of the division of juvenile justice services, the chair of the
advisory board, or any board member. In furtherance of this paragraph,
the board may solicit comments from the public or any other entities as
it deems appropriate.
                                             
 II. Beginning in December 2010, and biennially thereafter, the board
shall submit a written report to the speaker of the house, the president
of the senate, the governor, and the following legislative committees:
the house children and family law committee, the house criminal justice
and safety committee, and the senate judiciary committee. The report
shall detail the activities of the board and any recommendations made by
the board to the department relative to juvenile justice services.

**Source.** 2000, 294:6, eff. July 1, 2000. 2001, 286:18, eff. Sept. 14,
2001. 2009, 272:1, eff. July 29, 2009.
