---
title: 'CHAPTER 622-A NEW ENGLAND INTERSTATE CORRECTIONS COMPACT'
---

TITLE LX
                                             
CORRECTION AND PUNISHMENT
=========================

CHAPTER 622-A
                                             
NEW ENGLAND INTERSTATE CORRECTIONS COMPACT
------------------------------------------

### Section 622-A:1

 **622-A:1 Name. –** This chapter may be cited as the New England
interstate corrections compact.

**Source.** 1961, 101:1, eff. May 4, 1961.

### Section 622-A:2

 **622-A:2 Compact. –** The New England interstate corrections
compact is hereby enacted into law and entered into by this state with
any other of the hereinafter mentioned states legally joining therein in
the form substantially as follows:

**New England Interstate Corrections Compact**

**Article I**

**Purpose and Policy**


                                             
 The party states, desiring by common action to fully utilize and
improve their institutional facilities and provide adequate programs for
the confinement, treatment and rehabilitation of various types of
offenders, declare that it is the policy of each of the party states to
provide such facilities and programs on a basis of cooperation with one
another, thereby serving the best interests of such offenders and of
society and effecting economies in capital expenditures and operational
costs. The purpose of this compact is to provide for the mutual
development and execution of such programs of cooperation for the
confinement, treatment and rehabilitation of offenders with the most
economical use of human and material resources.

**Article II**

**Definitions**


                                             
 As used in this compact, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise:
                                             
 (a) "State'' means a state of the United States, located in New
England, to wit, Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts,
Connecticut, Rhode Island.
                                             
 (b) "Sending state'' means a state party to this compact in which
conviction or court commitment was had.
                                             
 (c) "Receiving state'' means a state party to this compact to
which an inmate is sent for confinement other than a state in which
conviction or court commitment was had.
                                             
 (d) "Inmate'' means a male or female offender who is committed,
under sentence to or confined in a penal or correctional institution.
                                             
 (e) "Institution'' means any penal or correctional facility
(including but not limited to a facility for the mentally ill or
mentally defective) in which inmates as defined in (d) above may
lawfully be confined.

**Article III**

**Contracts**


                                             
 (a) Each party state may make one or more contracts with any one
or more of the other party states for the confinement of inmates on
behalf of a sending state in institutions situated within receiving
states. Any such contract shall provide for:
                                             
 1. Its duration.
                                             
 2. Payments to be made to the receiving state by the sending
state for inmate maintenance, extraordinary medical and dental expenses,
and any participation in or receipt by inmates of rehabilitative or
correctional services, facilities, programs or treatment not reasonably
included as part of normal maintenance.
                                             
 3. Participation in programs of inmate employment, if any; the
disposition or crediting of any payments received by inmates on account
thereof; and the crediting of proceeds from or disposal of any products
resulting therefrom.
                                             
 4. Delivery and retaking of inmates.
                                             
 5. Such other matters as may be necessary and appropriate to
fix the obligations, responsibilities and rights of the sending and
receiving states.
                                             
 (b) Subject to legislative approval by the states concerned and
prior to the construction or completion of construction of any
institution or addition thereto by a party state, any other party state
or states may contract therewith for the enlargement of the planned
capacity of the institution or addition thereto, or for the inclusion
therein of particular equipment or structures, and for the reservation
of a specific percentum of the capacity of the institution to be kept
available for use by inmates of the sending state or states so
contracting. Any sending state so contracting may, to the extent that
monies are legally available therefor, pay to the receiving state a
reasonable sum as consideration for such enlargement of capacity, or
provision of equipment or structures, and reservation of capacity.
                                             
 (c) The terms and provisions of this compact shall be a part of
any contract entered into by the authority of or pursuant thereto, and
nothing in any such contract shall be inconsistent therewith.

**Article IV**

**Procedures and Rights**


                                             
 (a) Whenever the duly constituted authorities in a state party to
this compact, and which has entered into a contract pursuant to Article
III, shall decide that confinement in, or transfer of an inmate to, an
institution within the territory of another party state is necessary or
desirable in order to provide adequate quarters and care or an
appropriate program of rehabilitation or treatment, said officials may
direct that the confinement be within an institution within the
territory of said other party state, the receiving state to act in that
regard solely as agent for the sending state.
                                             
 (b) The appropriate officials of any state party to this compact
shall have access, at all reasonable times, to any institution in which
it has a contractual right to confine inmates for the purpose of
inspecting the facilities thereof and visiting such of its inmates as
may be confined in the institution.
                                             
 (c) Inmates confined in an institution pursuant to the terms of
this compact shall at all times be subject to the jurisdiction of the
sending state and may at any time be removed therefrom for transfer to a
prison or other institution within the sending state, for transfer to
another institution in which the sending state may have a contractual or
other right to confine inmates, for release on probation or parole, for
discharge, or for any other purpose permitted by the laws of the sending
state; provided that the sending state shall continue to be obligated to
such payments as may be required pursuant to the terms of any contract
entered into under the terms of Article III.
                                             
 (d) Each receiving state shall provide regular reports to each
sending state on the inmates of that sending state in institutions
pursuant to this compact, including a conduct record of each inmate, and
certify said record to the official designated by the sending state, in
order that each inmate may have official review of his or her record in
determining and altering the disposition of said inmate in accordance
with the law which may obtain in the sending state and in order that the
same may be a source of information for the sending state.
                                             
 (e) All inmates who may be confined in an institution pursuant to
the provisions of this compact shall be treated in a reasonable and
humane manner and shall be treated equally with such similar inmates of
the receiving state as may be confined in the same institution. The fact
of confinement in a receiving state shall not deprive any inmate so
confined of any legal rights which said inmate would have had if
confined in an appropriate institution of the sending state.
                                             
 (f) Any hearing or hearings to which an inmate confined pursuant
to this compact may be entitled by the laws of the sending state may be
had before the appropriate authorities of the sending state, or of the
receiving state if authorized by the sending state. The receiving state
shall provide adequate facilities for such hearings as may be conducted
by the appropriate officials of a sending state. In the event such
hearing or hearings are had before officials of the receiving state, the
governing law shall be that of the sending state and a record of the
hearing or hearings as prescribed by the sending state shall be made.
Said record together with any recommendations of the hearing officials
shall be transmitted forthwith to the official or officials before whom
the hearing would have been had if it had taken place in the sending
state. In any and all proceedings had pursuant to the provisions of this
subdivision, the officials of the receiving state shall act solely as
agents of the sending state and no final determination shall be made in
any matter except by the appropriate officials of the sending state.
                                             
 (g) Any inmate confined pursuant to this compact shall be
released within the territory of the sending state unless the inmate,
and the sending and receiving states, shall agree upon release in some
other place. The sending state shall bear the cost of such return to its
territory.
                                             
 (h) Any inmate confined pursuant to the terms of this compact
shall have any and all rights to participate in and derive any benefits
or incur or be relieved of any obligations or have such obligations
modified or his status changed on account of any action or proceeding in
which he could have participated if confined in any appropriate
institution of the sending state located within such state.
                                             
 (i) The parent, guardian, trustee, or other person or persons
entitled under the laws of the sending state to act for, advise, or
otherwise function with respect to any inmate shall not be deprived of
or restricted in his exercise of any power in respect of any inmate
confined pursuant to the terms of this compact.

**Article V**

**Acts Not Reviewable in Receiving State: Extradition**


                                             
 (a) Any decision of the sending state in respect of any matter
over which it retains jurisdiction pursuant to this compact shall be
conclusive upon and not reviewable within the receiving state, but if at
the time the sending state seeks to remove an inmate from an institution
in the receiving state there is pending against the inmate within such
state any criminal charge or if the inmate is formally accused of having
committed within such state a criminal offense, the inmate shall not be
returned without the consent of the receiving state until discharged
from prosecution or other form of proceeding, imprisonment or detention
for such offense. The duly accredited officers of the sending state
shall be permitted to transport inmates pursuant to this compact through
any and all states party to this compact without interference.
                                             
 (b) An inmate who escapes from an institution in which he is
confined pursuant to this compact shall be deemed a fugitive from the
sending state and from the state in which the institution is situated.
In the case of an escape to a jurisdiction other than the sending or
receiving state, the responsibility for institution of extradition or
rendition proceedings shall be that of the sending state, but nothing
contained herein shall be construed to prevent or affect the activities
of officers and agencies of any jurisdiction directed toward the
apprehension and return of an escapee.

**Article VI**

**Federal Aid**


                                             
 Any state party to this compact may accept federal aid for use in
connection with any institution or program, the use of which is or may
be affected by this compact or any contract pursuant hereto, and any
inmate in the receiving state pursuant to this compact may participate
in any such federally aided program or activity for which the sending
and receiving states have made contractual provision; provided that if
such program or activity is not part of the customary correctional
regimen, the express consent of the appropriate official of the sending
state shall be required therefor.

**Article VII**

**Entry into Force**


                                             
 This compact shall enter into force and become effective and binding
upon the states so acting when it has been enacted into law by any 2
states from among the states in New England. Thereafter, this compact
shall enter into force and become effective and binding as to any other
of said states upon similar action by such state.

**Article VIII**

**Withdrawal and Termination**


                                             
 This compact shall continue in force and remain binding upon a party
state until it shall have enacted a statute repealing the same and
providing for the sending of formal written notice of withdrawal from
the compact to the appropriate officials of all other party states. An
actual withdrawal shall not take effect until one year after the notices
provided in said statute have been sent. Such withdrawal shall not
relieve the withdrawing state from its obligations assumed hereunder
prior to the effective date of withdrawal. Before the effective date of
withdrawal, a withdrawing state shall remove to its territory, at its
own expense, such inmates as it may have confined pursuant to the
provisions of this compact.

**Article IX**

**Other Arrangements Unaffected**


                                             
 Nothing contained in this compact shall be construed to abrogate or
impair any agreement or other arrangement which a party state may have
with a nonparty state for the confinement, rehabilitation or treatment
of inmates nor to repeal any other laws of a party state authorizing the
making of cooperative institutional arrangements.

**Article X**

**Construction and Severability**


                                             
 The provisions of this compact shall be liberally construed and
shall be severable. If any phrase, clause, sentence or provision of this
compact is declared to be contrary to the constitution of any particular
state or of the United States, or the applicability thereof to any
government, agency, person or circumstance is held invalid, the validity
of the remainder of the compact and the applicability thereof to any
government, agency, person or circumstance shall not be affected
thereby. If this compact shall be held contrary to the constitution of
any state participating therein, the compact shall remain in full force
and effect as to the remaining states and in full force and effect as to
the state affected as to all severable matters.

**Source.** 1961, 101:1, eff. May 4, 1961.

### Section 622-A:3

 **622-A:3 Authority of Commissioner of Corrections. –** The
commissioner of corrections is hereby authorized and directed to do all
things necessary or incidental to the carrying out of the compact in
every particular.

**Source.** 1961, 101:1, eff. May 4, 1961.
