---
title: 'CHAPTER 623-C MEDICAL SERVICES FOR PRISONERS'
---

TITLE LX
                                             
CORRECTION AND PUNISHMENT
=========================

CHAPTER 623-C
                                             
MEDICAL SERVICES FOR PRISONERS
------------------------------

### Section 623-C:1

 **623-C:1 Medical Services for County Prisoners. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Except as provided in subparagraphs (b) through (g), the
county department of corrections or its agent shall pay health care
facilities licensed pursuant to RSA 151 no more than 110 percent of the
Medicare allowable rate for inpatient, outpatient, or emergency room
care provided for prisoners in county correctional facilities.
                                             
 (b) Except as provided in subparagraphs (c) through (e), and
subparagraph (i), the county department of corrections or its agent
shall pay independent health care providers licensed in this state no
more than 125 percent of the Medicare allowable rate for care provided
for prisoners in county correctional facilities.
                                             
 (c) Allowances provided by hospitals shall qualify as community
benefits under RSA 7:32-d, III(b).
                                             
 (d) The county department of corrections shall pay health care
facilities licensed pursuant to RSA 151 and reported by the department
of health and human services as having a negative operating margin in
the most recent year for which audited financial data is available no
more than 125 percent of the Medicare rate.
                                             
 (e) Nothing in this section shall preclude the superintendent of
a county correctional facility from negotiating and executing medical
service rate agreements with health care facilities licensed pursuant to
RSA 151, or other licensed medical providers, for the provision of
medical or dental services to county prisoners at the lowest rate
possible, or utilizing rates in existing agreements.
                                             
 (f) The superintendent of a county correctional facility may
waive the application of subparagraph (a) if the superintendent
determines such action is necessary to ensure prisoner access to
medically necessary care.
                                             
 (g) The superintendent of a county correctional facility may
waive the application of subparagraph (a) if the superintendent
determines such action to be necessary for the efficient operations of
the county correctional facility.
                                             
 (h) The superintendent of a county correctional facility may at
any time audit any claim or seek clarification on any payment made
pursuant to this section, or both. Upon request by the superintendent,
the provider shall furnish information on pricing methodology and shall
detail any internal process controls for ensuring accurate pricing of
claims processed under this section. Claim information shall be provided
in the industry standard format, including but not limited to the
application of global surgery provisions, billing for surgical
assistants, and bundling.
                                             
 (i) If a county prisoner's medical care is covered by Medicaid,
the health care facility licensed pursuant to RSA 151, or the licensed
health care provider, or both, shall be paid at the Medicaid rate for
services provided.
                                             
 II. Pharmacists shall substitute generically equivalent drug
products for all legend and non-legend prescriptions paid for by the
county department of corrections, including the medicaid program, unless
the prescribing practitioner specifies that the brand name drug product
is medically necessary. Such notification shall be in the practitioner's
own handwriting and shall be retained in the pharmacist's file. The
superintendent may waive the application of RSA 623-C:1, I if the
superintendent determines such action is necessary to ensure the
availability of prescription and other pharmaceutical services to
persons served by the county or to avert serious economic hardship in
the provision of prescriptions and other pharmaceutical services. The
county commissioners shall adopt necessary rules and regulations to
implement this paragraph.

**Source.** 2004, 218:1, eff. June 11, 2004. 2013, 85:1, eff. July 1,
2013.

### Section 623-C:2

 **623-C:2 Medical Services for State Prisoners. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Except as provided in subparagraphs (b) through (f), the
state department of corrections or its agent shall pay health care
facilities licensed pursuant to RSA 151 no more than 110 percent of the
Medicare allowable rate for inpatient, outpatient, or emergency room
care provided for prisoners in state correctional facilities.
                                             
 (b) Except as provided in subparagraphs (c) through (e), and
subparagraph (h), the state department of corrections or its agent shall
pay independent health care providers licensed in this state no more
than 125 percent of the Medicare allowable rate for care provided for
prisoners in state correctional facilities.
                                             
 (c) Allowances provided by hospitals shall qualify as community
benefits under RSA 7:32-d, III(b).
                                             
 (d) The state department of corrections shall pay health care
facilities licensed pursuant to RSA 151 and reported by the department
of health and human services as having a negative operating margin in
the most recent year for which audited financial data is available no
more than 125 percent of the Medicare rate.
                                             
 (e) The commissioner of the state department of corrections may
waive the application of subparagraph (a) if the commissioner determines
such action is necessary to ensure prisoner access to medically
necessary care.
                                             
 (f) The commissioner of the state department of corrections may
waive the application of subparagraph (a) if the commissioner determines
such action to be necessary for the efficient operations of the state
correctional facility.
                                             
 (g) The commissioner of the state department of corrections may
at any time audit any claim or seek clarification on any payment made
pursuant to this section, or both. Upon request by the commissioner, the
provider shall furnish information on pricing methodology and shall
detail any internal process controls for ensuring accurate pricing of
claims processed under this section. Claim information shall be provided
in the industry standard format, including but not limited to the
application of global surgery provisions, billing for surgical
assistants, and bundling.
                                             
 (h) If a state prisoner's medical care is covered by Medicaid,
the facility or the licensed health care provider, or both, shall be
paid at the Medicaid rate for services provided.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this section shall preclude the commissioner of the
state department of corrections from negotiating and executing medical
service rate agreements with health care facilities licensed pursuant to
RSA 151, or other licensed medical providers, for the provision of
medical or dental services to state prisoners at the lowest rate
possible, or utilizing rates in existing agreements.
                                             
 III. Pharmacists shall substitute generically equivalent drug
products for all legend and non-legend prescriptions paid for by the
department of corrections, including the Medicaid program, unless the
prescribing practitioner specifies that the brand name drug product is
medically necessary. Such notification shall be in the practitioner's
own handwriting and shall be retained in the pharmacist's file. The
commissioner of the department of corrections may waive the application
of RSA 623-C:2, I if the commissioner determines such action is
necessary to ensure the availability of prescription and other
pharmaceutical services to persons served by the state or to avert
serious economic hardship in the provision of prescriptions and other
pharmaceutical services. For Medicaid fee for service clients, no prior
authorization for generically equivalent drugs shall be required.

**Source.** 2004, 218:1, eff. June 11, 2004. 2009, 144:264, eff. Aug.
28, 2009. 2013, 85:2, eff. July 1, 2013. 2015, 276:208, eff. July 1,
2015.
