---
title: 'CHAPTER 623-B INMATE LITIGATION'
---

TITLE LX
                                             
CORRECTION AND PUNISHMENT
=========================

CHAPTER 623-B
                                             
INMATE LITIGATION
-----------------

### Section 623-B:1

 **623-B:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the state department of
corrections.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of corrections.
                                             
 III. "Inmate'' means a person confined to a correctional facility as
the result of conviction of a crime or violation of parole or probation,
or an offender sentenced to a home detention program.
                                             
 IV. "Inmate's account'' means the moneys belonging to an inmate
which are held in the department of corrections trust fund.

**Source.** 1995, 296:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 623-B:2

 **623-B:2 Civil Actions by Inmates; Filing Fees and Court Costs.
–**
                                             
 I. An inmate who commences any civil action or proceeding is
responsible for all court fees and costs.
                                             
 II. The court shall order an inmate who commences any civil action
or proceeding to pay, upon filing of such action or proceeding, court
fees from the inmate's account. The commissioner shall withdraw the
amount from the inmate's account and forward the money to the
appropriate court clerk. As long as the account contains at least 
                                             $10,
the commissioner shall make withdrawals from such account until the
actual court fees are paid.
                                             
 III. The court shall order any inmate who commences any civil action
or proceeding to pay court costs when they accrue. As long as the
account contains at least 
                                             $10, the commissioner shall withdraw the
amount from the inmate's account and forward the money to the
appropriate court clerk. Thereafter, the commissioner shall make
withdrawals from such account until the court costs are paid in full.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an inmate from filing a
civil action or proceeding if the inmate is indigent.

**Source.** 1995, 296:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 623-B:3

 **623-B:3 Affidavit. –**
                                             
 I. A court may authorize the commencement, prosecution, or defense
of any civil action or proceeding without prepayment of fees and costs,
by an inmate who makes an affidavit that such inmate is unable to pay
such fees or costs. The affidavit shall contain complete information as
to the inmate's identity, nature, and amount of income, spouse's income
if available to the inmate, property owned, cash or checking accounts,
dependents, debts and monthly expenses and the amount of money deposited
in such inmate's account for the last 3 months. The affidavit shall
contain a statement under oath that the claim has not been previously
brought against the same parties or from the same operative facts in any
state or federal court. The court may develop a form questionnaire which
it may require by local rule to be filed to implement this statute.
                                             
 II. A court in which an affidavit of inability to pay has been filed
may dismiss the action in whole or in part on a finding that the
allegation of poverty is false; or the action or a portion of the action
is frivolous or malicious. In determining whether an action is frivolous
or malicious, the court may consider whether the claim has no arguable
basis in law or fact; or whether the claim is substantially similar to a
previous claim either in that it is brought against the same parties or
in that the claim arises from the same operative facts as a previous
claim. If a portion of the action is dismissed, the court shall also
designate the issues and defendants on which the action is to proceed
without paying costs. This order is subject only to an interlocutory
appeal.
                                             
 III. If the court authorizes the commencement of the action and the
court concludes, based on information contained in the affidavit or
other information available to the court, that such inmate is able to
pay part of the fees or costs, then the court shall order a partial
payment to be made as a condition of the commencement or further
prosecution of the action.

**Source.** 1995, 296:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.
