---
title: 'CHAPTER 623-A APPROVED ABSENCES FROM NEW HAMPSHIRE STATE PRISONS'
---

TITLE LX
                                             
CORRECTION AND PUNISHMENT
=========================

CHAPTER 623-A
                                             
APPROVED ABSENCES FROM NEW HAMPSHIRE STATE PRISONS
--------------------------------------------------

### Section 623-A:1

 **623-A:1 Authority to Establish Regulations. –** The commissioner
of corrections is hereby authorized to establish rules permitting
approved absences of eligible inmates who are in his official custody.
The rules shall be subject to the limitations, restrictions and
conditions of this chapter and may impose additional limitations,
restrictions or conditions. The rules may be amended from time to time
or rescinded.

**Source.** 1975, 241:1, eff. Aug. 3, 1975.

### Section 623-A:2

 **623-A:2 Eligibility for Approved Absence. –**
                                             
 I. Upon the application of an inmate, the commissioner of
corrections may grant an approved absence if he determines that the
inmate:
                                             
 (a) Is serving the last 90 days of his sentence;
                                             
 (b) Pursuant to RSA 651:25, is on work or study release or is a
resident of a community correctional center or halfway house;
                                             
 (c) Is physically and mentally capable of conducting himself
during an approved absence without escort; and
                                             
 (d) Has demonstrated a level of responsibility which provides
reasonable assurance that he will comply fully with the requirements of
approved absence and will not jeopardize the safety of persons or
property in the community.
                                             
 II. If otherwise eligible under subparagraphs I(a), (b), (c) and
(d), inmates confined at the state prison or other institution under the
control of the commissioner of corrections under RSA 622-A may be
eligible for approved absence only if, upon the request of the
commissioner of corrections, the sending state authorizes such approved
absence.

**Source.** 1975, 241:1, eff. Aug. 3, 1975.

### Section 623-A:3

 **623-A:3 Purposes of Approved Absence. –**
                                             
 I. An eligible inmate may be considered for approved absence only
for the following purposes:
                                             
 (a) Visits with the inmate's family.
                                             
 (b) Attendance at the funeral of a close relative.
                                             
 (c) Obtaining medical treatment.
                                             
 (d) Seeking or securing employment.
                                             
 (e) Seeking or securing admission to an educational or vocational
program.
                                             
 (f) Attendance at specific community religious, educational,
vocational, social, civic or recreational activities.
                                             
 II. In unusual circumstances, an approved absence may be granted for
purposes not specified in this section.

**Source.** 1975, 241:1, eff. Aug. 3, 1975.

### Section 623-A:4

 **623-A:4 Duration of Approved Absence. –** Every approved absence
shall be for a specified period of time which shall be no longer than
necessary to accomplish the purpose of the approved absence. An approved
absence shall not exceed 7 days except where necessary for extended
medical treatment. An approved absence once begun may be extended by the
commissioner of corrections only where necessary to permit
accomplishment of the purpose for which the approved absence was
originally granted. The commissioner of corrections may shorten or
terminate an approved absence in his discretion.

**Source.** 1975, 241:1, eff. Aug. 3, 1975.

### Section 623-A:5

 **623-A:5 Expenses. –** All expenses of an approved absence for
transport, food, lodging and incidentals shall be borne by the inmate or
his family or from other sources approved by the commissioner of
corrections.

**Source.** 1975, 241:1, eff. Aug. 3, 1975.

### Section 623-A:6

 **623-A:6 Waiver of Extradition. –** Prior to commencement of an
approved absence, the inmate shall be required to execute a waiver of
extradition.

**Source.** 1975, 241:1, eff. Aug. 3, 1975.

### Section 623-A:7

 **623-A:7 Status During Absence. –** While on approved absence, an
inmate continues in the official custody of the commissioner of
corrections.

**Source.** 1975, 241:1, eff. Aug. 3, 1975.

### Section 623-A:8

 **623-A:8 Violation of Terms of Approved Absence. –**
                                             
 I. If the commissioner of corrections has reason to believe that an
inmate has violated the terms of an approved absence, he may certify
that the inmate has escaped and thereafter shall take all necessary
steps to secure the return of the inmate as promptly as possible. Escape
from approved absence is escape from official custody within the meaning
and subject to the provisions of RSA 642:6.
                                             
 II. A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if he willfully obstructs,
intimidates or abets an inmate on approved absence and thereby causes or
contributes to cause the inmate to violate the terms of approved
absence.

**Source.** 1975, 241:1, eff. Aug. 3, 1975.

### Section 623-A:9

 **623-A:9 Interpretation of Chapter. –** This chapter shall not be
interpreted as establishing any rights to approved absence, but only as
authorizing establishment of provisions for approved absence as part of
a program for rehabilitation and reintegration of inmates into the
community. This chapter does not affect nor is it affected by the
provisions of RSA 651:19 and 25, relating to work release, and RSA 623,
relating to temporary removal of prisoners.

**Source.** 1975, 241:1, eff. Aug. 3, 1975.
