---
title: 'CHAPTER 399-F CASH DISPENSING MACHINES'
---

TITLE XXXVI
                                             
PAWNBROKERS AND MONEYLENDERS
============================

CHAPTER 399-F
                                             
CASH DISPENSING MACHINES
------------------------

### Section 399-F:1

 **399-F:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Bank'' means a bank as defined in RSA 383-A:2-201(a)(3).
                                             
 I-a. "Credit union'' means a credit union as defined in RSA
383-A:2-201(a)(15).
                                             
 II. "Cash dispensing machine'':
                                             
 (a) Means an electronic device that, operating in conjunction
with a processor and network, allows a consumer to debit an account in
exchange for dispensing cash.
                                             
 (b) Does not mean a point-of-sale device as defined by the
commissioner pursuant to RSA 384-B:7.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the New Hampshire bank commissioner
appointed under the provisions of RSA 383:1.
                                             
 IV. "Establish'' means to own, lease, or otherwise legally control.
                                             
 V. "Network'' means a person who engages primarily in the
establishment and maintenance of a computer-operated system of
transmitting items and messages between banks, processors, and cash
dispensing machines or similar electronic devices.
                                             
 VI. "Operator'' means the person who owns, leases, or otherwise
legally controls a cash dispensing machine.
                                             
 VII. "Person'' means any natural person, partnership, corporation,
or other business association recognized under New Hampshire law.
                                             
 VIII. "Processor'' means a person who electronically acquires
financial data emanating from a cash dispensing machine and relays such
data to a network.
                                             
 IX. "Servicing agent'' means a person who contracts with an operator
to provide consumer relations, financial recordkeeping, or similar
services in regard to a cash dispensing machine.

**Source.** 1998, 358:1, eff. Aug. 25, 1998. 2015, 272:25, 31, eff. Oct.
1, 2015. 2016, 230:7, 8, eff. Aug. 8, 2016.

### Section 399-F:2

 **399-F:2 Establishment of Cash Dispensing Machines. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall establish a cash dispensing machine unless it:
                                             
 (a) Does not accept deposits, loan payments, or effectuate
account transfers;
                                             
 (b) Is not operated in such a way as to violate the Electronic
Funds Transfer Act, 15 U.S.C. 1693 et seq. or regulations promulgated
thereunder; and
                                             
 (c) Is in complete and accurate compliance with the provisions of
RSA 399-F:3.
                                             
 II. Paragraph I shall not apply to and this chapter shall not govern
any cash dispensing machine or similar electronic device established by
a bank or credit union.

**Source.** 1998, 358:1, eff. Aug. 25, 1998. 2015, 272:26, eff. Oct. 1,
2015. 2016, 230:9, eff. Aug. 8, 2016.

### Section 399-F:3

 **399-F:3 Notice. –**
                                             
 I. At least 15 business days prior to the activation date of any
cash dispensing machine, its operator shall provide to the commissioner
an initial:
                                             
 (a) Written notice completely and accurately setting forth the
following information in regard to the cash dispensing machine:
                                             
 (1) The operator's name, address, and telephone number;
                                             
 (2) The location name and address;
                                             
 (3) The activation date;
                                             
 (4) The types of transactions available;
                                             
 (5) The processor's name, address, and telephone number;
                                             
 (6) The servicing agent's name, address, and telephone number;
and
                                             
 (7) The dated signature, name, title, address, and telephone
number of the person completing the notice; and
                                             
 (b) Fee of 
                                             $50 payable to the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. Commencing in the calendar year following an operator's
compliance with paragraph I, the operator shall provide annually before
July 1 to the commissioner a notice and fee in accordance with the
provisions of subparagraph I(a) and a renewal fee of 
                                             $5 payable to the
state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 III. The operator, without being assessed a fee, shall promptly
notify the commissioner in writing:
                                             
 (a) Of any changes to the information required under subparagraph
I(a) as provided in the most current notice; or
                                             
 (b) If the operation of the cash dispensing machine is
terminated.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner is authorized at any time to verify the
completeness and accuracy of any notice required under this section, and
in connection therewith:
                                             
 (a) If the operator fails to promptly provide adequate
documentation to and upon the request of the commissioner:
                                             
 (1) The commissioner shall inform the operator of such failure
and the provisions of paragraph V; and
                                             
 (2) The operator's cash dispensing machine shall not be deemed
in compliance for purposes of RSA 399-F:2, I(c) until the provisions of
paragraph V are fulfilled.
                                             
 (b) If the commissioner determines that any information provided
in the most current notice is incomplete or inaccurate:
                                             
 (1) The commissioner shall inform the operator of such
discrepancy and the provisions of paragraph V; and
                                             
 (2) The operator's cash dispensing machine shall not be deemed
in compliance for purposes of RSA 399-F:2, I(c) until the provisions of
paragraph V are fulfilled.
                                             
 V. The operator of a cash dispensing machine who fails to completely
and accurately abide by this section shall not legally establish or
operate such cash dispensing machine until paragraph I is fully complied
with, except that a fee of 
                                             $100 shall be paid.
                                             
 VI. In lieu of the operator, the cash dispensing machine's servicing
agent may submit to the commissioner any information, documentation, or
fees required pursuant to this section.

**Source.** 1998, 358:1, eff. Aug. 25, 1998. 2016, 74:1-3, eff. July 18,
2016.

### Section 399-F:4

 **399-F:4 Required Consumer Disclosures. –**
                                             
 I. An operator shall clearly and conspicuously disclose on a sign
posted on the cash dispensing machine or in clear view of a consumer
viewing the cash dispensing machine:
                                             
 (a) The name of the operator;
                                             
 (b) A disclaimer indicating that the operator is not a bank nor a
credit union; and
                                             
 (c) The name, address, and 24-hour toll-free telephone number
where a consumer may direct inquiries or complaints.
                                             
 II. An operator shall not charge a fee for use of a cash dispensing
machine unless the amount of the fee is clearly and conspicuously
disclosed:
                                             
 (a) On a sign posted on the cash dispensing machine or in clear
view of a consumer viewing the cash dispensing machine; and
                                             
 (b) Electronically during the course of the transaction in a
manner that permits the consumer to cancel the transaction without
incurring the fee.
                                             
 III. Failure to comply in good faith with the provisions of this
section shall constitute an unfair or deceptive act or practice under
RSA 358-A:2.

**Source.** 1998, 358:1, eff. Aug. 25, 1998.

### Section 399-F:5

 **399-F:5 Fee Collection. –**
                                             
 I. Sums collected under this chapter shall be payable to the state
treasurer as restricted revenue and credited to the appropriation for
the commissioner.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1998, 358:1, eff. Aug. 25, 1998. 2016, 74:4, eff. July 18,
2016.
