---
title: 'CHAPTER 399-B DISCLOSURE OF FINANCE CHARGES'
---

TITLE XXXVI
                                             
PAWNBROKERS AND MONEYLENDERS
============================

CHAPTER 399-B
                                             
DISCLOSURE OF FINANCE CHARGES
-----------------------------

### Section 399-B:1

 **399-B:1 Definitions. –** Whenever used in this chapter the
following words shall have the meaning set opposite them below:
                                             
 I. "Credit'' means any loan, residential mortgage, deed of trust,
advance, or discount; any conditional sales contract; any contract to
sell, or sale, or contract of sale of property or services, either for
present or future delivery, under which part or all of the price is
payable subsequent to the making of such sale or contract; any
rental-purchase contract; any contract or arrangement for the hire,
bailment, or leasing of property; any option, demand, lien, pledge, or
other claim against, or for the delivery of, property or money; any
purchase, discount, or other acquisition of, or any credit upon the
security of, any obligation or claim arising out of any of the
foregoing; and any transaction or series of transactions having a
similar purpose or effect.
                                             
 II. "Finance charges'' includes charges such as interest, fees,
service charges, discounts, and other charges associated with the
extension of credit.
                                             
 III. "Person'' means any individual, partnership, association,
corporation, or unincorporated organization.

**Source.** 1961, 245:7, eff. Aug. 30, 1961.

### Section 399-B:2

 **399-B:2 Statement Required. –** Any person engaged in the business
of extending credit shall furnish to each person to whom such credit is
extended, concurrently with the consummation of the transaction or
agreement to extend credit, a clear statement in writing setting forth
the finance charges, expressed in dollars, rate of interest, or monthly
rate of charge, or a combination thereof, to be borne by such person in
connection with such extension of credit as originally scheduled.

**Source.** 1961, 245:7, eff. Aug. 30, 1961.

### Section 399-B:2-a

 **399-B:2-a Exception. –** A finance charge statement or disclosure
in a consumer credit transaction, as defined in RSA 358-K:1, V, that is
made in conformity with Federal Reserve Board Regulation Z, Truth in
Lending, 12 CFR 226, as amended, or Regulation M, 12 CFR 213, as
amended, shall be deemed to fulfill the finance charge statement
requirements of RSA 399-B:2.

**Source.** 1997, 193:2. 1999, 16:6, eff. June 26, 1999.

### Section 399-B:3

 **399-B:3 Prohibition. –** No person shall extend credit in
contravention of this chapter.

**Source.** 1961, 245:7, eff. Aug. 30, 1961.

### Section 399-B:4

 **399-B:4 Penalty. –** Whoever wilfully violates any provision of
RSA 399-B shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or
guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1961, 245:7. 1973, 528:272, eff. at 11:59 P.M., Oct. 31,
1973.

### Section 399-B:5

 **399-B:5 Additional Purchases. –** Where a buyer makes any
subsequent purchases of consumer goods from a seller from whom he has
previously purchased goods or services under one or more conditional
sales contracts, and the amounts under the contract or contracts have
not been fully paid, the subsequent purchases may be included in and
consolidated with one or more of the prior contract or contracts. A
memorandum of the additional purchases shall be prepared by the seller,
inserted in or attached to the seller's counterpart of the contract and
shall set forth:
                                             
 (a) A description of the additional goods or services so
purchased;
                                             
 (b) The consolidated total indebtedness of the buyer;
                                             
 (c) The finance charge stating either as the additional amount on
the subsequent purchase or as the total amount on the consolidated
contract;
                                             
 (d) The revised installment payments. A copy of the memorandum
shall be furnished to the buyer.

**Source.** 1965, 376:1, eff. Sept. 6, 1965.

### Section 399-B:6

 **399-B:6 Repossession Procedure. –** Prior to or after any action
by the seller or his agents to repossess consumer goods under the terms
of any such conditional sales contract or contracts involving both
previous and subsequent purchases which have not been fully paid, the
seller must retroactively allocate all payments received under the
contract or contracts to the various purchases in the same proportion or
ratio as the original cash prices of the various purchases bear to one
another. However, the amount of initial or down payment involved in each
purchase shall be allocated in its entirety to such purchase. The result
of such allocation shall be reported to the buyer who has the right to
complete payment on any of the purchases consolidated in the conditional
sales contract within 15 days from receipt of the allocation report from
the seller. Any purchases upon which the payments have been so completed
are exempt from repossession by the seller. Provisions of this section
do not apply to sales involving equipment, parts, or other merchandise
attached or affixed to goods previously purchased or repairs or services
rendered by the seller in connection therewith at the buyer's request.

**Source.** 1965, 376:1, eff. Sept. 6, 1965.

### Section 399-B:7

 **399-B:7 Not to Apply to Liens Upon Real Estate. –** Conditional
sales contracts do not include any instrument creating or involving
liens against real estate or any interest in real estate.

**Source.** 1965, 376:1, eff. Sept. 6, 1965.

### Section 399-B:8

 **399-B:8 Definition. –** "Consumer goods'' means goods bought for
use primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, as
distinguished from goods bought for commercial, industrial, or business
use, and does not include motor vehicles, accessories, equipment, parts,
or repairs, the installment sales and financing of which are regulated
by RSA 361-A.

**Source.** 1965, 376:1, eff. Sept. 6, 1965.
