---
title: 'CHAPTER 399-C LENDERS OF MONEY'
---

TITLE XXXVI
                                             
PAWNBROKERS AND MONEYLENDERS
============================

CHAPTER 399-C
                                             
LENDERS OF MONEY
----------------

### Section 399-C:1

 **399-C:1 Additional Fee or Charge for Substitution of Insurance
Policy Prohibited. –** It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership,
association, corporation, unincorporated organization, bank, or credit
union, whether federally or state chartered, that makes a loan secured
by real or personal property in connection with such a transaction, to
make any separate or additional charge to, or to require any fee from,
or to require the payment of any money by an insurance company,
insurance agency, borrower, mortgagor, or purchaser, other than the
insurance premium on insurance written as additional security for the
loan, for the substitution by a borrower, a mortgagor, or a purchaser of
one insurance policy on the property for an existing policy on the
property, when the existing or substituted policy is provided through an
insurance company or insurance agent or broker licensed to do business
in this state. However, nothing in this section prevents the payment of
interest which may be charged on premium loans or premium advancements
in accordance with the security agreement.

**Source.** 1969, 79:1, eff. June 3, 1969. 2015, 272:23, eff. Oct. 1,
2015.

### Section 399-C:1-a

 **399-C:1-a Inducement Check Disclosure. –** No person subject to
the provisions of this chapter shall induce any potential borrower who
is not a loan customer of the person to enter into a closed-end loan
agreement, by delivering in the first instance a negotiable check for
such loan to such potential borrower, without including the following
information clearly printed on the endorsement side of the check:
                                             
 I. A statement which reads, "By endorsing this check, you become
legally liable for repaying all moneys, including interest, as specified
in the following loan agreement/disclosure statement'';
                                             
 II. The amount financed;
                                             
 III. The annual percentage rate;
                                             
 IV. The number of installments; and
                                             
 V. The amount of each installment payment.

**Source.** 2015, 272:24, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 399-C:2

 **399-C:2 Penalty. –** Whoever violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty
of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1969, 79:1. 1973, 529:96, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.
