---
title: 'CHAPTER 311-B AUCTIONEERS'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 311-B
                                             
AUCTIONEERS
--------------

### Section 311-B:1

 **311-B:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Auction'' means the sale of real or personal property, or both,
in which the sale price of the property offered is increased by
competitive bids until the highest accepted bidder becomes the
purchaser.
                                             
 II. "Auctioneer'' means a person who engages in, or who by
advertising or otherwise holds himself or herself out as being available
to engage in, the solicitation or the acceptance of competitive bids for
the purchase of real or personal property, or both, at auction, or
otherwise engages in auctioneering.
                                             
 III. "Auctioneering'' means the business or act of selling for
another real, personal, or mixed property by auction for compensation by
fee, commission, or other exchange of value.
                                             
 IV. "Authorized business organization'' means any entity organized
for gain or profit and carrying on any business activity within the
state of New Hampshire which is:
                                             
 (a) A corporation or business association having at least one
officer holding a valid license issued by the board;
                                             
 (b) A partnership in which at least one partner holds a valid
license issued by the board;
                                             
 (c) A limited liability company in which the managing member
holds a valid license issued by the board;
                                             
 (d) A sole proprietorship or sole-shareholder corporation in
which the sole proprietor or sole shareholder holds a valid license
issued by the board; or
                                             
 (e) A trust in which at least one trustee holds a valid license
issued by the board.
                                             
 V. "Board'' means the state board of auctioneers established under
RSA 311-B:2.

**Source.** 1969, 469:1. 2010, 291:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 311-B:2

 **311-B:2 State Board of Auctioneers. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a state board of auctioneers
consisting of 5 members, including 4 auctioneers and one public member,
appointed by the governor with the advice of the council for terms of 5
years. Terms shall expire March 1. All board members shall be residents
of this state and no board member shall serve more than 2 consecutive
terms.
                                             
 II. The public member of the board shall be a person who is not, and
never was, a member of the auctioneering profession or the spouse of any
such person, and who does not have, and never has had, a material
financial interest in either the provision of such professional services
or an activity directly related thereto, including the representation of
the board or profession for a fee at any time during the 5 years
preceding appointment.
                                             
 III. The board shall elect a chairman and secretary from among its
members. The secretary shall quarterly submit minutes of board meetings
and reports of board activities to the secretary of state.
                                             
 IV. All board members shall serve without compensation.

**Source.** 1969, 469:1. 1981, 491:3, eff. July 1, 1981.

### Section 311-B:3

 **311-B:3 Rulemaking Authority. –**
                                             
 I. The board, with the approval of the secretary of state, shall
adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (a) Procedures for initial, renewal, and reinstatement
licensure;
                                             
 (b) The qualifications of applicants for initial, renewal, and
reinstatement licensure in addition to those requirements set by
statute, and the means to be used by applicants to demonstrate good
professional character;
                                             
 (c) The establishment of all fees required or authorized under
this chapter;
                                             
 (d) The form and content of applications for initial, renewal,
and reinstatement licensure, including a notarized affidavit of
completeness and accuracy;
                                             
 (e) Ethical and professional standards required to be met by each
holder of a license under this chapter;
                                             
 (f) How disciplinary actions by the board shall be implemented
for violations of these standards and for misconduct by licensees;
                                             
 (g) Procedures for the conduct of hearings consistent with the
requirements of due process; and
                                             
 (h) Establishing eligibility for certificates of authorization
issued under RSA 311-B:4, III.
                                             
 II. The board, with the approval of the secretary of state, may
adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (a) Required maintenance of competence including requirements for
continuing education;
                                             
 (b) Procedures for submitting complaints about licensees to the
board and for the board's management of such complaints;
                                             
 (c) Board approval of auctioneering educational programs; and
                                             
 (d) Standards governing auctioneering apprenticeships.

**Source.** 1969, 469:1. 1981, 491:4. 1987, 274:1. 2010, 291:2, eff.
Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 311-B:4

 **311-B:4 Acts Prohibited; Use of Name by Business Organization.
–**
                                             
 I. It shall be unlawful for any person physically located in the
state of New Hampshire to:
                                             
 (a) Knowingly engage in, or offer to engage in, auctioneering for
a fee, commission, or other consideration unless such natural person has
a valid license under this chapter or such other person is an authorized
business organization.
                                             
 (b) Knowingly make any verbal, written, electronic, or other
representation that such person is an auctioneer or is able to perform
auctioneering, unless such natural person has a valid license under this
chapter or such other person is an authorized business organization.
                                             
 (c) Recklessly make any verbal, written, electronic, or other
representation which would lead a reasonable person to believe that the
natural person making the representation is currently licensed as an
auctioneer under this chapter or such other person is an authorized
business organization.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding subparagraph I(a), an apprentice auctioneer
employed by a licensed auctioneer may engage in auctioneering under the
direct supervision of the licensed auctioneer.
                                             
 III. The secretary of state shall not issue a certificate of
incorporation to an applicant for incorporation or for registration as a
foreign business organization which includes the words "auction,''
"auctioneer,'' or "auctioneering'' or any modification or derivative
thereof in its corporate or business name or which includes the practice
of auctioneering among the objectives for which it is established unless
the board shall have issued, with respect to such applicant, a
certificate of authorization, a copy of which shall have been presented
to the secretary of state. The board shall issue such a certificate only
to an authorized business organization. The secretary of state shall
decline to register any trade name or service mark which includes such
words or modifications or derivatives thereof in its firm or business
name except for trade names and service marks of business entities which
have presented to the secretary of state proof that they qualify as
authorized business organizations under this chapter.

**Source.** 1969, 469:1. 1981, 491:5. 2010, 291:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 311-B:4-a

 **311-B:4-a Cease and Desist Orders. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever the board has reasonable cause to believe that any
person is engaging in the business of auctioneering without obtaining a
license as provided in this chapter or without being an authorized
business organization under this chapter, or has engaged or is about to
engage in any act or practice constituting a violation of this chapter,
or any rule or order under this chapter, the board may, in addition to
all actions provided for in this chapter, enter an order requiring such
person to cease and desist from such violation. Delivery of such order
shall be by hand or registered mail at the principal office of the
licensee or other person. The order shall be calculated to give
reasonable notice of the rights of the person to request a hearing on
the order and shall state the reasons for the entry of the order. A
hearing shall be held not later than 10 days after the request for such
hearing is received by the board after which and within 20 days of the
date of the hearing the board shall issue a further order vacating the
cease and desist order or making it permanent as the facts require. All
hearings shall comply with RSA 541-A. If the person to whom a cease and
desist order is issued fails to appear at the hearing after being duly
notified, the person shall be deemed in default, and the proceeding may
be decided against the person upon consideration of the cease and desist
order, the allegations of which may be deemed to be true. If the person
to whom a cease and desist order is issued fails to request a hearing
within 30 calendar days of receipt of such order, then such person shall
likewise be deemed in default, and the order shall, on the thirty-first
day, become permanent, and shall remain in full force and effect until
and unless later modified or vacated by the board, for good cause
shown.
                                             
 II. If any person refuses to obey such order, an action may be
brought by the board or by the attorney general on the board's behalf in
any superior court in this state to enjoin such person from engaging in
or continuing such violation or from doing any act or acts in
furtherance of such violation. In any such action, an order or judgment
may be entered awarding a temporary or permanent injunction, and
awarding the board or the attorney general or both costs in bringing
such action. The court shall have the power to enforce obedience to such
injunction, in addition to all the court's customary powers, by a fine
not exceeding 
                                             $10,000 or by imprisonment, or both.

**Source.** 2010, 291:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 311-B:5

 **311-B:5 Qualifications; Application. –** The board shall grant
licensure to any applicant who:
                                             
 I. Shall have attained the age of 18 years by the date the board
receives the application;
                                             
 II. Submits professional references or recommendations that comply
with other standards specified by rule, certifying that the applicant is
trustworthy and competent to auction real, personal, and mixed property
in such a manner as to safeguard the interests of the public. Each such
recommendation shall set forth the writer's name, address, and
occupation, the extent of the writer's acquaintanceship with the
applicant, the writer's familiarity with the applicant's past business
experience and dealings, and any additional knowledge of the applicant's
background upon which the writer bases the recommendation;
                                             
 III. Pays the initial licensure fee;
                                             
 IV. Files a bond as required under RSA 311-B:8;
                                             
 V. Has good professional character;
                                             
 VI. Meets the eligibility standards established by the board through
rulemaking;
                                             
 VII. Pays the examination fee specified by the board through
rulemaking if the examination is one developed or administered by the
board; and
                                             
 VIII. Passes an examination administered by the board or an
examination administered by another entity and approved by the board
through rulemaking.

**Source.** 1969, 469:1. 1981, 491:6. 1987, 274:2. 2010, 291:5, eff.
Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 311-B:6

 **311-B:6 Nonresidents. –** The board may grant an auctioneer's
license to any applicant who is similarly licensed in any other state,
provided the other state's licensing requirements are substantially
equivalent to or higher than those of this state.

**Source.** 1969, 469:1. 1981, 491:7. 2010, 291:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 311-B:7

 **311-B:7 Application. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 291:14, eff. Jan. 1,
2011.
                                             ]

### Section 311-B:8

 **311-B:8 Bond. –** No license shall be granted until the applicant
has filed a bond with the secretary of state in the sum of 
                                             $25,000,
with sureties approved by the secretary of state, conditioned that he or
she will properly account for and deliver to the person entitled, all
moneys and things of value coming into his or her hands as an auctioneer
and will conform to the laws relating to such auctions. All bonds
required under this chapter shall be purchased from a reputable company
authorized to do business in this state.

**Source.** 1969, 469:1. 1981, 491:8. 1987, 274:3. 2010, 291:7, eff.
Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 311-B:9

 **311-B:9 Local Regulation. –** This chapter shall not be deemed to
nullify or prevent a municipal corporation from collecting an additional
fee from auctioneers licensed under this chapter.

**Source.** 1969, 469:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 311-B:10

 **311-B:10 Renewal; Reinstatement. –**
                                             
 I. An auctioneer license shall be valid for 2 years from the date of
issuance, but if the board fails to act on a complete and timely
application for license renewal before the expiration date of the
license, the license shall remain valid until the board acts on the
application.
                                             
 II. The board shall renew the licenses of those who have met any
maintenance of competence or continuing education requirements
established by the board, made a timely application for renewal of
licensure, and paid the renewal fee.
                                             
 III. The board is authorized to reinstate licenses on terms
established by the board through rulemaking in accordance with RSA
541-A, and to charge a fee for such reinstatement.

**Source.** 1969, 469:1. 1977, 563:25. 1981, 491:9. 1987, 274:5. 2010,
291:8, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 311-B:11

 **311-B:11 Disciplinary Action. –**
                                             
 I. The board may undertake disciplinary proceedings:
                                             
 (a) Upon its own initiative; or
                                             
 (b) Upon written complaint of any person which charges that a
person licensed by the board has committed misconduct under paragraph II
and which specifies the grounds for the complaint.
                                             
 II. Misconduct sufficient to support disciplinary proceedings under
this section shall include:
                                             
 (a) The practice of fraud or deceit in procuring or attempting to
procure a license to practice under this chapter;
                                             
 (b) Conviction of a felony;
                                             
 (c) Violation of the code of ethics established by the board
through rulemaking in accordance with RSA 541-A;
                                             
 (d) Negligent or willful acts performed in a manner inconsistent
with the interests of persons relying on the expertise of the licensee;
                                             
 (e) Addiction to the use of alcohol or other habit-forming drugs
to a degree which renders the person unfit to practice under this
chapter;
                                             
 (f) Repeated violation of the provisions of this chapter or the
rules adopted by the board; or
                                             
 (g) Suspension or revocation without reinstatement of a license,
similar to one issued under this chapter, in another jurisdiction.
                                             
 III. Each individual sale or act in connection with the conduct of
an auction in violation of any provision of this chapter or any rules
adopted by the board shall constitute a separate instance of misconduct.
Upon a finding of misconduct, the board may impose one or more of the
following disciplinary sanctions:
                                             
 (a) A fine of not more than 
                                             $10,000.
                                             
 (b) A letter of reprimand.
                                             
 (c) Placement of the auctioneer on probation for a period of time
and subject to conditions as the board may specify.
                                             
 (d) Payment of restitution to each consumer negatively affected
by the prohibited act. Proof of such restitution shall be a signed and
notarized release executed by the consumer or the consumer's estate.
                                             
 (e) Suspension of a license for a period of time established by
the board, with or without automatic reinstatement.
                                             
 (f) Revocation of a license.
                                             
 (g) Requiring the licensee to participate in a program of
continuing education in the area or areas in which he or she has been
found deficient or requiring the person to retake the licensing exam, or
both.
                                             
 IV. The board is authorized to add to the order imposing
disciplinary sanctions an order for the licensee to pay the costs of
investigation in the disciplinary matter.
                                             
 V. The board may in its own name request the attorney general to
seek injunctive relief in the courts of general jurisdiction to restrain
any violation or anticipated violation of this section or the board's
rules. When seeking injunctive relief the board may, with the prior
approval and supervision of the attorney general, employ an attorney for
assistance and representation.

**Source.** 1969, 469:1. 1981, 491:10. 1987, 274:6. 2010, 291:9, eff.
Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 311-B:11-a

 **311-B:11-a Hearings. –**
                                             
 I. The board is authorized to perform investigations, to engage in
both disciplinary and nondisciplinary proceedings and to settle both
disciplinary and nondisciplinary matters. The board is authorized to
issue subpoenas for persons and things to assist in its investigations,
proceedings, and settlements.
                                             
 II. The board shall hold a hearing or take other action on each
written complaint of licensee misconduct submitted to the board, no
later than 3 months after the date that notice of a complaint was
received by the licensee from the board, unless otherwise agreed to by
the board, the licensee, and the complainant. All complaints shall be
objectively received and fairly heard by the board.
                                             
 III. Upon receiving a complaint of misconduct by a licensee, the
board shall respond to the complaint by denying jurisdiction over the
matter complained about or opening an investigation into the matter. The
fact and nature of the investigation and its results shall be held
confidential from the public, excluding the licensee, except as they
appear during disciplinary proceedings.
                                             
 IV. Rehearings and appeals from a decision of the board relative to
disciplinary action shall be in accordance with RSA 541.

**Source.** 1981, 491:11. 1987, 274:7. 2010, 291:10, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 311-B:12

 **311-B:12 Penalties. –** Any person violating the provisions of RSA
311-B:4, I and not exempt under RSA 311-B:13 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other
person.

**Source.** 1969, 469:1. 1973, 528:196. 2010, 291:11, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 311-B:13

 **311-B:13 Exceptions. –**
                                             
 I. This chapter shall not apply to any auctions held by order or
judgment of any court of the state or the United States or by any
officer of a municipality, county, state of United States, foreclosure
sales by mortgagees, lienholders, or holders of any other kinds of
security interests in real, personal, or mixed property or to sales
conducted or made by sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, constables, collectors
of taxes, executors, administrators, guardians, conservators, receivers,
assignees under voluntary assignments for the benefit of creditors or
insurers, or by any other person required by law to sell real, personal,
or mixed property, or as permitted under any other state or federal
law.
                                             
 II. Any resident member of a charitable, educational, religious or
other nonprofit organization within the state may conduct a charity
auction without a license for that organization, so long as the
individual is not a member of the organization solely for the purpose of
conducting the charity auction, and so long as the individual receives
no compensation or other consideration for conducting the auction.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. Any individual may, without being licensed, sell his or her own
personal property through competitive bidding, using any electronic or
non-electronic means.
                                             
 V. Any individual may, without being licensed, sell the personal
property of another individual utilizing a service that assists such
individual in accessing an online Internet marketplace, who does not
take physical or legal possession of goods being sold, and who does not
collect or transmit payment for transactions except by a secure money
transmitter or other online payment transaction method. Such an
individual may accept an associated fee, provided that such individual
does not:
                                             
 (a) Represent by any verbal statement, sign, letterhead, card, or
any other way that he or she is an auctioneer or able to perform
auctioneering services; or
                                             
 (b) Use or otherwise assume in conjunction with the personal
name, or advertise any title or description tending to convey the
impression that such person is an auctioneer licensed under this
chapter.

**Source.** 1969, 469:1. 1987, 274:8. 2010, 291:12, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 311-B:14

 **311-B:14 Disposition of Revenue. –** All moneys collected under
this chapter shall be paid into the general fund and are appropriated
therefrom to the secretary of state for the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1969, 469:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.
