---
title: CHAPTER 311 ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELORS
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 311
                                             
ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELORS
------------------------

### Section 311:1

 **311:1 Right to Appear, Etc. –** A party in any cause or proceeding
may appear, plead, prosecute or defend in his or her proper person, that
is, pro se, or may be represented by any citizen of good character. For
the purposes of this section, a citizen shall be presumed to be of good
character unless demonstrated otherwise.

**Source.** RS 177:1. CS 187:1. GS 199:1. GL 218:1. PS 213:1. PL 325:1.
RL 381:1. RSA 311:1. 1996, 117:2. 1999, 251:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 311:2

 **311:2 Admission to Practice. –** Any citizen of the age of 18
years, of good moral character and suitable qualifications, on
application to the supreme court shall be admitted to practice as an
attorney.

**Source.** RS 177:2. CS 187:2. GS 199:2. 1872, 36:1. GL 218:2. PS
213:2. PL 325:2. RL 381:2. RSA 311:2. 1973, 72:63, eff. June 3, 1973.

### Section 311:3

 **311:3 Without Examination. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 328:3, I, eff.
Aug. 16, 1981.
                                             ]

### Section 311:4

 **311:4 Powers. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 328:3, II, eff. Aug. 16,
1981.
                                             ]

### Section 311:5

 **311:5 Limitation. –** No person shall act as attorney in any cause
in which the person has acted as judge.

**Source.** RS 177:8. CS 187:8. GS 199:8. GL 218:8. PS 213:8. PL 325:5.
RL 381:5. RSA 311:5. 1996, 117:3, eff. May 15, 1996.

### Section 311:6

 **311:6 Oath. –** Every attorney admitted to practice shall take and
subscribe the oaths to support the constitution of this state and of the
United States, and the oath of office in the following form: You
solemnly swear or affirm that you will do no falsehood, nor consent that
any be done in the court, and if you know of any, that you will give
knowledge thereof to the justices of the court, or some of them, that it
may be reformed; that you will not wittingly or willingly promote, sue
or procure to be sued any false or unlawful suit, nor consent to the
same; that you will delay no person for lucre or malice, and will act in
the office of an attorney within the court according to the best of your
learning and discretion, and with all good fidelity as well to the court
as to your client. *So help you God or under the pains and penalty of
perjury.* The supreme court shall have authority to determine by court
rule the manner in which the oaths shall be administered.

**Source.** RS 177:5. CS 187:5. GS 199:5. GL 218:5. PS 213:5. PL 325:6.
RL 381:6. RSA 311:6. 1995, 277:3. 2014, 204:46, eff. July 11, 2014.

### Section 311:7

 **311:7 Prohibition. –** No person shall be permitted commonly to
practice as an attorney in court unless he has been admitted by the
court and taken the oath prescribed in RSA 311:6.

**Source.** RS 177:6. CS 187:6. GS 199:6. GL 218:6. PS 213:6. PL 325:7.
RL 381:7.

Unauthorized Practice of Law
----------------------------

### Section 311:7-a

 **311:7-a Petition for Injunction. –**
                                             
 I. Upon the attorney general's own information or upon complaint of
any person, including any judge or any organized bar association in this
state, the attorney general may maintain an action for injunctive relief
in the supreme or superior court against any person who renders, offers
to render, or holds himself or herself out as rendering any service
which constitutes the unauthorized practice of the law. Any organized
bar association in this state may intervene in the action, at any stage
of the proceeding, for good cause shown.
                                             
 II. The action may also be maintained by the bar association of the
state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1967, 290:1. 1996, 117:4, eff. May 15, 1996.

### Section 311:7-b

 **311:7-b Investigation by Attorney General. –**
                                             
 I. The attorney general may investigate any complaint of
unauthorized practice of the law and the attorney general, or a deputy
attorney general or an assistant attorney general designated by the
attorney general, may subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance,
examine them under oath, and require the production of any relevant
documentary evidence.
                                             
 II. The laws relating to the attendance of witnesses in civil
actions and the payment of their fees and expenses to those witnesses
shall apply to investigations made by the attorney general.
                                             
 III. If a person fails or refuses to obey a subpoena or to testify
as to any material matter regarding which the person may be
interrogated, the superior court, upon application by the attorney
general, may issue to the person an order requiring the person to appear
before the attorney general, or a deputy attorney general or an
assistant attorney general designated by the attorney general, to
produce documentary evidence or testify. Failure to obey the order of
the court may be punished by the court as a contempt of court.
                                             
 IV. When requested, public officers, their assistants, clerks or
employees shall furnish to the attorney general, the deputy or an
assistant attorney general designated by the attorney general all
information and assistance.
                                             
 V. Investigations under this section shall be confidential. Any
person participating in the investigation who, except as required in the
discharge of the person's official duties, discloses to any person,
other than to a person under investigation, the name of any person under
investigation or any witness examined, or any other information obtained
in the investigation is guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                             
 VI. Every person whose conduct is investigated under this section
shall be furnished with a written specification of the issues which are
to be considered, and shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
and be heard upon the specified issues.

**Source.** 1967, 290:1. 1996, 117:4, eff. May 15, 1996.

### Section 311:7-c

 **311:7-c Remedies and Procedures Additional to Those Now Existing.
–** The remedies and procedures provided in this subdivision are in
addition to and not in substitution for other available remedies and
procedures.

**Source.** 1967, 290:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1967.

### Section 311:7-d

 **311:7-d Definition. –** The word "person'' as used in this
subdivision means an individual, corporation, partnership or
association.

**Source.** 1967, 290:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1967.

### Section 311:7-e

 **311:7-e Short Title. –** This subdivision may be cited as the
Model Act Providing Remedies for the Unauthorized Practice of Law.

**Source.** 1967, 290:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1967.

### Section 311:7-f

 **311:7-f Severability. –** If any provision of this subdivision or
the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications hereof
which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application,
and to this end the provisions of this subdivision are severable.

**Source.** 1967, 290:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1967.

State Bar Association
---------------------

### Section 311:7-g

 **311:7-g State Bar Association Membership; Vote Required. –**
                                             
 I. The supreme court, pursuant to its power to regulate the practice
of law under this chapter and its continuing supervisory authority over
attorneys practicing before courts of this state, may assess fees for
the purpose of regulating the practice of law and for maintaining a
professional conduct committee.
                                             
 II. The supreme court may require all persons engaged in the
practice of law in this state to be members of the New Hampshire Bar
Association; provided that the members of the Bar Association have
approved the requirement pursuant to paragraph III.
                                             
 III. The board of governors of the New Hampshire Bar Association
shall place on the ballot with the election of officers of the
association, the following question: "Shall membership in the New
Hampshire Bar Association be required for all attorneys licensed to
practice in this state?'' An affirmative vote of a majority of those
voting on the question, shall allow for the requirement by the supreme
court under paragraph II. Approval by the membership under this
paragraph shall be valid for a 5-year period beginning on the date of
the affirmative vote.

**Source.** 2003, 250:1, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 311:7-h

 **311:7-h Bar Association Legislative Activities. –**
                                             
 I. The New Hampshire Bar Association, if membership is mandatory for
attorneys under RSA 311:7-g, shall be prohibited from using any part of
dues paid by its members for the purpose of lobbying or influencing the
general court on any matter, except as provided in paragraph III.
                                             
 II. If membership in the New Hampshire Bar Association is mandatory
for attorneys under RSA 311:7-g, no person shall be permitted to engage
in legislative activities on behalf of the New Hampshire Bar Association
for the purpose of lobbying or influencing the general court on any
matter, except as provided in paragraph III.
                                             
 III. The Bar Association may use a part of dues paid by its members,
and may engage a person to lobby or influence the legislature on its
behalf provided the Association:
                                             
 (a) Limits its activities before the general court to those
matters which are directly related to the regulation of the legal
profession and improving the quality of legal services available to the
people of the state. The scope of such permissible activities shall be
narrowly defined; and
                                             
 (b) Has determined that substantial unanimity exists within the
bar as a whole in agreement with the position taken on a matter.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in the section shall prevent officers and members of the
Bar Association from appearing before the general court to express their
views as individuals, as members of voluntary associations, or as
representatives of clients.
                                             
 V. Any member of the New Hampshire Bar Association, if membership is
mandatory for attorneys under RSA 311:7-g, may refuse to pay that
portion of the Bar Association dues that are used for lobbying or
influencing the legislature or other political matters.

**Source.** 2003, 250:1, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 311:7-i

 **311:7-i Severability. –** If any provision of this subdivision or
the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications hereof
which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application,
and to this end the provisions of this subdivision are severable.

**Source.** 2003, 250:1, eff. July 1, 2003.

Regulation of Practice of Law
-----------------------------

### Section 311:8

 **311:8 Disbarment, Etc. –** The supreme court shall inquire in a
summary manner into any charges of fraud, malpractice, or contempt of
court against an attorney, and, upon satisfactory evidence of the
attorney's guilt, shall suspend such attorney from practice, or may
remove the attorney from office.

**Source.** RS 177:7. CS 187:7. GS 199:7. GL 218:7. 1889, 20:1. PS
213:7. PL 325:8. RL 381:8. RSA 311:8. 1996, 117:5, eff. May 15, 1996.

### Section 311:9

 **311:9 Unauthorized Practice Prohibited. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1967,
290:2, eff. Aug. 26, 1967.
                                             ]

### Section 311:10

 **311:10 Effect of Suspension, Etc. –** No person while suspended
from practice pursuant to RSA 311:8, or until the person's restoration
to office, shall be permitted to practice as an attorney before any
court or magistrate, or elsewhere; and any writ or other process made by
such person for another, while thus disqualified, shall be void.

**Source.** RS 177:7. CS 187:7. GS 199:7. GL 218:7. 1889, 20:1. PS
213:7. PL 325:9. RL 381:9. RSA 311:10. 1996, 117:6, eff. May 15, 1996.

### Section 311:11

 **311:11 Practice by Corporations Prohibited. –** No corporation
shall practice or appear as an attorney in any court in the state or
before any judicial body or hold itself out to the public or advertise
as being entitled to practice law, and no corporation shall draw
agreements, or other legal documents not relating to its lawful
business, or draw wills, or practice law, or give legal advice or legal
information as an attorney, or hold itself out in any manner as being
entitled to do any of the foregoing acts, by or through any person
orally or by advertisement, letter, or circular; provided that the
foregoing prohibition shall not prevent a corporation from employing an
attorney in regard to its own affairs or in any litigation to which it
is or may be a party. Any person violating any provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a felony. Any natural person, including every
officer, agent or employee of any such corporation, who, on its behalf,
directly or indirectly engages in any of the acts herein prohibited or
assists such corporation to do such prohibited acts shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1935, 34:1. RL 381:11. RSA 311:11. 1973, 529:66, eff. Oct.
31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 311:11-a

 **311:11-a Exception. –** The word "corporation'' as used in RSA
311:11 shall not include a corporation of attorneys organized as a
professional association under the provisions of RSA 294-A.

**Source.** 1970, 2:1, eff. June 8, 1970.

### Section 311:12

 **311:12 Restraint of Violations. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1967, 290:2, eff.
Aug. 26, 1967.
                                             ]

### Section 311:13

 **311:13 Lien on Verdict. –** From the commencement of an action,
bill in equity or other proceeding in any court, the filing of a
counterclaim or plea in set-off or recoupment, or appearance in any
proceeding before any state or federal department, board, or commission,
the attorney who appears for a client in such proceeding shall have a
lien for reasonable fees and expenses upon the client's cause of action,
upon the judgment decree or other order in the client's favor entered or
made in such proceeding, and upon the proceeds derived therefrom. The
lien cannot be affected by any settlement between the parties before or
after the judgment decree or other order. Upon the request of the client
or the attorney, the court in which the proceeding is pending, or, if
the proceeding is not pending in a court, the superior court, may
determine and enforce the lien; provided that this section shall not
apply to matters arising under RSA 282-A and any case where the method
of determination of attorneys' fees is otherwise expressly provided by
statute.

**Source.** 1963, 89:1. 1996, 117:7, eff. May 15, 1996.
