---
title: 'CHAPTER 314-A BODY ART'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 314-A
                                             
BODY ART
--------------

### Section 314-A:1

 **314-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Body piercing'' means the creation of an opening in human
tissue, except piercing of the ear lobe, through which jewelry or other
items are inserted.
                                             
 II. "Branding'' means a permanent mark made on human tissue by
burning with a hot iron or other instrument, excluding laser burning.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 IV. "Practitioner'' means a person who practices tattooing, body
piercing, or branding.
                                             
 V. "Tattoo'' means an indelible mark or figure fixed upon the
surface of the body by the insertion of pigment under the skin or by the
production of scars.

**Source.** 2002, 195:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 314-A:2

 **314-A:2 License Required; Fees. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be unlawful for any person to practice body piercing,
branding, or tattooing without a license, unless such person is exempt
under RSA 314-A:4.
                                             
 II. The fee for an initial license and a renewal license shall be

                                             $110. The license shall be renewed biennially on or before June 30 upon
payment of the 
                                             $110 renewal fee.
                                             
 III. Licenses shall be issued to any person who:
                                             
 (a) Makes application on a form prescribed by the commissioner;
                                             
 (b) Makes payment of fees required under RSA 314-A:6, III;
                                             
 (c) Has been practicing body piercing, branding, or tattooing in
an establishment, under the supervision of a person practicing body
piercing, branding, or tattooing in compliance with the applicable
statutes and rules of the state for not less than 3 years. Out-of-state
applicants shall provide proof of at least 3 years experience as a
licensed practitioner in another state; and
                                             
 (d) Has completed a course approved by the department in methods
and techniques for the proper sterilization of instruments and materials
used in body piercing, branding, or tattooing.

**Source.** 2002, 195:1. 2014, 167:44, eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 229:3,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 314-A:3

 **314-A:3 Apprenticeship. –** An apprentice license shall be issued
if an applicant is unable to comply with any of the provisions of RSA
314-A:2. A person shall remain an apprentice for at least one year and
until the supervising licensee attests that the apprentice is qualified
to become licensed.

**Source.** 2002, 195:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 314-A:4

 **314-A:4 Exemptions. –** This chapter does not apply to:
                                             
 I. Any person licensed by the New Hampshire board of medicine.
                                             
 II. A person or facility which performs only ear lobe piercing.

**Source.** 2002, 195:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 314-A:5

 **314-A:5 Renewal of License; Continuing Education Requirement. –**
Renewal of licenses shall be contingent upon the licensee's completion
of 3 hours of continuing education related to the practice of body
piercing, branding, or tattooing during the preceding year.

**Source.** 2002, 195:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 314-A:6

 **314-A:6 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules, under
RSA 541-A, relative to the practice of body piercing, branding, and
tattooing and the operations of tattoo and body piercing establishments.
Such rules shall include:
                                             
 I. Standards of hygiene to be met and maintained by establishments
and practitioners in order to receive and maintain a license to carry
out the practice of tattooing or body piercing, and the manner in which
records of period spore tests are to be maintained and reported. All
records shall be maintained for a minimum of 7 years.
                                             
 II. Procedures for granting, revoking, and reinstating a license.
                                             
 III. Fines and fees.
                                             
 IV. Inspection of body piercing, branding, and tattooing
establishments.
                                             
 V. The maintenance of records pertaining to parental consent for
minors, including names, dates of birth, type of identification used,
and any other evidence of parentage or guardianship.

**Source.** 2002, 195:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 314-A:7

 **314-A:7 Prohibited Acts. –** No practitioner shall:
                                             
 I. Use any piercing needle more than once, or use a tattooing needle
on more than one person.
                                             
 II. Fail to comply with any rule adopted pursuant to this chapter,
order of the commissioner, or any other provision of this chapter.
                                             
 III. Hire as an employee to practice body piercing, branding, or
tattooing, any person not licensed under this chapter.

**Source.** 2002, 195:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 314-A:8

 **314-A:8 Body Art on Minors Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. Branding and tattooing a person under the age of 18 is
prohibited.
                                             
 II. Body piercing a person under the age of 18 is prohibited without
consent of that person's parent or legal guardian.
                                             
 III. The consent required by paragraph II of this section shall be
satisfied only by the parent or legal guardian being physically present
at the time the body piercing is performed and, upon presenting evidence
of the person's status as parent or legal guardian, by signing a
document declaring that the person is the parent or legal guardian of
the minor on whom the piercing is to be performed. The consent shall
indicate the location of the piercing on the minor's body. Records shall
be maintained for a minimum of 7 years.

**Source.** 2002, 195:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 314-A:9

 **314-A:9 License Revocation or Suspension. –** After notice and
hearing the commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued under
this chapter if the licensee:
                                             
 I. Violates any provision of this chapter or rule or order adopted
or issued under it;
                                             
 II. Knowingly makes any false statement on any application or any
report required by the commissioner; or
                                             
 III. Fails to respond to any lawful inquiry of the commissioner.

**Source.** 2002, 195:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 314-A:10

 **314-A:10 Administrative Fines. –** The commissioner, after notice
and hearing pursuant to rules adopted under RSA 541-A, may impose fines
upon any person who violates any provision of this chapter or rules
adopted pursuant to this chapter, in an amount not to exceed 
                                             $2,000.
Rehearings and appeals from a decision of the commissioner shall be in
accordance with RSA 541. Any administrative fine imposed under this
section shall not preclude the imposition of further penalties or
administrative fines under this chapter.

**Source.** 2002, 195:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 314-A:11

 **314-A:11 Actions by Department. –** The department may, in
accordance with applicable law, maintain an action in the name of the
state against any person, partnership, association, or corporation for
practicing body piercing, marking, branding, or tattooing or operating
an establishment in which these activities are conducted within the
meaning of this chapter without first obtaining a license. In charging
any defendant in a complaint in such action, it shall be sufficient to
charge that such defendant did, upon a certain day and in a certain
county, practice or operate an establishment without having a license to
do so, without averring any further or more particular facts concerning
the same.

**Source.** 2002, 195:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.

### Section 314-A:12

 **314-A:12 Violations; Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who shall practice or attempt to practice body
piercing, branding, or tattooing in this state without a license shall
be guilty of a class A misdemeanor if a natural person or guilty of a
felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any other provision of this chapter, or
rules adopted pursuant to this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation
if a natural person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other person, for
a first offense. A person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural
person, or guilty of a felony if any other person, for any subsequent
offense. Each day of violation after the first day of violation shall be
considered a subsequent violation.

**Source.** 2002, 195:1. 2006, 76:4, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 314-A:13

 **314-A:13 Minimum Standards. –** The provisions of this chapter
represent minimum standards and shall not preclude any licensee from
voluntarily exceeding these standards with more stringent provisions.

**Source.** 2002, 195:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2003.
