---
title: CHAPTER 314 ELECTROLOGISTS
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 314
                                             
ELECTROLOGISTS
--------------

### Section 314:1

 **314:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. "Electrologist'' means any person who engages in electrology
for compensation, except the following persons:
                                             
 (a) A physician licensed to practice medicine in this state who
performs electrology in such practice.
                                             
 (b) A person who engages on behalf of a manufacturer or
distributor solely in demonstrating the use of any machine or other
article for the purpose of sale, without charge to the person who is the
subject of such demonstration.
                                             
 IV. "Electrology'' or "electrolysis'' means the process by which
hair is removed from the normal skin by the application of an electronic
current to the hair root by means of a needle or needles, whether the
process employs direct electric current or shortwave alternating
electric current.
                                             
 IV-a. "Executive director'' means the executive director of the
office of professional licensure and certification.
                                             
 V. "Office'' means the place of business kept open solely for the
business of electrology, or where equipment and facilities for the
practice of electrology for compensation are available, as may be
authorized by the department.

**Source.** 1994, 202:2. 1995, 310:154, 175. 2012, 171:15, eff. Aug. 10,
2012. 2015, 276:89; 276:108, XVIII, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 314:2

 **314:2 Powers and Duties of the Executive Director. –** The powers
and duties of the executive director shall include:
                                             
 I. Licensure of individuals to practice electrology, in accordance
with RSA 314:3.
                                             
 II. Renewal of licenses, in accordance with RSA 314:5.
                                             
 III. Denial, suspension or revocation of licenses, in accordance
with RSA 314:6.
                                             
 IV. The conduct of hearings relative to administrative fines and the
denial, suspension or revocation of licenses.
                                             
 V. Conducting investigations in accordance with RSA 314:9.
                                             
 VI. Adopting rules, in accordance with RSA 314:8.
                                             
 VII. Assessing administrative fines, in accordance with RSA 314:13.

**Source.** 1994, 202:2. 1995, 310:183. 2005, 262:1. 2009, 25:1, eff.
July 7, 2009. 2015, 276:90, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 314:2-a

 **314:2-a Electrology Advisory Committee. –** The executive director
shall establish the electrology advisory committee. The committee shall
consist of 3 electrologists who are licensees in the state of New
Hampshire. The members shall be appointed for 3 years, with initial
terms staggered so that the term of one member expires each year, and
shall hold office until successors are appointed. In no event shall a
member serve more than 3 consecutive terms. The committee shall:
                                             
 I. Conduct license competency examinations consisting of practical
demonstrations.
                                             
 II. Determine applicant performance on the competency examination.
                                             
 III. Advise the executive director regarding the implementation of
this chapter.
                                             
 IV. Receive compensation for travel expenses for committee meetings.

**Source.** 2005, 262:2. 2009, 25:2, eff. July 7, 2009. 2015, 276:90,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 314:3

 **314:3 Licensure. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be unlawful for any person to practice electrology in
this state without first obtaining a license, unless such person is
exempt under RSA 314:1, III.
                                             
 II. Except as provided in RSA 314:7, licenses issued by the
executive director shall be valid for a 2-year period.
                                             
 III. Licenses shall be issued to any person:
                                             
 (a) Upon application on a form prescribed by the executive
director;
                                             
 (b) Upon payment of fees required under RSA 314:10;
                                             
 (c) Who is a high school graduate and has had training of at
least 1,100 hours in a school of electrology approved by the executive
director;
                                             
 (d) Who satisfies any other condition for licensure, including
passing a competency examination, pursuant to rules adopted under RSA
314:8, III; and
                                             
 (e) Who demonstrates good professional character.
                                             
 IV. The executive director may grant a license to an individual who
has been registered or licensed as an electrologist under the laws of
another state which, in the opinion of the executive director, maintains
standards substantially equivalent to those of this state. Such
licensure shall not preclude completion of an application and payment of
appropriate fees.
                                             
 V. In the case of loss, mutilation or destruction of a license, the
executive director shall issue a duplicate license upon proof of facts
and payment of a fee in accordance with RSA 314:10, I.

**Source.** 1994, 202:2. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995. 2015, 276:90,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 314:4

 **314:4 Display of License. –** Any person who has been issued a
license under this chapter shall conspicuously display such license in
the office or offices identified on the license.

**Source.** 1994, 202:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 314:5

 **314:5 Renewal of License; Reinstatement; Continuing Education
Requirement. –** Licenses issued under this chapter shall be subject to
renewal every 2 years and shall lapse unless renewed or reinstated in
accordance with rules adopted by the executive director under RSA 314:8,
IV, and upon payment of any fees required under RSA 314:10. Applicants
for renewal shall also be required to complete 10 hours of continuing
education related to the practice of electrology during the prior 2
years; provided that 5 hours of such continuing education shall be in
didactic, live courses.

**Source.** 1994, 202:2. 1995, 310:183. 1998, 279:1. 2005, 262:3, eff.
July 1, 2005. 2015, 276:90, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 314:6

 **314:6 Denial, Suspension, or Revocation of License. –** The
executive director may deny, suspend or revoke a license if it is
determined after hearing that such applicant or licensee:
                                             
 I. Has made a materially false statement or concealed a material
fact in connection with application for licensure.
                                             
 II. Has had a license issued under this chapter revoked or suspended
previously.
                                             
 III. Has been found guilty of fraud or fraudulent practices, or has
used dishonest or misleading advertising.
                                             
 IV. Has practiced electrology in an office or offices other than as
stated on the license, or has not maintained the office or offices
according to rules adopted under RSA 314:8, VIII.
                                             
 V. Has violated ethical or professional standards for the practice
of electrology, as provided for in rules adopted under RSA 314:8, VII.
                                             
 VI. Has failed to comply with any other provision of this chapter or
any rules adopted by the executive director.

**Source.** 1994, 202:2. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995. 2015, 276:90,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 314:7

 **314:7 Administrative Hearings; Judicial Review. –**
                                             
 I. No license to practice electrology shall be denied, suspended or
revoked, or a fine levied, until after a hearing before the executive
director, which shall be held in accordance with RSA 541-A, and upon
written notice to the applicant or licensee.
                                             
 II. The executive director shall grant a hearing to an applicant or
licensee upon receipt of a request for a hearing made within 30 days
after receipt of an order of denial, revocation, suspension or fine by
the applicant or licensee.
                                             
 III. If the applicant or licensee fails to request a hearing within
30 days of receipt of the order of the executive director, the order
shall become final.
                                             
 IV. The executive director shall have the power to require the
attendance of witnesses and issue subpoenas duces tecum in the conduct
of such hearing.
                                             
 V. If a license is denied, revoked or suspended, no such license
shall be issued to such applicant or former licensee for at least 6
months, except in the discretion of the executive director.
                                             
 VI. The executive director shall have the power to subpoena any
person in this state, or document, record or other relevant evidence.
                                             
 VII. Rehearings and appeals of an order of the executive director to
deny, suspend or revoke a license or impose a fine shall be made under
RSA 541.

**Source.** 1994, 202:2. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995. 2015, 276:90,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 314:8

 **314:8 Rulemaking. –** The executive director shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The license application form and content, and the license
application procedures.
                                             
 II. The qualifications of applicants for licensure under RSA 314:3.
                                             
 III. The content and conduct of written and practical competency
examinations.
                                             
 IV. The application form, content and procedure for a renewal or
reinstatement of a license to practice electrology, in accordance with
RSA 314:5.
                                             
 V. Reciprocity.
                                             
 VI. A schedule of fees, in accordance with RSA 314:10.
                                             
 VII. Ethical and professional standards required to be met by
licensees.
                                             
 VIII. Offices, including structures, equipment, and sanitation
including required testing.
                                             
 IX. The conduct of investigations, in accordance with RSA 314:9.
                                             
 X. A schedule of administrative fines pursuant to RSA 314:13 for the
violation of the provisions of this chapter or rules adopted pursuant to
this chapter.
                                             
 XI. Procedures for notice and hearing prior to denial, suspension or
revocation of a license, and the imposition of administrative fines.
                                             
 XII. Procedures for the handling of complaints.
                                             
 XIII. Procedures for the approval or denial of an application.
                                             
 XIV. Procedures for suspension or revocation of a license.
                                             
 XV. Procedures for appeal of decisions of the executive director
made pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision and rules adopted
pursuant to this subdivision.
                                             
 XVI. Approval of schools of electrology, to include curriculum,
equipment, and instructor qualifications.
                                             
 XVII. The appointment, qualifications, responsibilities, and
requirements of the electrology advisory committee.
                                             
 XVIII. Office inspections for new licensees.
                                             
 XIX. Waivers of applicable rules.

**Source.** 1994, 202:2. 1995, 310:183. 2005, 262:4. 2009, 25:3. 2012,
171:16, eff. Aug. 10, 2012. 2015, 276:90, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 314:9

 **314:9 Investigations. –** The executive director may investigate
any complaints raised with regard to any individual licensed under this
chapter.

**Source.** 1994, 202:2. 1995, 310:183. 2005, 262:5. 2009, 25:4, eff.
July 7, 2009. 2015, 276:90, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 314:10

 **314:10 Fees. –**
                                             
 I. The fee for an initial biennial license and for renewal of the
biennial license issued under this chapter shall be 
                                             $110. The executive
director shall establish by rule a schedule of fees for applications,
examinations, and license replacement.
                                             
 II. Fees collected shall be appropriated to the department and used
to carry out the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1994, 202:2. 1995, 310:175, 183. 2014, 167:12, eff. July 1,
2014. 2015, 276:90, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 314:11

 **314:11 Deceptive Advertising. –** No individual licensed to
practice electrology or any other individual shall use or cause to be
used or promote the use of any advertising matter, promotional
literature, testimonial, guarantee, or other representation, however
disseminated or published, which is misleading, deceptive, or untruthful
about the practice of electrology or the licensure status of an
individual practicing electrology.

**Source.** 1994, 202:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 314:12

 **314:12 Penalty. –** Any person who violates the provisions of this
chapter or rules adopted pursuant to this chapter shall, if a natural
person, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any other person shall be guilty
of a felony.

**Source.** 1994, 202:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 314:13

 **314:13 Administrative Fines. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director, after notice and hearing, pursuant to RSA
314:7 and rules adopted under RSA 314:8, X, may impose an administrative
fine not to exceed 
                                             $2,000 for each offense upon any person who violates
any provision of this chapter or rules adopted pursuant to this
chapter.
                                             
 II. Any administrative fine imposed under this section shall not
preclude the imposition of further penalties or administrative actions
under this chapter.
                                             
 III. The executive director shall adopt rules in accordance with RSA
314:8, X, relative to administrative fines which shall be scaled to
reflect the scope and severity of the violation.
                                             
 IV. The sums obtained from the levying of administrative fines under
this chapter shall be forwarded to the state treasurer to be deposited
into the general fund.

**Source.** 1994, 202:2. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995. 2015, 276:90,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 314:14

 **314:14 Injunction. –** A civil action may be instituted in
superior court on behalf of the department for injunctive relief to
prevent the violation of the provisions of this chapter or rules adopted
pursuant to this chapter. The court may proceed in the action in a
summary manner or otherwise, and may enjoin in all such cases any person
in violation of any provisions of this chapter or rules adopted pursuant
to this chapter.

**Source.** 1994, 202:2. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.
