---
title: 'CHAPTER 318-D METHAMPHETAMINE-RELATED OFFENSES'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 318-D
                                             
METHAMPHETAMINE-RELATED OFFENSES
--------------------------------

### Section 318-D:1

 **318-D:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Anhydrous ammonia'' means ammonia that has been cooled,
pressurized, or both so that it exists in liquid form. Water may be
present in varying degrees, if at all. This definition shall not include
commercially available water solutions of ammonia such as glass
cleaners.
                                             
 II. "Clandestine lab site'' means any structure or conveyance or
location occupied or affected by conditions or chemicals typically
associated with the manufacturing of methamphetamine.
                                             
 III. "Emergency response'' includes, but is not limited to, removing
and collecting evidence, securing the site, removal, remediation, and
hazardous chemical assessment or inspection of the site where the
relevant offense or offenses took place, regardless of whether these
actions are performed by a public entity, a private contractor paid by a
public entity, or the property owner.
                                             
 IV. "Remediation'' means proper cleanup, treatment, or containment
of hazardous substances or methamphetamine at or in a clandestine lab
site, and may include demolition or disposal of structures or other
property.
                                             
 V. "Removal'' means the removal from the clandestine lab site of
precursor or waste chemicals, chemical containers, or equipment
associated with the manufacture, packaging, or storage of illegal drugs.

**Source.** 2006, 241:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 318-D:2

 **318-D:2 Manufacture of Methamphetamine. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly manufacture or
attempt to manufacture methamphetamine. A person is guilty of an attempt
to manufacture methamphetamine if the person:
                                             
 (a) With the purpose that the crime of manufacturing
methamphetamine be committed, the person engages in any conduct that,
under the circumstances as the person believes them to be, is an act
constituting a substantial step toward the commission of the crime; or
                                             
 (b) Possesses one or more of the following substances or their
salts or isomers, with the intent to manufacture methamphetamine:
                                             
 (1) Acetic acid.
                                             
 (2) Acetic anhydride.
                                             
 (3) Aluminum.
                                             
 (4) Ammonium nitrate.
                                             
 (5) Anhydrous ammonia.
                                             
 (6) Benzaldehyde.
                                             
 (7) Benzyl chloride.
                                             
 (8) Benzyl cyanide.
                                             
 (9) Chloroephedrine.
                                             
 (10) Chloropseudoephedrine.
                                             
 (11) Elemental phosphorous.
                                             
 (12) Ephedrine.
                                             
 (13) Ethylamine.
                                             
 (14) Formic acid.
                                             
 (15) Hydriodic acid.
                                             
 (16) Hydrochloric acid.
                                             
 (17) Hydrogen.
                                             
 (18) Hydrogen peroxide.
                                             
 (19) Hypophosphorus acid.
                                             
 (20) Iodine.
                                             
 (21) Lithium metal.
                                             
 (22) Mercuric chloride.
                                             
 (23) Methylamine.
                                             
 (24) N-methyl formamide.
                                             
 (25) Nitroethane.
                                             
 (26) Palladium.
                                             
 (27) Perchloric acid.
                                             
 (28) Phenylacetic acid.
                                             
 (29) Phosphorous pentachloride.
                                             
 (30) Platinum.
                                             
 (31) Raney nickel.
                                             
 (32) Sodium acetate.
                                             
 (33) Sodium hydroxide.
                                             
 (34) Sodium hypochlorite.
                                             
 (35) Sodium hypophosphite.
                                             
 (36) Sodium metal.
                                             
 (37) Sodium/potassium cyanide.
                                             
 (38) Sulfuric acid.
                                             
 (39) Thionyl chloride.
                                             
 (40) Tincture of iodine.
                                             
 (c) Possesses one or more of the following organic solvents with
the intent to manufacture methamphetamine:
                                             
 (1) Acetone.
                                             
 (2) Chloroform.
                                             
 (3) Cyclohexane.
                                             
 (4) Ethanol.
                                             
 (5) Ether.
                                             
 (6) Light petroleum distillates.
                                             
 (7) Methanol.
                                             
 (8) Methyl isobutyl ketone.
                                             
 (9) Phenyl-2 porpanone.
                                             
 (10) Tetrachloroethylene.
                                             
 (11) Toluene.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 318-B:26, I, a person
convicted under this section may be sentenced to imprisonment for not
more than 30 years, a fine of not more than 
                                             $500,000, or both. A person
convicted under this section who has one or more prior offenses as
defined in RSA 318-B:27, shall be sentenced to imprisonment for not less
than 5 years and not more than life imprisonment, a fine of not more
than 
                                             $500,000, or both.
                                             
 III. A court may require a person convicted of manufacturing or
attempting to manufacture methamphetamine, where the response to the
crime involved an emergency response or a hazardous substance cleanup
operation, to pay restitution to all public entities, or private
entities under contract to a public entity, that participated in the
response or the cleanup. The restitution ordered shall cover the
reasonable costs of the entities' participation in the response and the
reasonable costs of the site cleanup.
                                             
 IV. In addition to the restitution authorized in paragraph III, a
court may require a person convicted of manufacturing or attempting to
manufacture methamphetamine to pay restitution to a property owner who
incurred removal or remediation costs as a result of the crime.

**Source.** 2006, 241:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 318-D:3

 **318-D:3 Injury Resulting From the Manufacture of Methamphetamine.
–**
                                             
 I. A person shall be guilty of an offense if that person recklessly
causes serious bodily injury to a law enforcement officer, firefighter,
emergency medical technician, ambulance operator, ambulance attendant,
or social worker, civilian government employee, or hazardous material
contractor acting in his or her official duties, as a result of the
hazards posed by the person's conduct in manufacturing or attempting to
manufacture methamphetamine. For purposes of this section, a person who
takes any substantial step towards the manufacture of methamphetamine
acts recklessly.
                                             
 II. A person convicted of an offense under this section may be
sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 20 years, or a fine of not
more than 
                                             $300,000 or both.

**Source.** 2006, 241:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 318-D:4

 **318-D:4 Sale, Transfer, Lease, or Rental of Real Property on Which
Methamphetamine Has Been Produced. –** Any sale, transfer, lease, or
rental of real property on which methamphetamine has been produced shall
be subject to the provisions of RSA 477:4-g.

**Source.** 2006, 241:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 318-D:5

 **318-D:5 Anhydrous Ammonia; Prohibited Conduct. –**
                                             
 I. In this section, "tamper'' means action taken by a person not
authorized to take that action by law, or by the owner or authorized
custodian of an anhydrous ammonia container, or of equipment where
anhydrous ammonia is used, stored, distributed, or transported.
                                             
 II. No person shall:
                                             
 (a) Steal or unlawfully take or carry away any amount of
anhydrous ammonia.
                                             
 (b) Purchase, possess, transfer, or distribute any amount of
anhydrous ammonia, knowing, or having reason to know, that it will be
used to unlawfully manufacture a controlled substance or explosive
device.
                                             
 (c) Place, have placed, or possess anhydrous ammonia in a
container that is not designed, constructed, maintained, and authorized
to contain or transport anhydrous ammonia.
                                             
 (d) Transport anhydrous ammonia in a container that is not
designed, constructed, maintained, and authorized to transport anhydrous
ammonia.
                                             
 (e) Use, deliver, receive, sell, or transport a container
designed and constructed to contain anhydrous ammonia without the
express consent of the owner or authorized custodian of the container.
                                             
 (f) Tamper with any equipment or facility used to contain, store,
or transport anhydrous ammonia.
                                             
 III. The department of safety shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA
541-A, in order to implement and enforce the provisions of this
section.
                                             
 IV. Except as provided in paragraph V, a person who tampers with
anhydrous ammonia containers or equipment under this section shall have
no cause of action for damages arising out of the tampering against:
                                             
 (a) The owner or lawful custodian of the container or equipment;
                                             
 (b) A person responsible for the installation or maintenance of
the container or equipment; or
                                             
 (c) A person lawfully selling or offering for sale the anhydrous
ammonia.
                                             
 V. Paragraph IV shall not apply to a cause of action against a
person who unlawfully obtained the anhydrous ammonia or anhydrous
ammonia container or who possesses the anhydrous ammonia or anhydrous
ammonia container for any unlawful purpose.
                                             
 VI. A person who knowingly violates paragraph II may be sentenced to
imprisonment for not more than 5 years or a fine of not more than

                                             $50,000, or both.

**Source.** 2006, 241:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.
