---
title: |
    CHAPTER 318-E CONTROLLED AND NON-CONTROLLED PHARMACEUTICAL DRUG
    TAKE-BACK PROGRAMS
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 318-E
                                             
CONTROLLED AND NON-CONTROLLED PHARMACEUTICAL DRUG TAKE-BACK PROGRAMS
--------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 318-E:1

 **318-E:1 Pharmaceutical Drug Take-Back Programs Authorized. –**
                                             
 I. A local, county, regional, state, or other governmental entity or
private entity in conjunction with the chief law enforcement officer of
a law enforcement agency may establish a controlled and non-controlled
pharmaceutical drug take-back program. For the purposes of this chapter,
"pharmaceutical drug'' means a prescription or over-the-counter drug,
including, but not limited to, controlled drugs as defined in this
chapter.
                                             
 I-a. A registered pharmacy may establish a controlled and
noncontrolled pharmaceutical drug take-back program provided it complies
with the United States Drug Enforcement Administration regulations, 21
C.F.R. part 1300 et seq.
                                             
 II. A pharmaceutical drug take-back program established by a local,
county, regional, state, or other governmental entity or private entity
shall enable individuals with dispensed drugs to voluntarily return the
unused drugs for collection, storage, and disposal in accordance with
applicable state and federal statutes and regulations.
                                             
 III. The department of justice, in consultation with the pharmacy
board, the department of safety, and the department of environmental
services shall establish rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, for the
collection, storage, and disposal of collected drugs in accordance with
applicable state and federal statutes and regulations.
                                             
 IV. The disposal requirements for controlled drugs stipulated in RSA
318-B:17 shall not apply to controlled and non-controlled drugs
collected in accordance with this section.
                                             
 V. Nothing in the implementation of a pharmaceutical drug take-back
program shall require, at the place of collection, any individual who is
returning drugs to disclose his or her personal identification in order
to return unused drugs.
                                             
 VI. Pharmaceutical drug take-back programs established under this
chapter may accept public and private grants and donations of money for
the purpose of covering the costs of such programs, including, but not
limited to public funds appropriated for this purpose and a fee from
participating individuals returning unused pharmaceuticals.

**Source.** 2011, 63:2, eff. July 1, 2011. 2013, 222:2, eff. Jan. 1,
2014. 2016, 214:2, eff. Aug. 6, 2016.
