---
title: 'CHAPTER 319-C ELECTRICIANS'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 319-C
                                             
ELECTRICIANS
--------------

### Section 319-C:1

 **319-C:1 Electricians. –** No electrical installation shall be made
for compensation, unless made by an electrician or other person licensed
by the electricians' board, except as provided in this chapter.

**Source.** 1975, 485:1, eff. July 1, 1975.

### Section 319-C:2

 **319-C:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Apprentice electrician'' means a person who is engaged in
learning and assisting in making electrical installations under the
direct supervision of a master or journeyman electrician.
                                             
 II. "Board'' means the electricians' board.
                                             
 III. "Electrical installations'' means the installation, repair,
alteration and maintenance of electrical conductors, fittings, devices
and fixtures for heating, lighting or power purposes, regardless of the
voltage. The term does not include the installation or repair of
portable appliances and other portable electrical equipment,
installation of which involves only the insertion of an attachment plug
into a fixed receptacle outlet. The word "portable'' does not include or
apply to any type of fixed electrically operated or driven equipment.
                                             
 III-a. "High/medium voltage power distribution system installation''
means the installation, repair, alteration, and maintenance of
electrical conductors, fittings, devices, fixtures, and equipment, from
the source of supply to the first disconnecting means of a building or
structure, for over 600 volt power distribution systems. The term shall
also include the associated metering and controls of the distribution
system, the secondary conductor terminations of the pad mount
transformer, the underground conductors between the base of the pole and
the secondary terminals of the pole mounted transformer, and the
overhead conductors between the secondary terminals of the pole mounted
transformer and the point of attachment to a building or structure,
regardless of the voltage.
                                             
 III-b. "High/medium voltage electrician'' means a person who, as a
business, hires or employs another, as defined in administrative rules,
to make electrical installations on high/medium voltage power
distribution systems operating at over 600 volts, or without hiring
another, makes electrical installations on high/medium voltage power
distribution systems operating at over 600 volts, including associated
controls and metering, as a principal or auxiliary business for their
own account.
                                             
 III-c. "Incidental electrical work'' means a job of minor
consequence which occurs by chance, not needing calculations.
                                             
 IV. "Journeyman electrician'' means a person doing work of
installing electrical wires, conduits, apparatus, fixtures and other
electrical equipment. A journeyman electrician shall be employed by a
master electrician, except as provided in RSA 319-C:10. Each journeyman
electrician may have one apprentice electrician working with him and
under his personal supervision. Each journeyman electrician shall work
under the direction and supervision of a master electrician.
                                             
 V. "Master electrician'' means a person either employed by another
master electrician or who, as a business, hires or employs another to do
electrical work, or, without hiring another, makes electrical
installations as a principal or auxiliary business for his or her own
account. Each master electrician may have no more than 2 apprentice
electricians working with him or her under his or her personal
supervision, provided this authorization shall not apply to more than 6
master electricians for each work location.

**Source.** 1975, 485:1. 1976, 16:1. 1981, 356:3-5. 1994, 238:1, 2.
2001, 266:1, 2, eff. July 1, 2001. 2011, 78:1, eff. July 15, 2011.

### Section 319-C:3

 **319-C:3 Exceptions. –** This chapter shall not apply to the
following:
                                             
 I. Any person, or any affiliate or employee of such person, under
the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission of this state, or
the Federal Communications Commission, or the Interstate Commerce
Commission, or any employee of such person, for the purpose of making
electrical installations in the course of such employment.
                                             
 II. The electrical work and equipment employed in connection with
the construction, installation, operation, repair or maintenance of any
utility by a utility company in rendering its authorized service, or in
any way incidental thereto.
                                             
 III. Any electrical equipment and work including installation,
operation, maintenance and repair, in or about industrial or
manufacturing plants or electrical generating plants performed by a
person or persons in the regular employ of the plants.
                                             
 IV. Any electrical equipment and work, including installation,
operation, maintenance and repair in, on or about other properties,
equipment or buildings, residential or of any other kind, owned or
controlled by the operators of industrial or manufacturing plants,
provided such work is done under the supervision of an electrical
engineer in the employ of said operator.
                                             
 V. The electrical work and equipment in mines, pipe line systems,
ships, railway rolling stock or automotive equipment, or the operation
of portable sound equipment.
                                             
 VI. Any electrical installations or equipment involved in the
manufacture, test or repair of electrical equipment in the
manufacturer's plant.
                                             
 VII. Installations in laboratories of exposed electrical wiring for
experimental purposes only.
                                             
 VIII. Regular employees of owners or lessees of real property doing
incidental electrical work, or persons whose occupation is the doing of
miscellaneous jobs of manual labor in the course of which some
incidental electrical work is done.
                                             
 IX. Installation of fuel oil, natural, propane, or other burnable
gas furnace, or boiler equipment and controls connected thereto.
                                             
 IX-a. Any electrical installations in residential or commercial
buildings performed by students enrolled in a high school vocational
electrical program, college vocational electrical program, and
apprenticeship training program, approved by the department of
education, provided such work is performed under the supervision of
either a teacher holding an electrician's license or by a licensed
electrician who is a supervisor of students in cooperative education
placements from such programs; and in those cases where the installation
is in a new building being constructed as a part of the vocational
program, that the installation will be inspected and approved by an
individual or group of individuals chosen by the local school districts
from persons nominated by the state board of electricians. Any person
nominated by the state board shall hold a master's license issued by the
board.
                                             
 X. Any electrical work and equipment employed in connection with the
construction, installation, operation, repair or maintenance of any
public highway, including traffic devices thereon by employees of any
unit of government having a responsibility for the highway; or an
independent contractor employed by any unit of government installing,
constructing or maintaining any conduit or piping for an electrical
system associated with a highway.
                                             
 XI. A person who makes or, as a business, hires or employs another
to make, electrical installations, repairs, alterations, or maintenance
on automatic irrigation systems operating at 30 volts or less.
                                             
 XII. An elevator or accessibility lift mechanic licensed by the
labor commissioner under RSA 157-B:8-a and rules adopted thereunder (a)
for accessibility lifts, at the wiring originating from the final
disconnecting means at the equipment; or (b) for elevators, at the
equipment disconnects located in the elevator machine room and
associated with the elevator equipment, elevator hoistway doors, and
elevator car only; in both commercial and residential installations on
elevator and accessibility lift controls.

**Source.** 1975, 485:1. 1979, 86:1. 1986, 199:1. 1994, 238:3. 2003,
194:1. 2005, 167:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2005; 185:1, eff. July 1, 2005. 2013,
252:2, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 319-C:4

 **319-C:4 Board. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be an electricians' board consisting of 5 members,
including 2 master electricians, one journeyman electrician, and 2
public members, each to be appointed by the governor, with the approval
of the council, to a term of 5 years. No member of the board shall be
appointed to more than 2 terms. The state fire marshal or his designee
shall be an ex officio member of the board, but shall not vote in board
determinations.
                                             
 I-a. No member of the board shall serve more than 12 years,
including the time of 2 5-year terms, being held over after a term
expires, and fulfilling an unexpired term. Members' terms shall be
staggered and in no case shall any member's term coincide with another
member's term. To avoid coinciding terms, the next appointment for a
member shall be for a term which complies with this paragraph.
                                             
 II. Each public member of the board shall be a person who is not,
and never was, a member of the electrical trade or the spouse of any
such person, and who does not have, and never has had, a material
financial interest in either the provision of electrical services or an
activity directly related to the electrical trade, including the
representation of the board or trade for a fee at any time during the 5
years preceding appointment.
                                             
 III. The members of the board, other than state employees, shall
each be allowed the sum of 
                                             $30 per day and their necessary traveling
expenses incurred in carrying out their official duties.
                                             
 IV. All administrative, clerical, and business processing functions
of the board shall be transferred to the office of professional
licensure and certification established in RSA 310-A:1 through RSA
310-A:1-e.

**Source.** 1975, 485:1. 1981, 356:6. 1985, 416:5. 1994, 238:4. 2005,
122:2; 177:106. 2008, 107:1, eff. July 27, 2008. 2012, 237:2 as amended
by 2013, 57:3, eff. June 4, 2013. 2015, 276:57, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 319-C:5

 **319-C:5 Inspectors. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall be empowered to appoint such inspectors as may be
necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Any person so
employed shall be under the administration and supervisory direction of
the board.
                                             
 II. An inspector appointed under this section shall have authority
to enter any premises in which an electrical installation subject to
rules adopted under RSA 319-C:6-a is being installed, replaced or
repaired for the purpose of making such inspection as is necessary to
carry out his responsibilities under this section.
                                             
 III. The inspector may order the removal or correction of any
violation of any rule adopted under RSA 319-C:6-a, and may order any
public utility furnishing electricity to such installation to disconnect
the same until the violations are corrected.
                                             
 IV. Whenever an inspector orders the removal or correction of a
violation under paragraph III, he shall immediately notify the local
building inspection department or administrative authority of the town
where the violation is located, and further order that all work related
to correction of the violation be discontinued. The local building
authority shall approve the continuation of work on the installation
upon being satisfied that any violations have been corrected and shall
notify the inspector of such approval.

**Source.** 1975, 485:1. 1981, 356:7. 2005, 122:3, eff. July 1, 2005;
177:107, eff. July 1, 2005. 2012, 237:3, eff. June 4, 2013.

### Section 319-C:6

 **319-C:6 Organization and Meetings. –** The board shall hold at
least 4 regular meetings each year, and special meetings may be held at
such times as the business of the board may require. Notice of all
meetings shall be given in such manner as the rules of the board may
provide. The board shall annually elect a chairman, a vice-chairman, and
a secretary, who shall be one of the appointed members. A quorum of the
board shall consist of not less than 3 members, not including the ex
officio member, and at least one of whom shall be a public member.

**Source.** 1975, 485:1. 1981, 356:8, eff. July 1, 1981.

### Section 319-C:6-a

 **319-C:6-a Rulemaking Authority. –** The board, with an affirmative
vote of at least 3 of the 5 appointed board members, shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The application procedure for a license to practice under this
chapter;
                                             
 II. The qualifications of applicants in addition to those
requirements established under this chapter, and including the
qualifications for satisfactory evidence of:
                                             
 (a) A high school education, and
                                             
 (b) Good professional character;
                                             
 III. How an applicant shall be examined, and procedures for
computerized examinations;
                                             
 IV. How a license to practice under this chapter shall be renewed,
including the requirements for continuing education;
                                             
 V. The establishment of all fees required under this chapter;
                                             
 V-a. The applicable version of the National Electrical Code with any
discretionary changes, provided that any such changes are no less
stringent than provided in the state building code administered and
approved by the state building code review board under RSA 155-A;
                                             
 VI. Ethical and professional standards required to be met by each
holder of a license to practice under this chapter and how disciplinary
actions by the board shall be implemented for violations of these
standards;
                                             
 VII. Procedures and policy for the investigation of complaints
against licensees or registrants;
                                             
 VIII. Procedures for the conduct of hearings consistent with the
requirements of due process; and
                                             
 IX. Matters related to the proper administration of this chapter.

**Source.** 1981, 356:8. 2002, 8:7. 2004, 63:1. 2005, 122:4; 177:108.
2007, 16:1. 2010, 117:1, eff. July 31, 2010. 2012, 237:5, eff. June 4,
2013. 2014, 174:17, eff. Sept. 9, 2014.

### Section 319-C:6-b

 **319-C:6-b Fees. –** The board shall establish application fees for
examination of applicants, fees for licensure, for renewal, and for late
renewal of licenses to practice under this chapter, and for transcribing
and transferring records and other services. The fee for examination
shall not include fees charged by and paid to an examination entity
approved by the board. The fees established by the board shall be
sufficient to produce estimated revenues equal to 125 percent of the
direct operating expenses of the board budgeted for the biennium in
which they will apply. Fees collected shall be deposited in the general
fund as unrestricted revenue.

**Source.** 1981, 356:8. 1996, 113:1. 2005, 122:5; 177:109. 2007, 16:2,
eff. July 1, 2007. 2012, 237:4, eff. July 1, 2013. 2014, 269:13, eff.
July 1, 2014.

### Section 319-C:6-c

 **319-C:6-c Continuing Education, NFPA 70 Changes. –** The board
shall adopt rules relative to continuing education applicable to all
licensees for training and compliance with the latest published edition
of the NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, as published by the National
Fire Protection Association. Each licensee shall show proof of
completion of continuing education requirements adopted under this
section within 12 months from the January 1 following the publication
date of the latest version of the NFPA 70. Proof of completion shall be
furnished to the board by the continuing education provider. Failure to
complete the continuing education shall render the electrician's license
invalid until the licensee demonstrates to the board that he or she has
completed the requisite number of continuing education hours.

**Source.** 2012, 237:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 319-C:7

 **319-C:7 Licensing Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. After June 30, 1976, the board shall issue a license as a master
or journeyman electrician to any person who files an application and
meets the following qualifications:
                                             
 (a) Completion of 8,000 hours of service as an apprentice
electrician. The board may give credit toward such service for the
satisfactory completion of a course of instruction in the field at a
school recognized by the board; and
                                             
 (b) Satisfactory passing of an examination conducted by said
board as provided in RSA 319-C:8 to determine his fitness to receive
such license.
                                             
 II-a. The board shall issue a license as a high/medium voltage
electrician to any person who files an application and meets the
following qualifications:
                                             
 (a) Shows proof of successfully completing a state, national, or
employer certification program approved by the board or;
                                             
 (b) Prior to January 1, 2003, shows proof of having been employed
for a minimum of 5 years as a high/medium voltage electrician working
for a company with an approved training program.
                                             
 III. All persons licensed by the board shall receive a certificate
under the seal of the board and with the signature of the board
chairman, which must be publicly displayed at the principal place of
business of said electrician, or, if no such place of business, must be
carried on his person and displayed at any time upon request, as long as
said person continues in the business as herein defined. The certificate
shall specify the name of the person licensed who, in the case of a
firm, shall be one of its members or employees and, in the case of a
corporation, one of its officers or employees passing the examination.
In the case of a firm or corporation, the license shall be void upon the
death of or the severance from the company of said person.
                                             
 IV. Apprentice electricians shall register with the board.

**Source.** 1975, 485:1. 1981, 356:9, 17. 1994, 238:5, 6. 2001, 266:3.
2004, 63:2, eff. July 1, 2004. 2014, 314:2, eff. Aug. 1, 2014.

### Section 319-C:8

 **319-C:8 Examinations for License. –** Each applicant for licensure
shall present to the board, on forms furnished by the board, a written
application for examination and license, containing such information as
the board may require, accompanied by the required application fee
established by the board. Proctored examinations shall be written,
written and oral, oral, or computerized as approved by the board, and
shall be of a thorough and practical character. They shall include such
provisions of the National Electrical Code as the board may deem
appropriate. Any person failing to pass his or her first examination may
be reexamined at any subsequent examination meeting of the board or by
an examination entity approved by the board, and thereafter may be
examined as often as he or she may desire upon submitting the written
application for examination and license and payment of the required
application fee as set forth in this chapter.

**Source.** 1975, 485:1. 1981, 356:10. 1994, 238:7. 2004, 63:3. 2007,
16:3, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 319-C:9

 **319-C:9 Renewal of Licenses. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any outstanding license to the contrary, all
licenses issued by the board shall be valid for 3 years and expire on
the last day of the month of the licensee's birth, but may be renewed
without additional fees during the following month, retroactive to the
first day of the month. Upon payment of the normal renewal fee and a
late fee, licenses which have been expired for at least one month shall
be permitted to be renewed within one year after the date of expiration.
The fees for renewal and late renewal of a license issued under this
chapter shall be established by the board.
                                             
 II. Upon request of a master, journeyman, or high/medium voltage
electrician who is serving in the Armed Forces of the United States, the
board shall place such licensee on inactive status. The license for a
master or journeyman electrician may be reactivated within one year of
discharge by payment of the renewal fee and with proof of completion of
the most current continuing education requirement. The license for a
high/medium voltage electrician shall be reactivated within one year of
discharge by payment of the renewal fee.

**Source.** 1975, 485:1. 1981, 356:11. 1996, 113:2. 2001, 266:4. 2004,
63:4, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 319-C:10

 **319-C:10 Corporations and Partnerships. –**
                                             
 I. The board may issue a license to corporations and partnerships
engaged in the business of making electrical installations, provided
that one or more officers or employees of any such corporation directly
in charge of the business affairs of such corporation, or a member of
such partnership directly in charge of its business affairs, is a
licensed master electrician.
                                             
 II. The board may issue a license to corporations or partnerships
engaged in the business of making electrical installations on high or
medium voltage distribution systems operating over 600 volts, provided
that one or more officers or employees of any such corporation directly
in charge of the electrical business affairs of such corporation, or a
member of a partnership directly in charge of its business affairs, is a
licensed master electrician or a licensed high/medium voltage
electrician.

**Source.** 1975, 485:1. 1981, 356:12. 2001, 266:5, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 319-C:11

 **319-C:11 Disposition of Funds. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 237:7, I, eff.
June 4, 2013.
                                             ]

### Section 319-C:12

 **319-C:12 Disciplinary Action. –**
                                             
 I. The board may undertake disciplinary proceedings:
                                             
 (a) Upon its own initiative; or
                                             
 (b) Upon written complaint of any person which charges that a
person certified or registered by the board has committed misconduct
under paragraph II and which specifies the grounds therefor.
                                             
 II. Misconduct sufficient to support disciplinary proceedings under
this section shall include:
                                             
 (a) The practice of fraud or deceit in procuring or attempting to
procure a certificate to practice under this chapter;
                                             
 (b) Conviction of a felony or any offense involving moral
turpitude;
                                             
 (c) Any unprofessional conduct, or dishonorable conduct unworthy
of, and affecting the practice of, the profession;
                                             
 (d) Unfitness or incompetency by reason of negligent habits or
other causes; or negligent or willful acts performed in a manner
inconsistent with the health or safety of persons under the care of the
certificate holder;
                                             
 (e) Addiction to the use of alcohol or other habit-forming drugs
to a degree which renders him unfit to practice under this chapter;
                                             
 (f) Mental or physical incompetency to practice under this
chapter;
                                             
 (g) Willful or repeated violation of the provisions of this
chapter; or
                                             
 (h) Suspension or revocation of a certificate, similar to one
issued under this chapter, in another jurisdiction and not reinstated.
                                             
 III. The board may take disciplinary action in any one or more of
the following ways:
                                             
 (a) By reprimand;
                                             
 (b) By suspension, limitation or restriction of certification for
a period of up to 5 years;
                                             
 (c) By revocation of certification;
                                             
 (d) By requiring the person to participate in a program of
continuing education in the area or areas in which he has been found
deficient.
                                             
 IV. The board shall retain the record of an action taken in a
disciplinary proceeding under this section for 7 years from the date of
final decision of the action and shall not consider such disciplinary
action more than 7 years after the final decision in any future
disciplinary proceeding concerning the same licensee.

**Source.** 1975, 485:1. 1981, 356:13. 2004, 63:5, eff. July 1, 2004.
2011, 246:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2011.

### Section 319-C:12-a

 **319-C:12-a Hearings. –** The board shall take no disciplinary
action, except for failure to renew a certificate, without a hearing. At
least 14 days prior to hearing, both parties to a disciplinary
proceeding shall be served, either personally or by registered mail,
with a written copy of the complaint filed and notice of the time and
place for hearing. All complaints shall be objectively received and
fairly heard by the board. A hearing shall be held on all written
complaints received by the board within one year of the date notice of a
complaint was received by the accused, unless otherwise agreed to by the
parties. Written notice of all disciplinary decisions made by the board
shall be given to both parties to the proceeding upon their issuance.

**Source.** 1981, 356:13, eff. July 1, 1981. 2014, 34:10, eff. Jan. 1,
2015.

### Section 319-C:12-b

 **319-C:12-b Appeals. –** Any person affected by a final decision of
the board may appeal such final decision to the state building code
review board, pursuant to RSA 155-A:11-a.

**Source.** 2004, 257:56, eff. June 15, 2004.

### Section 319-C:13

 **319-C:13 Records. –** The board shall keep a record of the name
and residence of all persons licensed under this chapter, and said
record or duplicate thereof shall be open for inspection during office
hours.

**Source.** 1975, 485:1, eff. July 1, 1975.

### Section 319-C:14

 **319-C:14 Nonresidents. –** The board may license any applicant who
is licensed in any other state, provided the other state's licensing
requirements are substantially equivalent to or higher than those of
this state.

**Source.** 1975, 485:1. 1981, 356:14, eff. July 1, 1981.

### Section 319-C:14-a

 **319-C:14-a Faulty Wiring; Investigation. –** Whenever the state
fire marshal finds that a principal cause of a fire was faulty wiring,
he shall notify the board which shall conduct its own investigation of
the occurrence. If the board finds that the wiring in question was
installed by a person currently licensed by the board, such person shall
be promptly ordered before the board to show cause why his license
should not be revoked or suspended.

**Source.** 1981, 356:15, eff. July 1, 1981.

### Section 319-C:15

 **319-C:15 Violations; Penalty; Homeowner's Exception. –**
                                             
 I. A person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, if a natural person,
or a felony if any another person, who:
                                             
 (a) Makes electrical installations without being licensed under
this chapter, except as provided in paragraph II;
                                             
 (b) Being in the electrical business, employs an unlicensed
person, other than an apprentice, to make electrical installations,
unless the person or installation is exempted under this chapter;
                                             
 (c) Wrongfully or fraudulently procures a license under this
chapter;
                                             
 (d) Violates any provision of this chapter or rule adopted by the
board; or
                                             
 (e) Wrongfully or fraudulently represents himself or herself as a
person licensed under this chapter.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a homeowner from making
electrical installations in or about a single family residence owned and
occupied by him or her or to be occupied by him or her as his or her
bona fide personal abode.

**Source.** 1975, 485:1. 1981, 356:16. 1994, 238:9. 2004, 64:1, eff.
July 2, 2004. 2014, 314:3, eff. Aug. 1, 2014.
