---
title: CHAPTER 320 HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 320
                                             
HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS
--------------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 320:1

 **320:1 Definition. –** The terms "hawker'' and "peddler'' shall
mean and include any person, as defined by RSA 358-A:1, either principal
or agent, who:
                                             
 I. Travels from town to town or from place to place in the same town
selling or bartering, or carrying for sale or barter or exposing
therefor, any goods, wares, or merchandise, either on foot or from any
animal, cart, or vehicle; or
                                             
 II. Travels from town to town, or place to place in the same town,
offering to perform personal services for household repairs or
improvements, or solicits or induces any person to sign any contracts
relating to household repairs and improvements, including contracts for
the replacement or installation of siding on any residence or building;
or
                                             
 III. Keeps a regular place of business, open during regular business
hours at the same location, but who offers for sale or sells and
delivers, personally or through his agents, at a place other than his
regular place of business, goods, wares, or merchandise.

**Source.** 1931, 102:1. RL 188:1. RSA 320:1. 1969, 481:1. 1973, 558:1.
1988, 27:1, eff. July 1, 1988.

### Section 320:2

 **320:2 Prohibition; Selling on State Property; Contracts Void;
Penalty. –** No hawker or peddler shall sell or barter or carry for sale
or barter, or expose therefor, any goods, wares or merchandise, unless
he holds a license to do so as herein provided. No person may operate as
a hawker or a peddler in any building or on any land owned, leased, or
controlled by the state, except as provided in RSA 186-B:13. Any person
violating this section shall, notwithstanding the provisions of title
LXII, be guilty of a violation and fined not more than 
                                             $500. The clerk
of the district or municipal court shall dispose of fines so collected
by the court as provided in RSA 502:14 or RSA 502-A:8. Any contract
relating to household repairs and improvements or for siding for any
building or residence solicited by any person who has not obtained the
licenses as herein provided shall be void and unenforceable, and any
sale or barter of any goods, wares or merchandise by any such person
shall be voidable. Provided further that any time before midnight, at
the expiration of 3 business days following the signing of any solicited
home repair, home improvement installment contract or cash sale of 
                                             $25
or more by the parties solicited or the owner, the parties solicited or
the owner may serve a notice of cancellation upon the licensee or
principal vendor.

**Source.** 1931, 102:1. RL 188:2. RSA 320:2. 1969, 481:2. 1973, 558:2.
1983, 383:67. 1991, 254:4, eff. Aug. 9, 1991.

### Section 320:3

 **320:3 Exceptions. –** The provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to the following:
                                             
 I. Itinerant vendors as defined in RSA 321:1.
                                             
 II. Any person selling the product of his own labor or the labor of
his family or the product of his own farm or the one he tills.
                                             
 III. Any person conducting sales of personal household goods on his
own property.
                                             
 IV. Any nonprofit organization, community chest, fund or foundation
organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable,
scientific, literary, or educational purposes when no part of the
entity's earnings benefit any private shareholder or individual.
                                             
 V. Any person conducting business in any industry or association
trade show.
                                             
 VI. Any person who sells exclusively antiques, used goods, or
vintage items.

**Source.** 1931, 102:1. 1941, 210:1. RL 188:3. 1951, 186:1. RSA 320:3.
1988, 27:8. 1991, 254:5, eff. Aug. 9, 1991.

### Section 320:4-7

 **320:4 to 320:7 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1969, 481:10, eff. Sept.
1, 1969
                                             ]

### Section 320:8

 **320:8 State Licenses. –**
                                             
 I. Upon compliance with this section and upon payment of 
                                             $50 for a
state license, the secretary of state may grant special state licenses.
Applications for such licenses shall be made upon blanks prepared by the
secretary of state requiring such information regarding the applicant's
character and qualifications as the secretary shall deem pertinent.
                                             
 II. Any person so licensed may do business as a hawker or peddler in
any city or town in this state, provided the licensee complies with all
local ordinances, bylaws and regulations, including those adopted under
RSA 31:102-a. If an applicant not a natural person applies for a license
under this chapter, the sum of 
                                             $5,000 deposited with the secretary of
state in cash or surety bond shall be required, and the employees or
agents of such corporation shall be covered under such cash payment or
surety bond. Any surety bond posted under this section shall remain
effective for at least 60 days after the annual renewal date. All such
agents or employees shall be permitted to apply for licenses under such
cash payment or surety bond.
                                             
 III. The annual license renewal fee shall be 
                                             $50. At the time the
renewal fee is submitted to the secretary of state, the licensee shall:
                                             
 (a) Update information pertaining to the license, if necessary.
                                             
 (b) Submit written proof that any surety bond required by
paragraph II is in effect and will remain in effect as required in
paragraph II.

**Source.** 1931, 102:1. RL 188:8. 1951, 186:2. RSA 320:8. 1955, 185:3.
1969, 481:3. 1973, 558:3. 1979, 278:1. 1981, 515:2. 1983, 186:1. 1988,
27:9. 1990, 3:25, 26. 1995, 95:1, eff. May 16, 1995.

### Section 320:9

 **320:9 Term; Transfer. –** All licenses issued under the provisions
of this chapter shall bear the date on which they are issued and shall
continue in force, subject to the provisions of RSA 320:8, III, unless
revoked by the secretary of state under RSA 320:14. Any hawker or
peddler who does not comply with the requirements for license renewal
under RSA 320:8, III shall be subject to the same penalty as if he had
no license. Said licenses may not be transferred.

**Source.** 1931, 102:1. RL 188:9. RSA 320:9. 1969, 481:4. 1983, 186:2,
eff. Aug. 9, 1983.

### Section 320:10

 **320:10 Record. –** The secretary of state shall keep records of
all licenses issued by him with the number of each, the names and
residences of the persons licensed and the sums received therefor, and
all such records shall be open for public inspection.

**Source.** 1931, 102:1. 1941, 210:1. RL 188:10. RSA 320:10. 1969,
481:5, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 320:11

 **320:11 Persons Exempt. –** Any soldier or sailor disabled in any
war in which the United States has been engaged or by sickness or
disability contracted therein or since his discharge because of such
service, and the widow of any such soldier or sailor so long as she
remains unmarried, or any citizen of this state over 70 years of age,
shall be exempt from paying the license fees required by this chapter.

**Source.** 1931, 102:1. RL 188:11.

### Section 320:12

 **320:12 Endorsing License; Exhibiting License. –** Every person
licensed as a hawker or peddler shall endorse his usual signature upon
his license. When this license is demanded of him by a mayor, selectmen,
alderman, city or town clerk, sheriff or his deputy, any constable or
police officer or the person to whom he sells or offers or exposes for
sale his wares, he shall forthwith exhibit the same; and, if he neglects
or refuses to do so, he shall be liable to the same penalty as if he had
no license.

**Source.** 1931, 102:1. 1941, 210:1. RL 188:12. RSA 320:12. 1969,
481:6, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 320:13

 **320:13 License, Effective Where. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1969, 481:10, eff.
Sept. 1, 1969.
                                             ]

### Section 320:13-a

 **320:13-a Veterans' Conventions. –** Licenses granted pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter shall entitle a peddler or hawker to
operate at meetings or conventions of recognized veterans'
organizations, but only at such meetings or conventions with the
specific approval of the organization concerned.

**Source.** 1965, 166:1. 1969, 481:7, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 320:14

 **320:14 Revocation of Licenses. –** Any license granted by the
secretary of state may be revoked by him after hearing (1) upon
conviction of the licensee of any offense which in the judgment of the
secretary of state warrants such revocation or (2) upon the submission
to the secretary of state of evidence satisfactory to him that, during
the term of the license, and acting under cover thereof, the licensee
has accepted or solicited money, otherwise than through a bona fide sale
or barter of goods, wares or merchandise or has in any manner solicited
alms from the public, or (3) upon a finding by him that the applicant
has wilfully falsified his application for license or (4) upon
consideration of evidence that the holder of said license is insane, a
sexual psychopath, is or has been guilty of assault upon others or whose
conduct has been otherwise disorderly and is of such violent or
offensive demeanor that to permit him to retain such license would
constitute a threat to the peace or safety of the public or (5) that the
holder of said license is at large pending appeal from a conviction for
a violation of the law involving extreme moral turpitude. Whenever any
person is convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter
relative to hawkers and peddlers, the clerk of the court or the trial
justice by whom such person was convicted shall notify the secretary of
state. Any person whose license has been revoked under this section
shall be ineligible to be licensed as a hawker or peddler in this state
for a period of not less than one year or more than 5 years from the
date of said revocation. Any person whose license has been revoked, as a
condition precedent to issuance of any new license, shall be required to
furnish to the revoking authority satisfactory evidence of renewed
reputation and character or mental health in addition to the certificate
required to qualify for such license under RSA 320:8.

**Source.** 1931, 102:1. 1941, 210:1. RL 188:14. RSA 320:14. 1955,
185:4. 1969, 481:8, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 320:14-a

 **320:14-a Appeal. –** Any person whose license is revoked under
this chapter shall have the right of appeal provided by RSA 541.

**Source.** 1955, 185:5, eff. June 9, 1955.

### Section 320:15

 **320:15 Counterfeiting Licenses, Etc. –** Whoever counterfeits or
forges a license, or has a counterfeited or forged license in his
possession with the intent to utter or use the same as true, knowing it
to be false or counterfeit, or attempts to sell under a license which
has expired or has been revoked or cancelled, or which has not been
issued or transferred to him, or has in his possession another's license
with intent to use the same shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a
natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1931, 102:1. RL 188:15. RSA 320:15. 1973, 529:74, eff. Oct.
31, 1973, at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 320:16

 **320:16 Assistance for Issuance. –** The secretary of state is
authorized to employ such assistance and to incur such expense for the
issuance of state licenses hereunder as the governor and council may
approve, and the governor is authorized to draw his warrant therefor.

**Source.** 1931, 102:1. 1941, 210:1. RL 188:16.

Sale of Artificial Flowers, Etc.
--------------------------------

### Section 320:17-19

 **320:17 to 320:19 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 66:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2012.
                                             ]

Sales for Religious and Benevolent Purposes
-------------------------------------------

### Section 320:20

 **320:20 Right to Solicit and Sell. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 260:4, II,
eff. July 19, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 320:21

 **320:21 Exemptions. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 260:4, III, eff. July 19,
1987.
                                             ]

### Section 320:21-a

 **320:21-a Certain Negotiable Instruments Prohibited. –** In a
consumer credit sale or consumer lease by a hawker or peddler, other
than a sale or lease primarily for an agricultural purpose, the hawker
or peddler may not take a negotiable instrument other than a check as
evidence of the obligation of the buyer or lessee. A holder is not in
good faith if he takes a negotiable instrument with notice that it is
issued in violation of this section.

**Source.** 1969, 481:9, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 320:21-b

 **320:21-b When Assignee Not Subject to Defenses. –** With respect
to a consumer credit sale or consumer lease, by a hawker or peddler,
other than a sale or lease primarily for an agricultural purpose, an
assignee of the rights of the hawker or peddler is subject to all claims
and defenses of the buyer or lessee against the hawker or peddler
arising out of the sale or lease notwithstanding an agreement to the
contrary, but the assignee's liability under this section may not exceed
the amount owing to the assignee at the time the claim or defense is
asserted against the assignee. Rights of the buyer or lessee under this
section can only be asserted as a matter of defense to or set-off
against a claim by the assignee.

**Source.** 1969, 481:9, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 320:22

 **320:22 Penalty. –** Any person violating the provisions of this
subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1937, 87:3. RL 188:23. RSA 320:22. 1973, 528:207, eff. Oct.
31, 1973, at 11:59 p.m.
