---
title: 'CHAPTER 321-A CARNIVAL-AMUSEMENT OPERATORS'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 321-A
                                             
CARNIVAL-AMUSEMENT OPERATORS
----------------------------

### Section 321-A:1

 **321-A:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:


                                             [Paragraph I effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph I set
out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. "Carnival or amusement ride'' means a device which carries or
conveys passengers for the purpose of giving its passengers amusement,
pleasure or excitement.


                                             [Paragraph I effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph I set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. "Carnival or amusement ride'' means a device or combination of
devices that carry, convey, or direct a person or persons over or
through a fixed or restricted course or within a defined area, for the
primary purpose of amusement or entertainment.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
safety.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. "Department'' means the department of safety.


                                             [Paragraph V effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph V set
out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 V. "Fixed base operator'' or "fixed base owner'' means a person who
owns or controls or has the duty to control the operation of an
amusement ride which is either installed in a permanent structure or
affixed to steel or concrete footings, but excluding any such owner or
operator regulated under RSA 225-A.


                                             [Paragraph V effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph V set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 V. "Fixed base operator'' or "fixed base owner'' means a person who
owns or controls or has the duty to control the operation of an
amusement ride which is either installed on or in a permanent structure
or on or in trees, or affixed to steel or concrete footings, but
excluding any such owner or operator regulated under RSA 225-A.
                                             
 VI. "Mobile base operator'' or "mobile base owner'' means a person
who owns or controls or has the duty to control the operation of an
amusement ride which is either operated or mounted upon or within a
motor vehicle or trailer or which is temporarily erected upon the ground
for use at carnivals, fairs, and similar events within the state, but
excluding any such owner or operator who is also a fixed base operator
at the same location.
                                             
 VII. "Air supported structure'' means any amusement attraction that
incorporates a structural and mechanical system that employs a
high-strength fabric or film that achieves its strength, shape, and
stability by pre-tensioning with internal air pressure, all of which are
intended to provide an enclosed area for the self-enjoyment of those
confined therein.
                                             
 VIII. "Amusement attraction'' means any building or structure
around, over, or through which people may move or walk without the aid
of any moving device integral to the building or structure, that
provides amusement, pleasure, thrills, or excitement. Amusement
attraction does not include any enterprise principally devoted to the
exhibition of products of agriculture, industry, science, religion, or
the arts.

**Source.** 1975, 473:1. 1977, 393:1. 1983, 233:1. 1987, 124:26, VI;
415:1, 2. 2004, 58:5, eff. June 2, 2004. 2011, 224:224, eff. July 1,
2011. 2016, 133:1, 2, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 321-A:2

 **321-A:2 Rules. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to
RSA 541-A, for the safe installation, repair, maintenance, use,
operation, and inspection of all carnival or amusement rides, air
supported structures, and amusement attractions, as covered by this
chapter, for the protection of the general public. The rules shall be
based upon generally accepted engineering standards, formulas, and
practices.

**Source.** 1975, 473:1. 1977, 393:2. 1987, 124:19. 2004, 58:6. 2006,
203:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007. 2011, 224:223, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 321-A:2-a

 **321-A:2-a Inspections. –**
                                             
 I. All carnival or amusement rides shall be inspected at the
following times:
                                             
 (a) Carnival or amusement rides operated at a fixed and regular
location:
                                             
 (1) By an agent of the commissioner when originally put into
operation for the use of the public. The director shall be notified of
the operator's intent at least 10 days prior to the inspection.
                                             
 (2) By the agent of the commissioner within 15 days prior to
the expected date of operation at the start of each season. The director
shall be notified at least 10 days prior to the inspection.
                                             
 (3) By an agent of the commissioner, after having been
completely or substantially disassembled and reassembled.


                                             [Paragraph I(a)(4) effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph
I(a)(4) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 (4) By the operator, daily on days of operation and prior to
operation, using an inspection form developed by the director, which
form shall be kept by the owner of the ride for a period of 2 years.


                                             [Paragraph I(a)(4) effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph
I(a)(4) set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 (4) By the operator, daily on days of operation and prior to
operation, using an inspection form developed by the manufacturer, or if
no such form exists, one approved by the director. Completed inspection
forms shall be kept by the owner of the ride for a period of 2 years and
shall be made available and open to inspection and copies shall be
furnished to the commissioner or his or her agents upon request.
                                             
 (5) By an agent of the commissioner, if warranted, after
receipt of inspection reports.
                                             
 (6) By an agent of the commissioner, at unannounced times.
                                             
 (b) Carnival or amusement rides which are relocatable:
                                             
 (1) By an agent of the commissioner, upon initial annual
assembly in New Hampshire.


                                             [Paragraph I(b)(2) effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph
I(b)(2) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 (2) By an agent of the commissioner not less than 90 days and
not more than 120 days after the inspection required by subparagraph
(1).


                                             [Paragraph I(b)(2) effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph
I(b)(2) set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 (2) By the operator on each day of operation, prior to
operation, using the inspection form developed by the manufacturer, or
if no such form exists, one approved by the director. The completed
inspection forms shall be retained by the owner of the ride for a period
of 2 years and shall be made available and open to inspection and copies
shall be furnished to the commissioner or his or her agents upon
request.


                                             [Paragraph I(b)(3) effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph
I(b)(3) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 (3) By the operator on each day of operation, prior to
operation, using the inspection form developed by the director. The form
shall be forwarded to the director on a weekly basis, or upon relocation
of the ride, whichever occurs first.


                                             [Paragraph I(b)(3) effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph
I(b)(3) set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 (3) By an agent of the commissioner, if warranted, after
receipt of the inspection reports.


                                             [Paragraph I(b)(4) effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph
I(b)(4) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 (4) By an agent of the commissioner, if warranted, after
receipt of the inspection reports.


                                             [Paragraph I(b)(4) effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph
I(b)(5) set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 (4) By an agent of the commissioner at unannounced times.


                                             [Paragraph I(b)(5) effective until January 1, 2017.
                                             ]


                                             
 (5) By an agent of the commissioner at unannounced time.
                                             
 II. Any person who operates a carnival or amusement ride without
submitting to the inspections required by this section shall be guilty
as provided in RSA 321-A:9 for a violation of RSA 321-A:5.

**Source.** 1983, 233:3. 1987, 124:6, I(d). 1988, 288:11. 2004, 58:7, 8,
eff. June 2, 2004. 2016, 133:3, 4, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 321-A:3

 **321-A:3 Expenses. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1977, 393:3, eff. Aug. 4, 1977.
                                             ]

### Section 321-A:4

 **321-A:4 Decal Required. –** No person shall operate a carnival or
amusement ride without a decal issued by the commissioner. The
commissioner shall by rule, adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A, establish a
reasonable fee for decals to cover the costs of administering this
chapter. An operator shall apply for a decal to the commissioner on a
form furnished by the commissioner and containing such information as
the commissioner may require. No such decals shall be issued by the
commissioner until proof of adequate insurance on each such ride, as
provided in RSA 321-A:5, III, is certified by the owner or operator to
the commissioner and the applicable fee has been paid.

**Source.** 1975, 473:2. 1977, 393:4; 600:102. 1983, 233:2. 1987,
124:21. 2003, 191:2, eff. June 30, 2003.

### Section 321-A:5

 **321-A:5 Registration With Commissioner. –**
                                             
 I. In addition to any other registration requirements imposed by
law, all carnival or amusement operators doing business or intending to
do business in this state shall annually register with the commissioner,
except that this chapter shall not apply to any such operator regulated
under RSA 225-A. The fees for such registration shall be established by
the commissioner in compliance with RSA 541-A.


                                             [Paragraph II effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph II
set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 II. The operator shall list by make and serial number with the
commissioner each piece of carnival equipment or amusement device that
he operates which is designed to carry passengers. The commissioner
shall issue, on an annual basis, an appropriate nontransferable decal
for each such piece of equipment or device listed with him. The operator
shall place such decal in a conspicuous location on the piece of
equipment or device for which it is issued. Each decal shall bear the
state seal and an identifying number.


                                             [Paragraph II effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph II set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 II. The operator shall list by make and serial number with the
commissioner each piece of carnival equipment or amusement device that
the operator operates which is designed to carry passengers. The
commissioner shall issue, on an annual basis, an appropriate
nontransferable decal for each such piece of equipment or device listed
with the commissioner. The operator shall place such decal in a
conspicuous location on the piece of equipment or device for which it is
issued. Each decal shall bear the state seal and an identifying number.
                                             
 III. Prior to obtaining any decals, a mobile base operator of
carnival equipment or an amusement device shall provide to the
commissioner:


                                             [Paragraph III(a) effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph
III(a) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 (a) A certificate of insurance showing the operator as a named
insured and confirming that insurance has been issued and is in force
providing coverage for specified equipment or devices in a minimum
amount of 
                                             $300,000 per person and 
                                             $1,000,000 aggregate.


                                             [Paragraph III(a) effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph III(a)
set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 (a) A certificate of insurance showing the operator as a named
insured and confirming that insurance has been issued and is in force
providing coverage for specified equipment or devices in a minimum
amount of 
                                             $1,000,000 per occurrence and 
                                             $2,000,000 aggregate. Such
certificate shall include the provision that coverage shall remain in
effect until the expiration date or if canceled by the insurer prior to
the expiration date for any reason, the cancellation shall not take
effect until 20 days after written notice received by the director that
said certificate is being canceled and the reason or reasons for such
cancellation.
                                             
 (b) A report prepared by an agent of the commissioner which
indicates that the carnival or amusement ride meets the safety
specifications established by the commissioner pursuant to RSA 321-A:2.
                                             
 IV. Prior to obtaining any decals, a fixed base operator of carnival
equipment or an amusement device shall provide to the commissioner, on a
form prescribed by him:


                                             [Paragraph IV(a) effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph
IV(a) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 (a) A certificate of insurance showing the operator as a named
insured and confirming that insurance has been issued and is in force
providing coverage for specified equipment or devices at specified
locations, in a minimum amount of 
                                             $100,000 per person and 
                                             $300,000
aggregate.


                                             [Paragraph IV(a) effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph IV(a)
set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 (a) A certificate of insurance showing the operator as a named
insured and confirming that insurance has been issued and is in force
providing coverage for specified equipment or devices at specified
locations, in a minimum amount of 
                                             $1,000,000 per occurrence and

                                             $2,000,000 aggregate. Such certificate shall include the provision that
coverage shall remain in effect until the expiration date or if canceled
by the insurer prior to the expiration date for any reason, the
cancellation shall not take effect until 20 days after written notice
received by the director that said certificate is being canceled and the
reason or reasons for such cancellation.
                                             
 (b) A report prepared by an agent of the commissioner which
indicates that the carnival or amusement ride meets the safety
specifications established by the commissioner pursuant to RSA 321-A:2.

**Source.** 1977, 393:4. 1986, 157:4. 1987, 124:6, I(d); 415:3, 4. 2004,
58:9, 10, eff. June 2, 2004. 2016, 133:5-7, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 321-A:6


                                             


                                             [RSA 321-A:6 effective until Jan. 1, 2017; see also RSA 321-A:6 set out
below.
                                             ]

 **321-A:6 Newly-Developed Rides; Altered Mechanisms. –**
                                             
 When applying for a decal for a newly-developed type of carnival or
amusement ride or whenever any additions or alterations are made which
change the structure, mechanism, classification or capacity of any
carnival or amusement ride the operator shall file with the commissioner
a notice of his intention and any plans or diagrams requested by the
commissioner.


                                             [RSA 321-A:6 effective Jan. 1, 2017; see also RSA 321-A:6 set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**321-A:6 Newly-Developed Rides; Altered Mechanisms.** --
                                             
 When applying for a decal for a newly-developed type of carnival or
amusement ride or whenever any additions or alterations are made which
change the structure, mechanism, classification or capacity of any
carnival or amusement ride the operator shall file with the commissioner
a notice of the operator's intention and any plans or diagrams requested
by the commissioner.

**Source.** 1977, 393:4. 1987, 124:6, I(d), eff. July 1, 1987. 2016,
133:8, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 321-A:7


                                             


                                             [RSA 321-A:7 effective until Jan. 1, 2017; see also RSA 321-A:7 set out
below.
                                             ]

 **321-A:7 Temporary Suspension. –**
                                             
 The commissioner may order, in writing, a temporary suspension of
operation of a carnival or amusement ride if it has been determined
after inspection to be hazardous or unsafe; and an agent of the
commissioner may order an immediate suspension of operation of a
carnival or amusement ride if his inspection reveals that such ride is
hazardous or unsafe. Operation shall not resume until such conditions
are corrected to the satisfaction of the commissioner or his designee.


                                             [RSA 321-A:7 effective Jan. 1, 2017; see also RSA 321-A:7 set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**321-A:7 Temporary Suspension.** --
                                             
 The commissioner may order, in writing, a temporary suspension of
operation of a carnival or amusement ride if it has been determined
after inspection to be hazardous or unsafe, or the required insurance
coverage is not in effect or has expired, or a notice of cancellation
has been issued; and an agent of the commissioner may order an immediate
suspension of operation of a carnival or amusement ride if an inspection
reveals that such ride is hazardous or unsafe, or the required insurance
is not in effect or has expired, or a notice of insurance cancellation
has been issued. Operation shall not resume until such conditions are
corrected to the satisfaction of the commissioner or his designee.

**Source.** 1977, 393:4. 1987, 124:6, I(d). 1988, 288:12, eff. Jan. 1,
1989. 2016, 133:9, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 321-A:8


                                             


                                             [RSA 321-A:8 effective until Jan. 1, 2017; see also RSA 321-A:8 set out
below.
                                             ]

 **321-A:8 Appeals. –**
                                             
 Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the commissioner or his
designee may petition the commissioner for a review of said decision
within 30 days. The commissioner shall, if necessary, order a hearing to
be held within 15 days of receipt of such petition. Thereafter, any
person aggrieved by a decision of the commissioner or his designee may
appeal therefrom in accordance with RSA 541.


                                             [RSA 321-A:8 effective Jan. 1, 2017; see also RSA 321-A:8 set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**321-A:8 Appeals.** --
                                             
 Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the commissioner or his
or her designee may petition the commissioner for a review of said
decision within 30 days. The commissioner shall, if necessary, order a
hearing to be held within 15 days of receipt of such petition.
Thereafter, any person aggrieved by a decision of the commissioner or
his or her designee may appeal therefrom in accordance with RSA 541.

**Source.** 1977, 393:4. 1987, 124:6, I(d), eff. July 1, 1987. 2016,
133:10, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 321-A:9

 **321-A:9 Penalty. –** Any person convicted of operating a carnival
or amusement ride without having first registered it with the
commissioner, as provided in RSA 321-A:5, or violating the rules adopted
by the commissioner, as provided in RSA 321-A:2, shall be guilty of a
violation if a natural person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other
person. Any operator or owner who operates after a suspension, as
provided in RSA 321-A:7, shall be guilty of a violation for each day of
illegal operation.

**Source.** 1977, 393:4. 1987, 124:20, eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 321-A:10,-11

 **321-A:10, 321-A:11 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 368:1(51), eff.
Dec. 31, 2010.
                                             ]
