---
title: |
    CHAPTER 322-A COMMISSION TO STUDY THE REGULATION OF PAWNBROKERS,
    SECONDHAND DEALERS, AND THE JUNK OR SCRAP METAL DEALERS
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 322-A
                                             
COMMISSION TO STUDY THE REGULATION OF PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS, AND THE JUNK OR SCRAP METAL DEALERS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 322-A:1


                                             


                                             [RSA 322-A:1 repealed by 2015, 72:2, effective December 1, 2016.
                                             ]

 **322-A:1 Commission to Study the Regulation of Pawnbrokers,
Secondhand Dealers, and Junk or Scrap Metal Dealers. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a commission to study the regulation of
pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers, and junk or scrap metal dealers. The
purpose of the commission shall be to:
                                             
 (a) Review state and local regulation of pawnbrokers and
secondhand dealers to determine whether current statutes and ordinances
should be revised for consistency and to better reflect current business
practices and/or law enforcement concerns.
                                             
 (b) Examine the current community-based system of commodities
reporting by junk or scrap metal dealers in New Hampshire and to examine
the advisability of creating a statewide database to assist in the
deterrence or investigation of metal theft in New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. The members of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) One member of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (b) Three members of the house of representatives, appointed by
the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (c) One representative of law enforcement from a municipality in
which a pawnshop and secondhand shop are located, appointed by the
president of the senate.
                                             
 (d) A representative of the New Hampshire Association of Chiefs
of Police, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (e) A county attorney with experience in property crimes,
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (f) One representative of the pawnbroker industry, appointed by
the president of the senate.
                                             
 (g) One representative of the secondhand dealer industry,
appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (h) One representative of the coin dealer industry who transacts
business with the general public, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (i) One representative of the antique dealer industry, who
transacts business with the general public, appointed by the speaker of
the house of representatives.
                                             
 (j) One representative of the scrap metal dealer industry,
appointed by the president of the senate.
                                             
 (k) One representative of the scrap metal dealer industry,
appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (l) One member of the construction industry in New Hampshire,
appointed by the president of the senate.
                                             
 (m) One member of the Auto and Truck Recyclers Association of New
Hampshire, appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 III. The commission shall:
                                             
 (a) Relative to the regulation of pawnbrokers and secondhand
dealers:
                                             
 (1) Study current laws and ordinances regulating pawnbrokers
and secondhand dealers in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (2) Study issues surrounding recordkeeping, reporting, and
retention periods, including privacy and constitutional questions.
                                             
 (3) Study the change in recovery rates in municipalities that
mandate recordkeeping, reporting, and retention periods, and assess the
effectiveness of such ordinances.
                                             
 (4) Consider the impact changes to state law would have on the
industry, including any ethical concerns.
                                             
 (5) Study issues related to jurisdiction and law enforcement
inspections.
                                             
 (6) Identify the type of items and transactions that should be
regulated and those that should be excluded from regulation, including
whether a minimum dollar value is appropriate.
                                             
 (7) Recommend statutory changes to reflect current business
practices and address enforcement issues.
                                             
 (b) Relative to the system of commodities reporting by junk or
scrap metal dealers:
                                             
 (1) Study the current system of community-based regulation and
reporting by junk or scrap metal dealers in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (2) Study the occurrence of metal theft and arrest records in
New Hampshire under the current system.
                                             
 (3) Examine what tools exist in New Hampshire currently to
curb the incidence of metal theft.
                                             
 (4) Study effective models in others states and their funding
mechanisms.
                                             
 (5) Review and recommend on the advisability of creating a
statewide database for New Hampshire, funded by fees on those regulated,
and its potential to assist in the deterrence or aid in investigations
of metal theft in New Hampshire.
                                             
 IV. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation,
except that legislative members of the commission shall receive mileage
at the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the commission.
                                             
 V. Members of the commission shall elect a chairperson from among
the members. The first meeting of the commission shall be called by the
first-named house member. The first meeting of the commission shall be
held within 45 days of the effective date of this section. Seven members
of the commission shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 VI. The commission shall submit an interim report on or before
November 1, 2015, and a final report on or before November 1, 2016, of
its findings and any recommendations for proposed legislation to the
president of the senate, the speaker of the house of representatives,
the senate clerk, the house clerk, the governor, and the state library.

**Source.** 2015, 72:1, eff. June 2, 2015.
