---
title: CHAPTER 322 JUNK AND SCRAP METAL DEALERS
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 322
                                             
JUNK AND SCRAP METAL DEALERS
----------------------------

### Section 322:1

 **322:1 License. –** The governing body of any town, city, or
unincorporated place, may, in their discretion, license suitable persons
to be dealers in and keepers of shops for the purchase and sale, or
barter, of old junk, old or scrap metals, old or second-hand bottles,
cotton or woolen mill waste, unfinished cloth, cotton or woolen mill
yarns in an unfinished state, not of family manufacture, or second-hand
articles, excepting furniture and books, within their respective cities,
towns, or unincorporated places, or to accumulate, store or handle said
commodities therein for the purpose of sale or barter elsewhere, or as
bailees for others, and may determine and designate the place where the
business is to be carried on, and the place where the commodities
aforesaid may be accumulated, stored or handled, under such license.

**Source.** GS 109:1. GL 120:1. 1883, 74:1. PS 124:1. 1905, 76:1. 1907,
73:1. 1917, 94:1. PL 159:1. RL 190:1. 2008, 287:2, eff. June 27, 2008.

### Section 322:2

 **322:2 Revocation; Regulations. –** The board which grants said
licenses may revoke the same, in their discretion, after a hearing on
charges preferred, and may from time to time establish rules,
regulations and restrictions relative to the business carried on as
aforesaid; and every such rule, regulation and restriction shall be
incorporated in the license.

**Source.** 1917, 94:1. PL 159:2. RL 190:2.

### Section 322:3

 **322:3 Conditions; Termination. –** The license shall designate the
place where the business is to be carried on, and shall contain a
condition that the person to whom it is granted shall not purchase from
any minor under the age of 16 years, nor barter with any such minor for
any commodity named in RSA 322:1, without the written consent of his
parents or guardian, and such other conditions and restrictions as may
be prescribed by the board which grants licenses. Said license shall
continue in force until April 1 next following, unless sooner revoked,
and may be renewed upon application to the licensing board.

**Source.** GS 109:2. GL 120:2. 1881, 14:1. PS 124:2. 1917, 94:2. PL
159:3. RL 190:3.

### Section 322:4

 **322:4 Illegal Dealing. –** Any person who, without a license,
shall be a dealer in the aforesaid commodities, or keep a shop for the
purchase, sale or barter thereof; or who, without a license, shall
accumulate, store or handle said commodities for the purpose of sale or
barter, or as a bailee for others; or any person having a license who
shall carry on the business, or accumulate, store or handle the
commodities aforesaid at any other place than that specified in his
license, or after notice that his license has been revoked, shall be
guilty of a violation for each day such offense continues.

**Source.** GS 109:4. 1878, 31:1. GL 120:4. PS 124:4. 1907, 73:2. 1917,
94:3. PL 159:4. RL 190:4. RSA 322:4. 1973, 531:101, eff. Oct. 31, 1973,
at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 322:5

 **322:5 Enjoining. –** The superior court may enjoin any person from
dealing in the commodities aforesaid, or from keeping a shop for the
purchase, sale or barter thereof, or from accumulating, storing or
handling said commodities contrary to the provisions of this chapter,
and may also enjoin any licensee from carrying on said business at any
other place than that designated in his license.

**Source.** 1907, 73:2. 1917, 94:3. PL 159:5. RL 190:5.

### Section 322:6

 **322:6 Territorial Limits. –** The licensing board of a city may,
by regulation, prohibit the accumulation or storage of the commodities
designated in RSA 322, the granting of licenses therefor, and the
granting of licenses to deal in or keep a shop for the purchase, sale or
barter of said commodities, within or in the immediate vicinity of the
compact part of such city, and may define the limits within which said
commodities shall not be accumulated or stored, or said business carried
on, or licenses therefor granted. The adoption of any such regulation
shall in no way affect the duties of the licensing board in acting upon
applications for licenses to be exercised in territory outside the
limits specified in such regulation.

**Source.** 1907, 73:3. 1917, 94:4. PL 159:6. RL 190:6.

### Section 322:6-a

 **322:6-a Records. –** Each person required to be licensed under
this chapter shall keep records sufficient to the licensing authority of
the accumulation, storage, and handling of commodities as a junk or
scrap metal dealer. Such record shall be legibly written in the English
language and provide account and description of the goods purchased, the
date and time of their purchase, and the name and residence, verified by
photo identification issued by a governmental agency, of the seller.

**Source.** 2008, 287:3, eff. June 27, 2008.

### Section 322:7

 **322:7 Inspection. –** Any officer, having jurisdiction may enter
upon any premises used by a licensee for the purpose of his or her
business, ascertain how the licensee conducts business and examine all
commodities purchased, obtained, kept, or stored in or upon said
premises, and all books and inventories relating thereto. Every such
licensee, his or her clerk, agent, or other person in charge of the
premises shall exhibit to such officer on demand any or all of such
commodities, books, and inventories.

**Source.** 1917, 94:5. PL 159:7. RL 190:7. 2008, 287:4, eff. June 27,
2008.

### Section 322:8

 **322:8 Obstructing Officer. –** Any such licensee, his clerk, agent
or other person in charge of such premises, who refuses to admit thereto
an officer authorized to enter the same, or who fails to exhibit to him
on demand all such commodities, books and inventories; or any person who
wilfully hinders, obstructs or prevents such officer from entering the
premises or from making the examination authorized in RSA 322:7 shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1917, 94:6. PL 159:8. RL 190:8. RSA 322:8. 1973, 528:209,
eff. Oct. 31, 1973, at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 322:9

 **322:9 Number. –** Every license shall be numbered, and each
licensee transporting any of the commodities specified in RSA 322:1 in
any wagon or vehicle shall have placed upon the outside of such wagon or
vehicle, and upon each side of the same, the number of the license in
plain, legible figures not less than 3 inches high so that the same may
be distinctly seen and read.

**Source.** 1917, 94:7. PL 159:9. RL 190:9. 2008, 287:5, eff. June 27,
2008.

### Section 322:10

 **322:10 Identification. –** Every licensee or employee of a
licensee shall carry a photocopy of his or her license or the license of
his or her employer on or about his or her person. The identification
may be required to be furnished by the licensing authority upon payment
of a suitable fee therefor.

**Source.** 1917, 94:7. PL 159:10. RL 190:10. 2008, 287:5, eff. June 27,
2008.

### Section 322:11

 **322:11 Fee. –** The fee for such license or renewal thereof shall
be fixed by the board which issues the license, and shall be paid into
the treasury of the city or town in which the license is to be in force,
and no person shall be required to pay a larger fee for said license
than that required to be paid by any other person in the same city or
town for a similar license.

**Source.** 1917, 94:8. PL 159:11. RL 190:11.

### Section 322:12

 **322:12 Unlicensed Person. –** No person not licensed shall
purchase any of the commodities above specified unless he or she acts as
a helper to, and is accompanied by, some licensee.

**Source.** 1917, 94:7. PL 159:12. RL 190:12. 2008, 287:6, eff. June 27,
2008.

### Section 322:12-a

 **322:12-a Metal Kegs for Malt Beverages. –** No junk or scrap metal
dealer licensed by a governing body under the authority of this chapter
shall purchase any metal keg for malt beverages, as defined in RSA
179:5-a, V, or pieces of such metal keg, unless the seller is the brewer
whose name or marking appears on the keg. If the brewer's name or
marking has been removed or obliterated, the licensee shall not purchase
the keg.

**Source.** 2008, 287:10, eff. June 27, 2008.

### Section 322:13

 **322:13 Penalty. –** Any person who shall violate any provision of
RSA 322 or of his license, for which offense no other punishment is
provided, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1917, 94:9. PL 159:13. RL 190:13. RSA 322:13. 1973, 528:210,
eff. Oct. 31, 1973, at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 322:14

 **322:14 Commission to Study Commodities Reporting. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2013, 101:2, eff. Nov. 1, 2013.
                                             ]

### Section 322:15

 **322:15 Commission to Study Commodities Reporting. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2014, 259:3, I, eff. Dec. 1, 2014.
                                             ]
