---
title: 'CHAPTER 326-J RECREATIONAL THERAPISTS'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 326-J
                                             
RECREATIONAL THERAPISTS
-----------------------

### Section 326-J:1

 **326-J:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter and RSA 328-F, unless
context otherwise requires:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means the recreational therapy governing board
established in RSA 328-F.
                                             
 II. "Recreational therapist'' means a person currently licensed to
practice recreational therapy in the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 III. "Recreational therapy'' means a treatment service designed to
restore, remediate, and rehabilitate a person's level of functioning and
independence in life activities, to promote health and wellness as well
as reduce or eliminate the activity limitations and restrictions to
participation in life situations caused by an illness or disabling
condition.
                                             
 (a) For purposes of accomplishing therapeutic recreation goals,
recreational therapy may include:
                                             
 (1) Remediating or restoring an individual's participation
levels that are limited due to impairment in physical, cognitive,
social, or emotional abilities.
                                             
 (2) Analyzing and evaluating recreational and psychosocial
activities to determine the physical, social, and programmatic elements
necessary for involvement and modifying those elements to promote full
participation and maximization of functional independence.
                                             
 (3) Using recreational modalities in designed intervention
strategies to maximize physical, cognitive, social, or emotional
abilities.
                                             
 (4) Incorporating the individual's interests and the
individual's family and community to maximize relevance to the
individual's goals.
                                             
 (5) Promoting the concept of healthy living into treatment
strategies to decrease the potential for secondary conditions.
                                             
 (6) Developing community support and encouraging attitudinal
changes to reflect dignity, self respect, and involvement within one's
community.
                                             
 (7) Fostering peer and intergenerational relationships.
                                             
 (b) Recreational therapy services include, but are not limited
to:
                                             
 (1) Conducting an individualized assessment for the purpose of
collecting systematic, comprehensive, and accurate data necessary to
determine the course of action and subsequent individualized treatment
plan.
                                             
 (2) Planning and developing the individualized treatment plan
that identifies an individual's goals, objectives, and treatment
intervention strategies.
                                             
 (3) Implementing the individualized treatment plan that is
consistent with the overall treatment program.
                                             
 (4) Systematically evaluating and comparing the individual's
response to the individualized treatment plan and suggesting
modifications as appropriate.
                                             
 (5) Developing a discharge plan in collaboration with the
individual, the individual's family, and other treatment team members.
                                             
 (6) Identifying, designing, fabricating, applying, or training
in the use of, adaptive recreational equipment.
                                             
 (7) Identifying, applying, and evaluating the use of
non-invasive and non-pharmacological approaches to reduce or alleviate
pain or manage pain to minimize its impact upon participation.
                                             
 (8) Identifying, providing, and educating individuals to use
resources that support a healthy, active, and engaged life.
                                             
 (9) Minimizing the impact of environmental constraints as a
barrier to participation.
                                             
 (10) Collaborating with and educating the individual, family,
caregiver, and others to foster an environment that is responsive to the
needs of the individual.
                                             
 (11) Consulting with groups, programs, organizations, or
communities to improve physical, social, and programmatic accessibility.

**Source.** 2006, 220:1, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 326-J:2

 **326-J:2 Evaluation and Treatment Authorization. –**
                                             
 I. Consultation and evaluation by a recreational therapist may be
performed without a referral. Initiation of recreational therapy
services to individuals with medically-related conditions shall be based
on a referral from any qualified health care professional who, within
the scope of the professional's licensure, is authorized to refer for
health care services.
                                             
 II. Prevention, wellness, education, adaptive sports and recreation,
and related services shall not require a referral.

**Source.** 2006, 220:1, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 326-J:3

 **326-J:3 Prohibition on Unauthorized Practice; Professional
Identification. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall practice or hold oneself out as being able to
practice recreational therapy or provide recreational therapy services
in this state unless the person is licensed under this chapter and RSA
328-F. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prohibit students
enrolled in board-approved schools or courses in recreational therapy
from performing recreational therapy that is incidental to their
respective courses of study or supervised work. The board shall adopt
rules under RSA 541-A relative to schools or courses allowing students
to practice under this paragraph.
                                             
 II. Licensed recreational therapists may use the letters "TR,''
"TRS,'' and "CTRS/L'' in connection with their name or place of
business.
                                             
 III. A person or business entity, its employees, agents, or
representatives shall not use in conjunction with that person's name or
the activity of the business the words therapeutic recreation
specialist, therapeutic recreation, recreational therapy, recreational
therapist, recreation therapy, recreation therapist, the letters
"CTRS,'' "TRS,'' or "TR,'' or any other words, abbreviations, or
insignia indicating or implying directly or indirectly that recreational
therapy is provided or supplied, including the billing of services
labeled as recreational therapy, unless such services are provided under
the direction of a recreational therapy specialist licensed pursuant to
this chapter. A person or entity that violates this paragraph is guilty
of a violation for the first offense and guilty of a misdemeanor for any
subsequent offense.

**Source.** 2006, 220:1, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 326-J:4

 **326-J:4 Coercion Prohibited. –** No person shall coerce a licensed
recreational therapist into compromising client safety by requiring the
licensed recreational therapist to delegate activities or tasks if the
licensed recreational therapist determines that it is inappropriate to
do so. Licensed recreational therapists shall not be subject to
disciplinary action by the board for refusing to delegate activities or
tasks or refusing to provide the required training for delegation if the
licensed recreational therapist determines that the delegation may
compromise client safety.

**Source.** 2006, 220:1, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 326-J:5

 **326-J:5 Eligibility for Licensure. –**
                                             
 I. An applicant shall possess the following qualifications to be
licensed:
                                             
 (a) Be at least 18 years of age.
                                             
 (b) Be of good moral character.
                                             
 (c) Successfully complete an academic program with a
baccalaureate degree or higher from an accredited college or university
with a major in therapeutic recreation or a major in recreation or
leisure with an option in therapeutic recreation.
                                             
 (d) Successfully complete a period of field experience as defined
by the National Council for Therapeutic Recreation Certification (NCTRC)
under the supervision of a Certified Therapeutic Recreation Specialist
(CTRS) approved by the educational institution where the applicant has
met his or her academic requirements.
                                             
 (e) Successfully complete the proctored examination administered
by the NCTRC.
                                             
 II. The board may, upon notice and opportunity for a hearing, deny
an application for reinstatement of a license or reinstate the license
with conditions. Conditions imposed may include a requirement for
continuing education, practice under the supervision of a licensed
recreational therapist, or any other conditions set forth in the section
addressing conditional licenses in RSA 328-F.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding paragraph I, the board may grant initial
licenses to recreational therapists who were certified by the NCTRC
prior to July 1, 2007 and who hold an active CTRS credential.

**Source.** 2006, 220:1, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 326-J:6

 **326-J:6 Renewal of License. –**
                                             
 I. Persons licensed as recreational therapists are eligible for
renewal of their licenses if they:
                                             
 (a) Have not violated this chapter or RSA 328-F or demonstrated
poor moral character.
                                             
 (b) Meet continuing competency requirements by completing a
minimum of 30 hours of continuing education in formal courses approved
by the board and other requirements established by the board rules
adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 II. The board shall accept continuing education programs that meet
the recertification standards of the National Council for Therapeutic
Recreation Certification.

**Source.** 2006, 220:1, eff. July 1, 2007.
