---
title: 'CHAPTER 326-I INTERPRETERS FOR THE DEAF AND HARD OF HEARING'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 326-I
                                             
INTERPRETERS FOR THE DEAF AND HARD OF HEARING
---------------------------------------------

### Section 326-I:1

 **326-I:1 Findings and Statement of Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. The general court finds that while there is no census count, as
many as 10,000 New Hampshire citizens live with hearing loss; that of
this number perhaps 3,000 men, women, and children are unable to readily
understand speech due to the extent of their hearing loss, but instead
rely on a visual mode of communication.
                                             
 II. The general court finds that a significant number of New
Hampshire's deaf and hard of hearing, its broad array of public agencies
and institutions, and its medical and legal professions share a unique
challenge: the necessity to hire professional interpreters licensed to
provide ready and reliable communications to and for those who use a
visual mode of communication.
                                             
 III. The general court further finds the mandates of federal and
state statutes which require funding of interpreter's services, by the
same public agencies and institutions, medical and legal professions,
and others of those interpreters requested by the deaf and hard of
hearing, is a mandate in itself to the legislature to ensure the
availability of a skilled cadre of professional, licensed interpreters.
                                             
 IV. The purpose of this legislation is:
                                             
 (a) To provide standards for the licensing and regulation of
interpreters for the deaf and hard of hearing.
                                             
 (b) To ensure interpreters for the deaf and hard of hearing meet
rigorous standards, and that by power of revoking their licenses are
held accountable for the quality and timeliness of their work.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 326-I:2

 **326-I:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means the board of licensure of interpreters for the
deaf and hard of hearing.
                                             
 II. "Deaf person'' means a person whose sense of hearing is
nonfunctional for the purpose of communication and whose primary
communication is visual.
                                             
 III. "Hard-of-hearing person'' means a person who has a hearing
loss, who may or may not primarily use visual communication, and who may
or may not use assistive devices.
                                             
 IV. "Interpreting'' means the process of providing accessible
communication between and among persons who are deaf, oral deaf,
hard-of-hearing, and who can hear, who do not share a common means of
communication. This process includes, without limitation, interpreting
and transliterating and visual, gestural, auditory, and tactile
communication.
                                             
 V. "Interpreting agency'' means an agency whose function is to
provide qualified interpreter services for a fee, usually including a
fee for travel time, and who access interpreters licensed under this
chapter.
                                             
 VI. "Interpreter'' means a person who provides any of the following
services:
                                             
 (a) English-based transliterating, which includes but is not
limited to conveying a message via visible representations of the
English language such as manually coded English and oral
transliteration. This process conveys information from one mode of
English to another mode of English;
                                             
 (b) American Sign Language-based interpreting, which is the
process of conveying information between American Sign Language and
English; and
                                             
 (c) Intermediary interpreting, which means interpreting services
rendered by a deaf person to facilitate communication between another
deaf person and another licensed interpreter or between 2 or more deaf
persons.
                                             
 VII. "Oral deaf'' means a person whose sense of hearing is
nonfunctional for the purpose of communication and whose primary
communication is by speech reading and spoken English.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 326-I:3

 **326-I:3 Board of Licensing for Interpreters for the Deaf and Hard
of Hearing; Administrative Attachment. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a board of licensing for interpreters for the deaf
and hard of hearing, each member to be appointed by the governor, with
the approval of the council.
                                             
 II. The board shall consist of 9 members as follows:
                                             
 (a) Four licensed interpreters, at least 2 of whom are national
level licensees, from a list of names submitted by the New Hampshire
Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf in conjunction with the New
Hampshire Association of the Deaf.
                                             
 (b) Five consumers, including 3 deaf persons from a list of names
submitted by the New Hampshire Association of the Deaf, one consumer of
oral interpreting services, and a non-deaf member of the public not
licensed under this chapter.
                                             
 III. No member of the board shall serve concurrently in an elected,
appointed, or employed position in any other state-level organization
representing interpreters for the deaf, if it would present a direct
conflict of interest.
                                             
 IV. (a) Appointments to the board shall be for 3 years, except that
one of the initial interpreter members and one of the initial consumer
members shall serve one-year terms, and one of the initial interpreter
members and one of the initial consumer members shall serve 2-year
terms. A member shall hold office until a successor has been appointed
and qualified. No member may serve more than 2 consecutive terms.
Initial interpreter member appointments to the board shall be required
to be licensed under this chapter, as of January 1, 2003.
                                             
 (b) The governor and council may remove any member of the board
for malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance pertaining to the duties of
the board.
                                             
 (c) The board shall review and take action on all applications
for licensure, renewal, and reinstatement licenses for interpreters for
the deaf and hard of hearing.
                                             
 V. Members of the board shall receive mileage incurred while
conducting the business of the board.
                                             
 VI. A quorum of the board shall be 5 members.
                                             
 VII. The board shall be an administratively attached agency, under
RSA 21-G:10, to the department of education.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1. 2006, 31:1, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 326-I:4

 **326-I:4 Powers and Duties of the Board. –** The powers and duties
of the board include:
                                             
 I. Accepting applications for licensure under this chapter, and
approving or denying such applications.
                                             
 II. Approving and enforcing performance requirements, including
education and examination standards, for interpreters for the deaf and
hard of hearing.
                                             
 III. Suspending or revoking licenses and conducting investigations
and hearings regarding the denial, suspension, revocation, and renewal
of licenses.
                                             
 IV. Adopting a code of professional conduct for licensees.
                                             
 V. Renewing licenses for interpreters for the deaf and hard of
hearing.
                                             
 VI. Maintaining a directory of all licensed interpreters for the
deaf and hard of hearing. The directory shall be updated, published, and
shall be offered for sale to the public at a fee to be equal to the cost
of reproduction.
                                             
 VII. Accepting written complaints from the public against licensees,
conducting necessary investigations of such complaints, and publicizing
the complaint procedure.
                                             
 VIII. Accepting funds from federal and other non-state sources to be
used for the purposes of this chapter.
                                             
 IX. Cooperating with the New Hampshire Registry of Interpreters for
the Deaf, the New Hampshire Association of the Deaf, Self Help for the
Hard of Hearing of New Hampshire, the New Hampshire League for the Hard
of Hearing, the department of education, division of vocational
rehabilitation, and interpreting agencies to provide access to the
services of interpreters to persons communicating with deaf and hard of
hearing persons.
                                             
 X. Reporting to the governor and council annually on the activities
conducted under this chapter.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 326-I:5

 **326-I:5 Rulemaking. –** The board shall adopt rules, pursuant to
RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The form and content of license applications for each license
level authorized in RSA 326-I:7, II. For national level licensure such
rules shall include application criteria including examinations and
examiners used by the Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf or the
National Association for the Deaf. For state level licensure such rules
shall include the use of the New Hampshire classification test
administered by the program for the deaf and hard of hearing under the
division of adult learning and rehabilitation, department of education.
                                             
 II. License and application fees, renewal fees, and any other fees
required under this chapter which shall be sufficient to produce
estimated revenues equal to 125 percent of the direct operating expenses
of the board for the previous fiscal year.
                                             
 III. The conditions under which an applicant from another
jurisdiction may be issued a license.
                                             
 IV. Requirements for continuing professional education and
competency of interpreters for the deaf and hard of hearing.
                                             
 V. The contents of the code of professional conduct, and the
application of the code to the provision of services by interpreters.
                                             
 VI. Expiration of licenses.
                                             
 VII. The conduct of investigations and hearings under this chapter,
consistent with due process requirements.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 326-I:6

 **326-I:6 Application for Licensure. –** An application for
licensure under this chapter shall be filed with the board in such form
and detail as required in accordance with rules adopted under RSA 541-A,
shall be duly signed and verified, and shall be available for public
inspection.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 326-I:7

 **326-I:7 Licensure Required; Exemptions. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall receive remuneration as an interpreter for the
deaf or hard of hearing or represent oneself as an interpreter for the
deaf or hard of hearing in this state after January 1, 2003, unless such
person is licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 II. The board shall license each applicant who satisfies the
requirements of the board at either a national level license or a state
level license. Upon payment of a license fee for each license level, the
board shall issue to such person a certificate of licensure which shall
be evidence of the right to practice at the appropriate level as an
interpreter for the deaf and hard of hearing.
                                             
 III. An interpreter for the deaf and hard of hearing certified by
the Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf, the National Association of
the Deaf, or the New Hampshire Interpreter classification process prior
to the effective date of this chapter shall be accepted for licensure by
the board, at the appropriate license level, without examination,
provided that all such certified persons comply with all other
requirements of the board under this chapter.
                                             
 IV. The following persons shall be exempt from the license
requirements of this chapter:
                                             
 (a) Nonresident interpreters certified by the National Registry
of Interpreters of the Deaf (RID) or the American Consortium of
Certified Interpreters (ACCI), levels IV and V, who have completed
RID-approved legal training or who hold a legal specialty certificate
(RID SC:L) when working in court settings, provided that such
interpreter shall be subject to disciplinary proceedings of the board.
                                             
 (b) Interpreters for the deaf and hard of hearing working in
religious settings.
                                             
 (c) Interpreters working in emergency situations where the
parties determine that the delay to obtain a licensed interpreter is
likely to cause injury or loss.
                                             
 (d) Students exempted under RSA 326-I:8.
                                             
 (e) Interpreters employed by a school district for a K-12
program.
                                             
 (f) Court reporters licensed under RSA 310-A:161--RSA 310-A:181
while employed as court reporters as defined in RSA 310-A:162, II.
                                             
 V. The recipient of services shall have the right to apply to the
department of education for, and to receive, a waiver in writing from
using a licensed interpreter and shall accept all responsibility for
such action.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1. 2006, 31:3; 76:21. 2007, 300:2, eff. July 1,
2007.

### Section 326-I:8

 **326-I:8 Persons or Practices Affected. –**
                                             
 I. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit a student
enrolled in a school or courses in interpreting for the deaf and hard of
hearing from interpreting for the deaf which is incidental to a course
of study of supervised field work.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit persons registered or
otherwise licensed in this state under any other law from engaging in
the practice for which they are registered or licensed.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 326-I:9

 **326-I:9 License Requirements; Fees. –**
                                             
 I. To be eligible for licensure by the board as an interpreter for
the deaf and hard of hearing at either the national level license or the
state level license, an applicant shall:
                                             
 (a) Be at least 18 years of age and make application to the
board, upon a form prescribed by the board.
                                             
 (b) Pay to the board the appropriate license application fee.
                                             
 (c) Possess the minimum standards of performance and training
pursuant to rules adopted by the board under RSA 541-A and RSA 326-I:5.
                                             
 (d) Demonstrate sufficient evidence of good professional
character and reliability to satisfy the board that the applicant shall
faithfully and conscientiously avoid professional misconduct and
otherwise adhere to the requirements of this chapter.
                                             
 (e) If applicable, submit proof of licensure in another state in
which the licensure requirements are equivalent to or greater than those
in this chapter.
                                             
 II. (a) A license shall be restored after a period of nonrenewal of
less than 2 years, if the person pays to the board a restoration fee
consisting of the current renewal fee plus any late fee established by
rules adopted by the board pursuant to RSA 541-A and submits such
evidence of continued professional competence and eligibility for
licensure as the board may require.
                                             
 (b) Any person who fails to renew a license within 3 years after
its expiration date may apply for and obtain a new license upon meeting
the requirements of this chapter and paying to the board the appropriate
fee.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 326-I:10

 **326-I:10 Persons From Other Jurisdictions; Licensure. –** The
board may waive licensure requirements for an applicant who is licensed
by another jurisdiction where the requirements for licensure are greater
than or equal to those required in this state.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 326-I:11

 **326-I:11 Prohibited Acts. –** No person shall:
                                             
 I. Practice as an interpreter for the deaf and hard of hearing after
January 1, 2003 without holding a license issued pursuant to this
chapter.
                                             
 II. Fail to comply with an order of the board issued pursuant to
this chapter.
                                             
 III. Fail to comply with a rule adopted pursuant to this chapter.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 326-I:12

 **326-I:12 Reinstatement After Suspension. –** An interpreter for
the deaf and hard of hearing seeking reinstatement of a suspended
license shall submit the following to the board:
                                             
 I. A written request to the board explaining the appropriateness of
reinstatement of the license or registration.
                                             
 II. The required license or application fee.
                                             
 III. Evidence of competency to practice as established by the board,
which shall include continuing education or training, passage of an
examination, and practice under the supervision of another licensed
interpreter for a period of time set by the board.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 326-I:13

 **326-I:13 License Renewal; Continuing Education. –** A license
issued by the board shall expire on the September 1 following 3 years
from the date of issuance. Every person licensed under this chapter who
wishes to renew a license shall, on or before the expiration date, pay a
fee for renewal of license to the board. The board shall notify each
person licensed under this chapter of the date of expiration of such
person's license and the renewal fee required. The notice shall be
mailed to such person's last known address as provided to the board at
least 60 days in advance of the expiration of such license. Renewals are
contingent upon evidence of completing the number of continuing
education units established by the board. The continuing education units
may be earned by attending professional training or completing approved
independent studies and regional in-service programs, as determined by
the board.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1. 2006, 31:2, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 326-I:14

 **326-I:14 Disciplinary Actions. –**
                                             
 I. The board may undertake disciplinary proceedings:
                                             
 (a) Upon its own initiative; or
                                             
 (b) Upon written complaint of any person which charges that a
person licensed by the board, or an unlicensed person under RSA 326-I:7,
IV(a), has committed misconduct under paragraph II and which specifies
the grounds for the misconduct.
                                             
 II. Misconduct sufficient to support disciplinary proceedings under
this section shall include:
                                             
 (a) The practice of fraud or deceit in procuring or attempting to
procure a license to practice under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Conviction of any crime which demonstrates unfitness to
practice as an interpreter for the deaf and hard of hearing
                                             
 (c) Violation of the standards adopted under RSA 326-I:4, II and
IV, including violations which demonstrate exceeding the level of the
licensee's skills commensurate with his or her experience or training.
                                             
 (d) Demonstrable gross incompetence of the licensee.
                                             
 (e) Addiction to the use of alcohol or other habit-forming drugs
to a degree which renders the licensee unfit to practice under this
chapter.
                                             
 (f) A legal finding of mental incompetence.
                                             
 (g) Willful or repeated violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
                                             
 (h) Suspension or revocation without subsequent reinstatement of
a license, similar to one issued under this chapter, in another
jurisdiction.
                                             
 III. (a) The board may take disciplinary action in any one or more
of the following ways:
                                             
 (1) By public or private reprimand.
                                             
 (2) By suspension, limitation, or restriction of license.
                                             
 (3) By revocation of license.
                                             
 (4) By requiring the person to participate in a program of
continuing education supervision, or treatment in the area the person is
deficient.
                                             
 (5) By removing an exemption for an unlicensed person under
RSA 326-I:7, IV(a).
                                             
 (b) Disciplinary action taken under this paragraph may be ordered
by the board in a decision made after a hearing in the manner provided
by the rules adopted by the board and reviewed in accordance with RSA
541.
                                             
 (c) No person licensed under this chapter shall continue to
practice as an interpreter for the deaf and hard of hearing while the
person's license is suspended or revoked.
                                             
 IV. At any time, the parties in a complaint, with the cooperation of
the board, may refer a matter to conflict resolution or mediation
services, provided that any proposed resolution of a complaint shall be
subject to the approval of the board.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 326-I:15

 **326-I:15 Hearings. –** The board shall take no disciplinary action
without a hearing. At least 14 days prior to hearing, both parties to a
disciplinary proceeding shall be served, either personally or by
registered mail, with a written copy of the complaint filed and notice
of the time and place for hearing. All complaints shall be objectively
received and fairly heard by the board, but no complaint shall be acted
upon unless in writing or formally presented to the board. A hearing
shall be held on all formal complaints received by the board within one
year of the date notice of a complaint was received by the accused,
unless otherwise agreed to by the parties. Official notice of all
disciplinary decisions made by the board shall be given to both parties
to the proceeding upon their issuance.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1, eff. July 1, 2001. 2014, 34:12, eff. Jan. 1,
2015.

### Section 326-I:16

 **326-I:16 Display of License. –** Any person who has been issued a
license under this chapter shall conspicuously display such license to a
client or consumer upon request when acting as an interpreter for the
deaf and hard of hearing.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 326-I:17

 **326-I:17 Record; Directory. –** The board shall maintain a record
of its proceedings under this chapter and a directory of all persons
licensed under this chapter. The directory shall list the name and last
known business address for each licensee, and may include such other
information as the board deems necessary.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 326-I:18

 **326-I:18 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who shall practice or attempt to practice as an
interpreter for the deaf and hard of hearing in this state without a
license shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor if a natural person or
guilty of a felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any other provision of this chapter or
any rule adopted by the board under this chapter, or who knowingly makes
a false statement in an application for licensure or in response to any
inquiry of the board shall be guilty of a violation. Upon conviction of
a second or subsequent violation under this chapter, the person shall be
guilty of a class A misdemeanor and may, in addition, be subject to a
civil penalty of up to 
                                             $2,000 per offense or, in the case of a
continuing offense, 
                                             $250 for each day the violation continues.

**Source.** 2001, 232:1. 2006, 76:11, eff. July 1, 2006.
