---
title: 'CHAPTER 326-E RESPIRATORY CARE PRACTICE'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 326-E
                                             
RESPIRATORY CARE PRACTICE
-------------------------

### Section 326-E:1

 **326-E:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter and RSA 328-F:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means the governing board of respiratory care
practitioners established under RSA 328-F.
                                             
 II. "Certified pulmonary function technician'' or "CPFT'' means a
person having successfully completed and achieved a passing score on the
entry level examination in pulmonary function and maintained the related
credential issued by the National Board for Respiratory Care, Inc.
                                             
 III. "Consultation by telecommunication'' means that a respiratory
care practitioner renders professional or expert opinion or advice via
telecommunications or computer technology from another location. It
includes the transfer of data or exchange of educational or related
information by any means of audio, video, or data communications.
                                             
 IV. "National Board for Respiratory Care, Inc.'' or "NBRC'' means
the national voluntary health certifying board that evaluates the
professional competence of respiratory therapists and pulmonary function
technicians, or its successor organization.
                                             
 V. "Nurse practitioner'' means a person licensed to practice as an
advanced practice registered nurse in this state pursuant to RSA
326-B:18.
                                             
 VI. "Physician'' means a person licensed to practice medicine in
this state pursuant to RSA 329.
                                             
 VII. "Physician assistant'' means a person licensed to practice as a
physician assistant pursuant to RSA 328-D.
                                             
 VIII. "Registered polysomnographic technologist'' or "RPSGT'' means
a person having successfully completed and achieved a passing score on
the comprehensive registry examination for polysomnographic
technologists administered by the Board of Registered Polysomnographic
Technologists or its successor organization.
                                             
 IX. "Registered pulmonary function technologist'' or "RPFT'' means a
person having successfully completed and achieved a passing score on the
advanced level examination in pulmonary function and maintained the
related credential issued by the National Board for Respiratory Care,
Inc.
                                             
 X. "Respiratory care'' means the treatment, management, diagnostic
testing and evaluation of responses to respiratory or medical treatment
and care of individuals or groups of individuals either having
deficiencies or abnormalities of the cardiopulmonary system or requiring
support of the cardiopulmonary system. Respiratory care is given in
accordance with the prescription of a physician, nurse practitioner, or
physician assistant. Respiratory care includes the implementation of
respiratory care strategies and modalities, and the administration of
pharmacological, diagnostic, and therapeutic agents necessary to
implement a treatment, disease or injury prevention, rehabilitative or
diagnostic regimen. Respiratory care includes, but is not limited to:
initiating emergency procedures; providing health counseling and
teaching; assembly, repair, testing and maintenance of respiratory
equipment; and those respiratory care activities that require a
substantial amount of scientific knowledge or technical skill.
                                             
 XI. "Respiratory care educational program'' means a program
accredited by the American Medical Association's Committee on Allied
Health Education and Accreditation in collaboration with the Joint
Review Committee for Respiratory Therapy Education, by the Committee on
Accreditation for Respiratory Care, or by the Commission on
Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs, or their successor
organizations.
                                             
 XII. "Respiratory care practitioner'' means a person who is:
                                             
 (a) Licensed in the practice or performance of respiratory care
who has the knowledge and skill necessary to administer the functions
defined in paragraph X of this section.
                                             
 (b) Capable of serving as a resource in relation to the clinical
and technical aspects of respiratory care as to the safe and effective
methods for administering respiratory care modalities.
                                             
 (c) Able to function in situations of unsupervised patient
contact requiring individual judgment.
                                             
 (d) Capable of supervising, directing, and teaching less skilled
personnel in the provision of respiratory care services.

**Source.** 2003, 310:2. 2005, 293:9. 2009, 54:5, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 326-E:2

 **326-E:2 Rulemaking. –** The board shall adopt rules pursuant to
RSA 541-A:
                                             
 I. Specifying the limited scopes of practice permitted to certified
pulmonary function technicians, registered pulmonary function
technologists and registered polysomnographic technologists.
                                             
 II. Relating to materiel management.
                                             
 III. Specifying the application procedures and eligibility
requirements to be met by persons or entities seeking approval as
providers of continuing education programs.
                                             
 IV. Specifying the standards to be met by continuing education
programs.
                                             
 V. Specifying the professional organizations, or the standards to be
met by professional organizations, whose approval of education programs
qualifies the programs as board-approved continuing education.

**Source.** 2003, 310:2, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-E:3

 **326-E:3 Requirements for Initial Licensure. –**
                                             
 I. An applicant for an initial license to practice respiratory care
shall be of good professional character and shall:
                                             
 (a) Be a graduate of a respiratory care educational program as
defined in RSA 326-E:1, XI; or
                                             
 (b) Have successfully completed and achieved a passing score for
the entry level exam administered in English by the National Board for
Respiratory Care, Inc. prior to July 31, 1977.
                                             
 II. An applicant for initial licensure shall also be required to
pass a standardized national examination administered in English by the
National Board for Respiratory Care, Inc. or by a successor organization
approved in rules adopted by the board pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 III. An applicant for initial licensure shall be required to certify
under oath that the applicant is not under investigation by any
professional licensing board and that the applicant's credentials have
not been suspended or revoked by any professional licensing board.
                                             
 IV. An applicant for initial licensure who has not practiced as a
respiratory care practitioner for at least 500 hours per year during the
4 years prior to filing the application shall be required to
successfully complete continuing education and continuing competency
requirements set forth in rules adopted by the board pursuant to RSA
541-A.

**Source.** 2003, 310:2, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-E:4

 **326-E:4 Professional Identification. –**
                                             
 I. A person holding a license to practice respiratory care in this
state shall use the title "respiratory care practitioner'' and the
abbreviation, "R.C.P.''.
                                             
 II. The licensee shall show his or her license when requested.
                                             
 III. A person matriculated in an accredited respiratory care or
polysomnographic technology education program shall display appropriate
identification.
                                             
 IV. A person or business entity, its employees, agents, or
representatives shall not use in conjunction with that person's name or
the activity of the business the words "respiratory care'', "respiratory
therapy'', "respiratory care practitioner'', "respiratory therapist'',
the letters "R.T.'' or "R.C.P'', or any other words, abbreviations, or
insignia indicating or implying directly or indirectly that respiratory
care is provided or supplied, including the billing of services labeled
as respiratory care, unless such services are provided by or under the
direction of a respiratory care practitioner licensed under this
chapter.

**Source.** 2003, 310:2, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-E:5

 **326-E:5 Duties and Powers of the Board. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall have the authorities, powers and duties set forth
in RSA 328-F.
                                             
 II. In addition, the board shall:
                                             
 (a) Elect officers from among its members for terms of one year.
                                             
 (b) Provide information to the public and its licensees regarding
the complaint process.
                                             
 (c) Provide timely orientation of new professional and public
appointees to the board regarding duties, powers and procedures of the
board.
                                             
 (d) Advise the board of directors of the office of licensed
allied health professionals of matters regarding respiratory care.
                                             
 (e) Keep information confidential in accordance with the
confidentiality requirements of RSA 328-F.
                                             
 (f) Keep confidential patient records, patient files, reports
relating to patients, oral statements relating to diagnostic findings or
treatment of patients, information from which a patient or his or her
family may be identified and information received and records kept by
the board as a result of an investigation, except when these become part
of a disciplinary hearing or are required to be disclosed by the order
of a court.
                                             
 III. The board may refer the unlawful practice of respiratory care
to the attorney general's office for prosecution regardless of whether
the person or entity ceases the unlawful practice.

**Source.** 2003, 310:2, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-E:6

 **326-E:6 Exemptions From Licensure. –**
                                             
 I. This chapter shall not prohibit:
                                             
 (a) A person matriculated in an education program approved by the
board who is pursuing a degree in respiratory care or respiratory
therapy from satisfying supervised clinical education requirements
related to the person's respiratory care education while under direct
supervision of a respiratory care practitioner or physician.
                                             
 (b) A respiratory care practitioner from practicing in the Armed
Forces, federal public health services, or the Department of Veterans
Affairs, pursuant to federal regulations of health care providers.
                                             
 (c) A respiratory care practitioner who is licensed in another
jurisdiction of the United States from providing consultation by
telecommunication.
                                             
 (d) A respiratory care practitioner who is licensed in another
jurisdiction of the United States or foreign educated respiratory care
practitioner credentialed in another country from practicing respiratory
care in conjunction with teaching or participating in an educational
seminar of no more than 60 days in a calendar year.
                                             
 (e) Respiratory care performed as part of a limited scope of
practice, as defined by the board, by certified pulmonary function
technicians (CPFT), registered pulmonary function technologists (RPFT)
or registered polysomnographic technologists (RPSGT) in a diagnostic
laboratory or research setting.
                                             
 (f) Respiratory care rendered in an emergency.
                                             
 (g) Self care by a patient or gratuitous care by family members
or friends who do not represent themselves as respiratory care
practitioners.
                                             
 (h) A respiratory care practitioner who is licensed in another
jurisdiction of the United States or foreign educated respiratory care
practitioner credentialed in another country from practicing respiratory
care in conjunction with the interfacility transport of a critically ill
patient.
                                             
 (i) A polysomnography trainee from fulfilling the training and
experiential clinical requirements established by the Board of
Polysomnographic Technologists for eligibility for the RPSGT
examination, while working under the indirect supervision of a
physician, a respiratory care practitioner, or a RPSGT.
                                             
 II. This chapter shall not restrict a person licensed under any
other law of this state from engaging in the profession or practice for
which that person is licensed if that person does not represent, imply,
or claim that he or she is a respiratory care practitioner or a provider
of respiratory care.

**Source.** 2003, 310:2, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-E:7

 **326-E:7 Rights of Consumers. –**
                                             
 I. The public shall have access to:
                                             
 (a) A list of licensees and conditional license holders that
includes place of practice, license number, date of license or date of
conditional license expiration, and status of license.
                                             
 (b) A list of official actions taken by the board.
                                             
 (c) A copy of public records of all hearings.
                                             
 (d) A copy of minutes from all public meetings of the board.
                                             
 II. A respiratory care practitioner shall inform each patient that
the patient has the freedom of choice in services and products.
                                             
 III. Any person may submit a complaint in writing to the board
regarding any licensee, entity, or other person potentially in violation
of this chapter or of RSA 328-F. Confidentiality shall be maintained
subject to state and federal law.
                                             
 IV. (a) Information relating to the respiratory care
practitioner-patient relationship is confidential and shall not be
related to a third party who is not involved with the patient's care
without the prior written consent of the patient.
                                             
 (b) Confidential communications between licensees and their
patients are placed on the same legal basis as those between physician
and patient, and, except as otherwise provided by law, no licensee shall
be required to disclose such privileged communications. Confidential
communications between a patient of a licensee and any person working
under the supervision of such licensee to provide services that are
customary and necessary for diagnosis and treatment are privileged to
the same extent as would be the same communications between the
supervising licensee and the patient.
                                             
 (c) The privilege established in subparagraph (b) shall not apply
to investigations and disciplinary proceedings conducted by any agency
regulating health professions in this state.

**Source.** 2003, 310:2, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-E:8

 **326-E:8 Responsibilities of the Respiratory Care Practitioner.
–**
                                             
 I. The respiratory care practitioner is responsible for managing all
aspects of the respiratory care of each patient under the orders of a
physician, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner. The respiratory
care practitioner shall provide:
                                             
 (a) Written documentation of therapeutic effectiveness of care
provided.
                                             
 (b) Periodic written evaluation of each patient.
                                             
 (c) Written documentation of diagnostic studies performed.
                                             
 II. The respiratory care practitioner shall be aware of and abide by
this chapter, RSA 328-F, and the rules adopted by the board.
                                             
 III. Each licensee shall provide his or her employer with a copy of
his or her license, conditional license, current renewal verification or
proof of reinstatement of license. This copy shall be available for
public review upon request. The employer shall maintain a list of all
persons providing respiratory care at his or her facility for review by
the board upon request.
                                             
 IV. In response to board inquires relevant to the status of their
licenses or their practice of respiratory care, licensees shall provide
complete and truthful information to the board.
                                             
 V. Licensees shall notify the board if licenses, renewal
verification cards, or other proofs of licensure are lost or stolen.
                                             
 VI. Licensees shall maintain their current business and residential
addresses on file with the licensing governing board. Changes in
addresses shall be submitted no later than 30 days from the date of
change.
                                             
 VII. Each licensee shall notify the board of those acts or omissions
that are violations of this chapter or are grounds for disciplinary
action.

**Source.** 2003, 310:2, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-E:9

 **326-E:9 Materiel Management. –** The assembly, delivery,
maintenance, repair, and testing of respiratory care equipment and
supplies shall be performed by respiratory care practitioners and other
personnel in conformity with rules adopted by the board under RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 2003, 310:2, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-E:10

 **326-E:10 Eligibility for License Renewal. –** Licensees are
eligible for renewal of their licenses if the licensees:
                                             
 I. Have not violated this chapter or RSA 328-F nor demonstrated poor
professional character.
                                             
 II. Meet any continuing education and continuing competency
requirements established by the board in rules adopted pursuant to RSA
541-A.

**Source.** 2003, 310:2, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-E:11

 **326-E:11 Approved Continuing Education Programs and Program
Providers. –**
                                             
 I. Education programs accepted by the board in fulfillment of the
continuing education required for license renewal are:
                                             
 (a) Programs approved by the American Association for Respiratory
Care, or its successor organization.
                                             
 (b) Education programs approved by other approved professional
organizations.
                                             
 (c) Education programs sponsored by continuing education
providers approved by the board.
                                             
 II. The board is authorized to approve, disapprove, or withdraw
approval from providers of respiratory care continuing education
programs.
                                             
 III. The board shall establish, through rules adopted pursuant to
RSA 541-A, application procedures and eligibility requirements for the
approval of persons and entities as providers of continuing education
programs.
                                             
 IV. The board shall set standards for the approval of continuing
education programs and for the approval of providers of continuing
education programs, including:
                                             
 (a) Minimum qualifications of faculty.
                                             
 (b) Curricular topics consistent with the knowledge and skills
required for the practice of respiratory care, including biological,
physical, social, behavioral, and respiratory care and medical
sciences.
                                             
 (c) Administrative aspects of the program or the provider.

**Source.** 2003, 310:2, eff. July 1, 2003.
