---
title: 'CHAPTER 326-G ATHLETIC TRAINERS'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 326-G
                                             
ATHLETIC TRAINERS
-----------------

### Section 326-G:1

 **326-G:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter and RSA 328-F:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means the governing board of athletic trainers
established in RSA 328-F.
                                             
 II. "Athletic trainer'' means a person licensed under this chapter
to practice athletic training.
                                             
 III. "Athletic training'' means the practice, with respect to
injuries or conditions incurred by participants in organized or
recreational sports, of:
                                             
 (a) Prevention;
                                             
 (b) Assessment and evaluation;
                                             
 (c) Acute care, management, treatment and disposition;
                                             
 (d) Rehabilitation and reconditioning; and
                                             
 (e) Education, counseling and program administration,
                                             
 Provided such care is within the professional preparation and
education of athletic trainers and under the direction of a physician
licensed in any state or in Canada.

**Source.** 2003, 310:4, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-G:2

 **326-G:2 Exemptions. –** This chapter and RSA 328-F shall not apply
to the following:
                                             
 I. Self-care by a patient, first aid by a coach, or gratuitous care
by a friend or family member who does not represent himself or herself
as an athletic trainer.
                                             
 II. The activities of athletic training students acting under the
direction of an athletic trainer licensed, certified, or registered in
any state, provided that the students are designated by a title which
clearly indicates their status as athletic training students.
                                             
 III. The activities of athletic trainers not residents of this
state, when called to perform athletic training services during a
temporary visit in this state, provided such athletic trainers are
currently licensed, certified, or registered in any state or Canada, or
are currently certified by the National Athletic Trainers Association
Board of Certification, Inc., or its successor organization.

**Source.** 2003, 310:4, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-G:3

 **326-G:3 Rulemaking. –** The board shall adopt rules, pursuant to
RSA 541-A, relative to the nature of the temporary visit in this state
which is sufficient to exempt from the application of this chapter the
practitioners of athletic training designated in RSA 326-G:2, III.

**Source.** 2003, 310:4, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-G:4

 **326-G:4 Eligibility for Initial Licensure. –** Applicants for
initial licensure as athletic trainers shall:
                                             
 I. Demonstrate sufficient evidence of good professional character
and reliability to satisfy the board that the applicant shall faithfully
and conscientiously avoid professional misconduct and adhere to this
chapter, RSA 328-F, and the board's rules.
                                             
 II. Have at least a bachelor's degree.
                                             
 III. Have a currently valid certificate issued by the National
Athletic Trainers Association Board of Certification, Inc., or its
successor organization.
                                             
 IV. Meet any continuing competency requirements established by the
board.

**Source.** 2003, 310:4, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-G:5

 **326-G:5 Professional Identification. –**
                                             
 I. Any person licensed to practice as an athletic trainer in this
state may use the title "New Hampshire Licensed Athletic Trainer'' and
the abbreviation, "N.H.LAT'' to designate such person's practice of
athletic training and shall produce such person's license upon the
request of the board.
                                             
 II. Any person who uses the title or the abbreviation or otherwise
states or implies by word or act that he or she is currently licensed to
practice athletic training, and does so at a time when she or he does
not possess a valid license, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2003, 310:4, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-G:6

 **326-G:6 Eligibility for Renewal of License. –** Licensees are
eligible for renewal of their licenses if they:
                                             
 I. Hold a currently valid certificate issued by the National
Athletic Trainers Association Board of Certification, Inc., or its
successor organization.
                                             
 II. Have not violated this chapter or RSA 328-F nor demonstrated
poor professional character.
                                             
 III. Meet any continuing competency requirements established by the
board.

**Source.** 2003, 310:4, eff. July 1, 2003.
