---
title: 'CHAPTER 326-K GENETIC COUNSELORS'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 326-K
                                             
GENETIC COUNSELORS
------------------

### Section 326-K:1

 **326-K:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter and RSA 328-F:
                                             
 I. "ABGC'' means the American Board of Genetic Counseling, its
equivalent, or successor.
                                             
 II. "ABMG'' means the American Board of Medical Genetics, its
equivalent, or successor.
                                             
 III. "Board'' means the genetic counselors governing board
established in RSA 328-F.
                                             
 IV. "Genetic counselor'' means an individual, who is licensed by the
board under this chapter, to engage in the practice of genetic
counseling.
                                             
 V. "NSGC'' means the National Society of Genetic Counselors, its
equivalent, or successor.
                                             
 VI. "Practice of genetic counseling'' means, for the purposes of
advising an individual client, a client's family, or other licensed
health care professionals:
                                             
 (a) Obtaining and evaluating individual, family, and medical
histories to determine genetic risk for genetic or medical conditions
and diseases in a patient, his or her offspring, and other family
members;
                                             
 (b) Discussing the features, natural history, means of diagnosis,
genetic and environmental factors, and management of risk for genetic or
medical conditions and diseases;
                                             
 (c) Identifying and coordinating genetic laboratory tests and
other diagnostic studies as appropriate for the genetic assessment;
                                             
 (d) Integrating genetic laboratory test results and other
diagnostic studies with personal and family medical history to assess
and communicate risk factors for genetic or medical conditions and
diseases;
                                             
 (e) Explaining the clinical implications of genetic laboratory
tests and other diagnostic studies and their results;
                                             
 (f) Evaluating the client's or family's responses to the
condition or risk of recurrence and provide client-centered counseling
and anticipatory guidance; and
                                             
 (g) Providing written documentation of medical, genetic, and
counseling information for families and health care professionals.

**Source.** 2013, 271:1, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 326-K:2

 **326-K:2 Exemptions from Licensure. –** Except for the requirements
under RSA 326-K:8, the requirements for licensure under this chapter
shall not apply to:
                                             
 I. Any person licensed by the state to practice in a profession
other than that of genetic counseling when acting within the scope of
the person's profession and doing work of a nature consistent with the
person's training. Such person shall not hold himself or herself out to
the public as a genetic counselor.
                                             
 II. Any person employed as a genetic counselor by the federal
government or an agency thereof if such person provides genetic
counseling services solely under the direction and control of the
organization by which he or she is employed.
                                             
 III. A student, if the following conditions apply:
                                             
 (a) The student is enrolled in an ABGC accredited genetic
counseling educational program;
                                             
 (b) The genetic counseling services performed by the student are
an integral part of the student's course of study;
                                             
 (c) The genetic counseling services are performed under the
direct supervision of a licensed genetic counselor; and
                                             
 (d) The student is designated by the title, "genetic counseling
intern.''

**Source.** 2013, 271:1, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 326-K:3

 **326-K:3 Eligibility for Initial Licensure. –** In addition to
requirements under RSA 328-F, the board shall require the following as a
minimum to qualify for licensure. Each applicant shall:
                                             
 I. Comply with the NSGC Code of Ethics.
                                             
 II. Provide satisfactory evidence of having fulfilled the following
criteria:
                                             
 (a) Genetic counselor currently certified by ABGC or ABMG; or
                                             
 (b) Medical geneticist currently certified by ABMG.
                                             
 III. Be at least 18 years of age.
                                             
 IV. Be of good moral character.
                                             
 V. Demonstrate sufficient evidence of good professional character
and reliability to satisfy the board that the applicant shall faithfully
and conscientiously avoid professional misconduct and adhere to this
chapter, RSA 328-F, and the board's rules.

**Source.** 2013, 271:1, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 326-K:4

 **326-K:4 Provisional License. –**
                                             
 I. A provisional license may be issued by the board to an applicant
who meets all of the requirements for licensure except for the
certification component and has been granted active candidate status by
ABGC.
                                             
 II. A provisional license shall be valid for the ABGC examination
cycle for which active candidate status by the ABGC has been granted.
Such provisional license shall expire automatically upon the earliest of
the following:
                                             
 (a) Issuance of a full license;
                                             
 (b) Thirty days after the applicant fails to pass the
certification examination; or
                                             
 (c) Two years from the issuance of a provisional license.
                                             
 III. A provisional license may only be extended upon approval of the
board for good cause shown.
                                             
 IV. A provisional licensed genetic counselor shall work under the
general supervision of a licensed genetic counselor or a licensed
physician at all times during which the provisional licensed genetic
counselor performs genetic counseling. An application for extension of
the provisional license shall be signed by the supervising licensed
genetic counselor or supervising licensed physician.
                                             
 V. The board is authorized to issue conditional provisional licenses
in accordance with rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 2013, 271:1, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 326-K:5

 **326-K:5 Prohibition on Unlicensed Practice; Professional
Identification. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall practice or represent himself or herself as a
genetic counselor in this state without first applying for and receiving
a license or provisional license from the board to practice as a
licensed genetic counselor.
                                             
 II. A genetic counselor whose license is suspended or revoked or
whose surrender of license with or without prejudice has been accepted
by the board, shall promptly deliver the original license to the board.
                                             
 III. Individuals holding currently valid licenses issued under this
chapter may use the title "genetic counselor'' and write the designation
"licensed genetic counselor'' following his or her written name.
                                             
 IV. No person shall represent himself or herself or the services
offered by using the term genetic counselor unless he or she is licensed
in accordance with this chapter. No person, who is not so licensed may
use in connection with his or her name or place of business, the title
"genetic counselor,'' "licensed genetic counselor,'' "gene counselor,''
"genetic consultant,'' "genetic associate,'' or any words, letters,
abbreviations or insignia indicating or implying a person holds a
genetic counseling license, or any similar words if the intent of such
use is to imply that the person is licensed.
                                             
 V. Any person who states or implies by word or act that he or she is
currently licensed to practice genetic counseling at a time when he or
she does not hold a currently valid license shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2013, 271:1, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 326-K:6

 **326-K:6 Reciprocity. –** The board may, in its discretion, grant a
license under this chapter to an individual certified or licensed in
another state if it determines that the requirements or standards for
certification or licensure in that state are equivalent to, or greater
than, those established by this chapter.

**Source.** 2013, 271:1, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 326-K:7

 **326-K:7 Compensation. –** Notwithstanding RSA 328-F:6 and RSA
328-F:15, I(g), the members of genetic counselors governing board shall
serve without compensation for attendance at meetings and shall not be
reimbursed for travel expenses incurred in connection with the work of
the board.

**Source.** 2013, 271:1, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 326-K:8

 **326-K:8 Privileged Communications. –** In addition to RSA
328-F:28:
                                             
 I. No person shall disclose any information or results related to a
genetic evaluation, assessment, laboratory test, diagnostic study, or
written documentation of genetic counseling, to any person other than
the client without prior written consent.
                                             
 II. Information and results may be made available to the board for
use in an investigation or disciplinary proceeding under RSA 328-F
concerning a licensed genetic counselor only if the results are coded to
maintain confidentiality of the client.
                                             
 III. A violation of this section shall be subject to a civil action
by an aggrieved individual and, if successful, the aggrieved individual
shall be awarded special or general damages of not less than 
                                             $10,000
for each violation, and costs and reasonable legal fees.

**Source.** 2013, 271:1, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 326-K:9

 **326-K:9 Rulemaking. –** In addition to rules adopted pursuant to
RSA 328-F:11, the board shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A relative
to:
                                             
 I. Eligibility requirements for provisional licenses.
                                             
 II. Application procedures for provisional licenses.
                                             
 III. The requirements for direction and supervision of those
practicing under provisional licenses.
                                             
 IV. The limitations on practice imposed on those practicing under
provisional licenses.

**Source.** 2013, 271:1, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 326-K:10

 **326-K:10 Eligibility for Renewal of Licenses. –** Licensees are
eligible for renewal of their licenses if they:
                                             
 I. Have completed 50 hours of continuing education which meet the
requirements established by the board through rulemaking pursuant to RSA
541-A and at least 50 percent of which are directly related to the
practice of genetic counseling.
                                             
 II. Have not violated this chapter or RSA 328-F nor demonstrated
poor professional character.

**Source.** 2013, 271:1, eff. July 1, 2013.
