---
title: 'CHAPTER 326-B NURSE PRACTICE ACT'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 326-B
                                             
NURSE PRACTICE ACT
------------------

### Section 326-B:1

 **326-B:1 Purpose. –** In order to safeguard the life, health, and
public welfare of the people of New Hampshire and in order to protect
the people of the state from the unauthorized, unqualified, and improper
application of services by individuals in the practice of nursing, it is
necessary that a regulatory authority be established and adequately
funded. To further this policy, the practice of nursing shall be
regulated through the New Hampshire board of nursing, and such board
shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Licensees under this chapter are accountable to clients, the nursing
profession, and the board for complying with the requirements of this
act and the quality of nursing care rendered, and for recognizing limits
of knowledge and experience and planning for management of situations
beyond the licensee's experience.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:2

 **326-B:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Advanced practice registered nurse'' or "APRN'' means a
registered nurse currently licensed by the board under RSA 326-B:18.
                                             
 I-a. "Advanced practice registered nurse-patient relationship''
means a medical connection between a licensed APRN and a patient that
includes an in-person or face-to-face 2-way real-time interactive
communication exam, a history, a diagnosis, a treatment plan appropriate
for the licensee's medical specialty, and documentation of all
prescription drugs including name and dosage. A licensee may prescribe
for a patient whom the licensee does not have an APRN-patient
relationship under the following circumstances: writing admission orders
for a newly hospitalized patient; for a patient of another licensee for
whom the prescriber is taking call; for a patient examined by another
licensed practitioner; or for medication on a short-term basis for a new
patient prior to the patient's first appointment.
                                             
 II. "Board'' means the New Hampshire board of nursing established in
RSA 326-B:3.
                                             
 III. "Continuing competence'' means integrated learning by which a
licensee gains, maintains, or refines practice knowledge, skills, and
abilities. This development may occur through a formal education
program, continuing education, and clinical practice, and is expected to
continue throughout the practitioners' career.
                                             
 IV. "Licensed nursing assistant'' or "LNA'' means an individual who
holds a current license to provide client care under the direction of a
registered nurse or licensed practical nurse.
                                             
 V. "Licensed practical nurse'' or "LPN'' means an individual who
holds a current license to practice practical nursing as defined in
paragraph IX.
                                             
 VI. "Medication nursing assistant'' means a licensed nursing
assistant holding a currently valid certificate authorizing the
delegation to the nursing assistant of tasks of medication
administration.
                                             
 VII. "Nursing'' means assisting clients or groups of clients to
attain or maintain optimal health by implementing a strategy of care to
accomplish defined goals and by evaluating responses to nursing care and
medical treatment. Nursing includes basic health care that helps both
clients and groups of clients cope with difficulties in daily living
associated with their actual or potential health or illness status and
also those nursing activities that require a substantial amount of
scientific knowledge or technical skill.
                                             
 VII-a. "Nurse'' means a person authorized to practice nursing and
who holds a current license to provide care as an APRN, RN, or LPN.
                                             
 VIII. "Nursing-related activities'' means client care provided by a
licensed nursing assistant directed by an APRN, an RN, or an LPN.
                                             
 IX. "Practical nursing'' means the practice of nursing as defined in
paragraph VII by a person who:
                                             
 (a) Uses sound nursing judgment based on preparation, knowledge,
skills, understanding, and past nursing experience.
                                             
 (b) Works under the direction of a registered nurse, advanced
practice registered nurse, dentist, or physician.
                                             
 (c) Functions as a member of a health care team and contributes
to the assessment, planning, implementation, and evaluation of client
care.
                                             
 X. "Registered nurse'' or "RN'' means an individual who holds a
current license to practice registered nursing as defined in paragraph
XI.
                                             
 XI. "Registered nursing'' means the application of nursing
knowledge, judgment, and skill drawn from broad in-depth education in
the biological, psychological, social, and physical sciences in
assessing and diagnosing the health status of a client, and in planning,
implementing, and evaluating client care which promotes the optimum
health, wellness, and independence of the individual, the family, and
the community.
                                             
 XII. (a) "Telemedicine'' means the use of audio, video, or other
electronic media for the purpose of diagnosis, consultation, or
treatment. "Telemedicine'' shall not include the use of audio-only
telephone or facsimile.
                                             
 (b) An out-of-state APRN providing services by means of
telemedicine shall be deemed to be in the practice of medicine and shall
be required to be licensed under this chapter.
                                             
 (c) It shall be unlawful for any person to prescribe by means of
telemedicine a controlled drug classified in schedule II through IV.
                                             
 (d)(1) The prescribing of a non-opioid controlled drug classified
in schedule II through IV by means of telemedicine shall be limited to
prescribers as defined in RSA 329:1-d, I and RSA 326-B:2, XII(a), who
are treating a patient with whom the prescriber has an in-person
practitioner-patient relationship, for purposes of monitoring or
follow-up care, or who are treating patients at a state designated
community mental health center pursuant to RSA 135-C or at a Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA)-certified state
opioid treatment program, and shall require an initial in-person exam by
a practitioner licensed to prescribe the drug. Subsequent in-person
exams shall be by a practitioner licensed to prescribe the drug at
intervals appropriate for the patient, medical condition and drug, but
not less than annually.
                                             
 (2) The prescribing of an opioid controlled drug classified in
schedule II through IV by means of telemedicine shall be limited to
prescribers as defined in RSA 329:1-d, I and RSA 326-B:2, XII(a), who
are treating patients at a SAMHSA-certified state opioid treatment
program. Such prescription authority shall require an initial in-person
exam by a practitioner licensed to prescribe the drug and subsequent
in-person exams shall be by a practitioner licensed to prescribe the
drug at intervals appropriate for the patient, medical condition, and
opioid, but not less than annually.
                                             
 (e) An APRN providing services by means of telemedicine directly
to a patient shall:
                                             
 (1) Use the same standard of care as used in an in-person
encounter;
                                             
 (2) Maintain a medical record; and
                                             
 (3) Subject to the patient's consent, forward the medical
record to the patient's primary care or treating provider, if
appropriate.
                                             
 (f) Under this section, Medicaid coverage for telehealth services
shall comply with the provisions of 42 C.F.R. section 410.78 and RSA
167:4-d.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1. 2009, 54:4, 5, eff. July 21, 2009. 2011, 245:1,
eff. July 1, 2011. 2015, 246:7, 8, eff. Sept. 11, 2015 except for
subpar. (f) eff. July 6, 2015 at 12:01 a.m. 2016, 221:4, eff. Aug. 8,
2016.

### Section 326-B:3

 **326-B:3 Board of Nursing. –**
                                             
 I. The board of nursing shall comprise 11 members to be appointed by
the governor with the consent of the council. Any interested individual,
association, or entity may make recommendation to the governor. The
members of the board shall include 5 registered nurses, one of whom
shall be an advanced practice registered nurse, 2 licensed practical
nurses, 2 licensed nursing assistants, one of whom shall be a medication
licensed nursing assistant if possible, and 2 representative members of
the public. The terms of members shall be staggered as determined by the
governor and council. All terms shall be for 3 years, and no member of
the board shall be appointed to more than 3 consecutive terms.
                                             
 II. Each RN member shall be a resident of this state, licensed in
good standing under the provisions of this chapter, and currently
engaged in the practice of nursing as an RN and shall have no fewer than
5 years of experience as an RN, at least 3 of which shall have
immediately preceded appointment. RN members of the board shall
represent the various areas of nursing practice including education,
administration, and clinical practice.
                                             
 III. The LPN members of the board shall be residents of this state,
licensed in good standing under the provisions of this chapter, and
currently engaged in the practice of nursing and shall have had no fewer
than 5 years of experience as an LPN, at least 3 of which shall have
immediately preceded the date of appointment.
                                             
 IV. The LNA members of the board shall be residents of this state,
licensed in good standing under the provisions of this chapter, and
currently engaged in nursing-related activities. These members shall
have a minimum of 5 years of experience as an LNA, at least 3 of which
shall have immediately preceded the date of their appointment.
                                             
 V. The public members shall be residents of the state of New
Hampshire who are not, and never have been, members of the nursing
profession or the spouse of any such person. The public members shall
not have, and shall never have had, a material financial interest in
either the provision of nursing services or an activity directly related
to nursing, including the representation of the board or its predecessor
or the profession for a fee at any time during the 5 years preceding the
date of appointment.
                                             
 VI. No more than one board member shall be associated with a
particular agency, corporation, or other enterprise or subsidiary at one
time.
                                             
 VII. Each member of the board shall be compensated at the rate of

                                             $100 for attendance at a regular board meeting and 
                                             $50 for each other
day actually engaged in official duties of the board, and shall be
reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the discharge
of official duties, including travel at the state employee mileage
rate.
                                             
 VIII. An appointee to a full term on the board shall be appointed by
the governor with the consent of the council before the expiration of
the term of the member being succeeded and shall become a member of the
board on the first day following the appointment expiration date of the
previous appointee. Appointees to unexpired portions of full terms shall
become members of the board on the day following such appointment, and
shall serve the unexpired term and then be eligible to serve 3 full
3-year terms.
                                             
 IX. The governor may remove any member from the board for neglect of
any duty under RSA 326-B:4 or for incompetence or unprofessional or
dishonorable conduct. Any person may file a complaint against a board
member with the office of professional licensure and certification. The
provisions of RSA 4:1 controlling the removal of public officials from
office shall be followed in dismissing board members.
                                             
 X. All members of the board and its agents or employees shall enjoy
immunity from individual civil liability while acting within the scope
of their duties as board members, agents, or employees, as long as they
are not acting in a wanton or reckless manner.
                                             
 XI. Board meetings shall be open to the public. In accordance with
RSA 91-A:3, the board may conduct part of a meeting in nonpublic
session.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1. 2009, 54:5, eff. July 21, 2009. 2015, 276:69,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 326-B:4

 **326-B:4 Powers and Duties of the Board. –** The board may:
                                             
 I. Establish reasonable and uniform standards for nursing practice
consistent with the criteria identified by the National Council of State
Boards of Nursing.
                                             
 II. Provide consultation regarding nursing practice for institutions
and agencies and investigate reports of illegal practice.
                                             
 III. Examine, license, and renew the licenses of duly qualified
individuals. The board shall select an appropriate nationally approved
licensing examination.
                                             
 IV. Gather and report to the public statistical information
regarding, but not limited to, the education and licensure of registered
and practical nurses.
                                             
 V. Conduct investigations, hearings, and proceedings concerning
alleged violations of this chapter or of rules adopted under this
chapter.
                                             
 VI. Subpoena witnesses, records, and documents, as needed, and
administer oaths to those testifying at hearings.
                                             
 VII. Determine and enforce appropriate disciplinary action against
all individuals found guilty of violating this chapter or the rules
adopted under this chapter.
                                             
 VIII. Deny or withdraw approval of nursing educational programs that
do not meet the minimum requirements of this chapter.
                                             
 IX. Maintain records of proceedings as required by the laws of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 X. Conduct conferences, forums, studies, and research on nursing
practice and education.
                                             
 XI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XIII. Establish and collect fees, under rules adopted by the board
under RSA 541-A, relative to applicants seeking any type of license
issued by the board under this chapter, including fees for applications
for temporary licenses, reinstatement of inactive licenses, licenses by
examination, and renewal of licenses, as well as fees for verifying
license status, program graduation, or computerized lists, and fees for
site visits associated with nursing education programs under RSA
326-B:32.
                                             
 XIV. In accordance with state due process laws, limit the multistate
licensure privilege of any registered nurse or licensed practical nurse
to practice in New Hampshire and may take any other actions under
applicable state laws necessary to protect the health and safety of New
Hampshire citizens. If the board does take such action, it shall
promptly notify the administrator of the coordinated licensure
information system. The administrator of the coordinated licensure
information system shall promptly notify the home state of any such
action taken by the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1. 2008, 179:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2008. 2015, 276:108,
VII, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 326-B:5

 **326-B:5 Administration by Executive Director. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2015,
276:108, VIII, eff. July 1, 2015.
                                             ]

### Section 326-B:6

 **326-B:6 Collection and Expenditure of Funds. –** The office of
professional licensure and certification shall receive and expend funds
provided such funds are received and expended for the pursuit of the
objectives authorized by this chapter. Fees, fines, and administrative
charges, including those related to RSA 326-B:26, shall be deposited in
the general fund.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m. 2011, 245:2,
eff. July 1, 2011. 2015, 276:70, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 326-B:7

 **326-B:7 Nursing Assistant Fees and Fines; Continual Appropriation.
–** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 245:4, I, eff. July 1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 326-B:8

 **326-B:8 Fees; Charges. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall charge fees for the issuance, renewal, and
reinstatement of all licenses, specialty licenses, and certificates
authorized by this chapter. The board shall recover at least 125 percent
of its direct expenses through licensee fees, fines, and administrative
charges.
                                             
 II. The board may provide the following services and make
administrative charges for:
                                             
 (a) The administration of examinations required by this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Verification of licensure status.
                                             
 (c) The sale of lists of licensees who have given their written
authorization to have their names included on such lists.
                                             
 (d) The actual costs of a criminal conviction record check
required pursuant RSA 326-B:15.
                                             
 (e) The actual cost of collection of statistical data provided to
private entities.
                                             
 (f) Site visits associated with nursing education programs under
RSA 326-B:32.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1. 2008, 179:2, eff. Aug. 10, 2008.

### Section 326-B:9

 **326-B:9 Rulemaking Authority. –** The board shall adopt rules, in
accordance with RSA 541-A, relative to the following:
                                             
 I. Application procedures and eligibility requirements for the
issuance of all initial, temporary, and renewal licenses, specialty
licenses, and certificates issued by the board, including the issuance
of such licenses to applicants holding a currently valid license or
other authorization to practice in another jurisdiction.
                                             
 II. Application procedures and eligibility requirements for the
reinstatement of licenses after lapse and after disciplinary action.
                                             
 III. Recognition of national certifying bodies issuing specialty
certifications required for licensure as an APRN which shall also be
recognized by the National Council of State Boards of Nursing.
                                             
 IV. The standards to be met by, and the process for approval of,
education programs designed to prepare applicants to qualify for
licensure or certification in any of the disciplines regulated by the
board under RSA 326-B:32, including the time period within which
noncompliance must be corrected before such approval is withdrawn.
                                             
 V. The standards to be met by, and the process for approval of,
education programs designed to prepare LPNs in intravenous therapy and
by programs designed to prepare LNAs to perform tasks not addressed in
the basic curriculum required for licensure.
                                             
 VI. The determination of disciplinary sanctions authorized by this
chapter, including the determination of administrative fines.
                                             
 VII. The administration of examinations authorized by this chapter,
and the manner in which information regarding the contents of any
licensing examinations may be disclosed, solicited, or compiled.
                                             
 VIII. Ethical standards for the practice of nursing and
nursing-related activities.
                                             
 IX. Continuing competence requirements.
                                             
 X. Designations that may be used by persons regulated by the board
and retired persons regulated by the board.
                                             
 XI. The implementation and coordination of the nurse licensure
compact adopted in RSA 326-B:46. The board shall use model rules
developed for the nurse licensure compact by the National Council of
State Boards of Nursing as the basis for adopting rules which shall be
modified as necessary to comply with state statutes.
                                             
 XII. Prescribing controlled drugs pursuant to RSA 318-B:41.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1. 2008, 179:3. 2009, 54:4, eff. July 21, 2009.
2016, 213:4, eff. June 7, 2016.

### Section 326-B:10

 **326-B:10 Joint Health Council. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2009, 54:6, eff.
July 21, 2009.
                                             ]

### Section 326-B:11

 **326-B:11 Scope of Practice and Authority; Advanced Practice
Registered Nurse. –**
                                             
 I. Advanced practice registered nursing by nurse practitioners shall
consist of a combination of knowledge and skills acquired in basic
nursing education. The APRN scope of practice, with or without
compensation or personal profit, shall be limited to:
                                             
 (a) Performing acts of advanced assessment, diagnosing,
prescribing, selecting, administering, and providing therapeutic
measures and treatment regimes;
                                             
 (b) Obtaining consultation, planning, and implementing
collaborative management, referral, or transferring the care of the
client as appropriate; and
                                             
 (c) Providing such functions common to a nurse practitioner for
which the APRN is educationally and experientially prepared and which
are consistent with standards established by a national credentialing or
certification body recognized by the National Council of State Boards of
Nursing and approved by the board in the appropriate APRN role and
specialty.
                                             
 II. An APRN shall practice within standards consistent with
standards established by a national credentialing or certification body
recognized by the National Council of State Boards of Nursing and
approved by the board in the appropriate APRN role and specialty. The
board shall not approve a new advanced practice specialty category that
has not been developed by a national credentialing or certifying body
recognized by the National Council of State Board of Nursing without
approval of the legislature under RSA 332-G:6. Each APRN shall be
accountable to clients and the board:
                                             
 (a) For complying with this chapter and the quality of advanced
nursing care rendered;
                                             
 (b) For recognizing limits of knowledge and experience and
planning for the management of situations beyond the APRN's expertise;
and
                                             
 (c) For consulting with or referring clients to other health care
providers as appropriate.
                                             
 III. An APRN shall have plenary authority to possess, compound,
prescribe, administer, and dispense and distribute to clients controlled
and non-controlled drugs within the scope of the APRN's practice as
defined by this chapter. Such authority may be denied, suspended, or
revoked by the board after notice and the opportunity for hearing, upon
proof that the authority has been abused.
                                             
 IV. Any expansion of the scope of practice shall be adopted by
legislation in accordance with RSA 332-G:6.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1. 2009, 54:3, 5, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 326-B:12

 **326-B:12 Scope of Practice; Registered Nurse. –**
                                             
 I. An RN shall, with or without compensation or personal profit,
practice nursing that incorporates caring for all clients in all
settings, is guided by nursing standards consistent with standards
established by the National Council of State Boards of Nursing and
approved by the board, and shall be limited to:
                                             
 (a) Providing comprehensive nursing assessment of the health
status of clients, families, groups, and communities.
                                             
 (b) Collaborating with a health care team to develop an
integrated client-centered plan of health care.
                                             
 (c) Developing a plan of nursing strategies to be integrated
within the client-centered health care plan that establishes nursing
diagnoses, setting goals to meet identified health care needs,
prescribing nursing interventions, and implementing nursing care through
the execution of independent nursing strategies and prescribed medical
regimen.
                                             
 (d) Delegating and assigning nursing interventions to implement
the plan of care.
                                             
 (e) Providing for the maintenance of safe and effective nursing
care rendered directly or indirectly.
                                             
 (f) Promoting a safe and therapeutic environment.
                                             
 (g) Providing health teaching and counseling to promote, attain,
and maintain the optimum health level of clients, families, groups, and
communities.
                                             
 (h) Advocating for clients, families, groups, and communities by
attaining and maintaining what is in the best interest of the client or
group.
                                             
 (i) Evaluating responses to interventions and the effectiveness
of the plan of care.
                                             
 (j) Communicating and collaborating with other health care
professionals in the management of health care and the implementation of
the total health care regimen within and across care settings.
                                             
 (k) Acquiring and applying critical new knowledge and
technologies to the practice of nursing.
                                             
 (l) Managing, supervising, and evaluating the practice of
nursing.
                                             
 (m) Teaching the theory and practice of nursing.
                                             
 (n) Participating in the development of policies, procedures, and
systems to support the client.
                                             
 (o) Other nursing services that require education and training
prescribed by the board and in conformance with national nursing
standards. Additional nursing services shall be commensurate with the
RN's experience, continuing education, and demonstrated competencies.
                                             
 II. Each RN is accountable to clients, the nursing profession, and
the board for complying with the requirements of this act and the
quality of nursing care rendered, and for recognizing limits of
knowledge and experience and planning for management of situations
beyond the nurse's experience.
                                             
 III. Any expansion of the scope of practice shall be adopted by
legislation in accordance with RSA 332-G:6.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:13

 **326-B:13 Scope of Practice; Licensed Practical Nurse. –**
                                             
 I. An LPN shall, with or without compensation or personal profit,
practice under the supervision of an RN, APRN, licensed physician, or
dentist. Such practice is guided by nursing standards established by the
National Council of State Boards of Nursing and approved by the board,
and shall be limited to:
                                             
 (a) Collecting data and conducting focused nursing assessments of
the health status of clients.
                                             
 (b) Planning nursing care for clients with stable conditions.
                                             
 (c) Participating in the development and modification of the
comprehensive plan of care for all types of clients.
                                             
 (d) Implementing appropriate aspects of the strategy of care
within the LPN scope of practice.
                                             
 (e) Participating in nursing care management through delegating,
assigning, and directing nursing interventions that may be performed by
others, including other LPNs, that do not conflict with this chapter.
                                             
 (f) Maintaining safe and effective nursing care rendered directly
or indirectly.
                                             
 (g) Promoting a safe and therapeutic environment.
                                             
 (h) Participating in health teaching and counseling to promote,
attain, and maintain the optimum health level of clients.
                                             
 (i) Serving as an advocate for the client by communicating and
collaborating with other health service personnel.
                                             
 (j) Participating in the evaluation of client responses to
interventions.
                                             
 (k) Communicating and collaborating with other health care
professionals.
                                             
 (l) Providing input into the development of policies and
procedures.
                                             
 (m) Other nursing services that require education and training
prescribed by the board and in conformance with national nursing
standards. Additional nursing services shall be commensurate with the
LPN's experience, continuing education, and demonstrated LPN
competencies.
                                             
 II. Each nurse is accountable to clients, the nursing profession,
and the board for complying with the requirements of this chapter and
the quality of nursing care rendered and for recognizing limits of
knowledge and experience and planning for management of situations
beyond the nurse's expertise.
                                             
 III. LPNs who have successfully completed the curriculum of a board-
approved LPN intravenous therapy course may administer intravenous
solutions under the direction of a physician or dentist, or as delegated
by an RN.
                                             
 IV. Any expansion of the scope of practice shall be adopted by
legislation in accordance with RSA 332-G:6.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1. 2009, 54:4, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 326-B:14

 **326-B:14 Scope of Practice; Licensed Nursing Assistant. –**
                                             
 I. An LNA shall, with or without compensation or personal profit,
practice under the supervision of an RN, APRN, or LPN.
                                             
 II. An LNA is responsible for competency in the nursing assistant
curriculum approved by the board.
                                             
 II-a. An LNA is authorized to administer medication if:
                                             
 (a) The LNA holds a currently valid certificate of medication
administration; or
                                             
 (b) A licensed nurse delegates the task of medication
administration to the LNA who is employed in the home care, hospice,
residential care, or adult day care setting. The board, in consultation
with the commissioner of health and human services or a designee, shall
adopt rules under RSA 541-A establishing standards for such delegation
of medication administration which include, but are not limited to,
limitations on the number of delegations per assistive personnel,
training and competency requirements, documentation requirements, and
medication administration error reporting requirements.
                                             
 III. Following successful completion of the curriculum, a nursing
assistant shall be able to:
                                             
 (a) Form a relationship, communicate, and interact effectively
with individuals and groups.
                                             
 (b) Demonstrate comprehension related to individuals' emotional,
mental, physical, and social health needs through skillful, direct
nursing-related activities.
                                             
 (c) Assist individuals to attain and maintain functional
independence.
                                             
 (d) Exhibit behaviors supporting and promoting care recipients'
rights.
                                             
 (e) Demonstrate observational and documenting skills required for
reporting of people's health, safety, welfare, physical and mental
condition, and general well-being.
                                             
 (f) Provide safe nursing-related activities under the supervision
of an RN or an LPN.
                                             
 IV. LNAs may perform tasks not addressed in the basic curriculum
required for licensure if they obtain additional training in the
performance of such tasks through programs approved by the board.
Additional tasks may be delegated provided:
                                             
 (a) The task has been properly delegated to the nursing assistant
by the supervising licensed nurse pursuant to RSA 326-B:28.
                                             
 (b) The task has not been made exempt from nursing assistant
practice.
                                             
 (c) The policies of the employing health care facility allow the
delegation of the task to an LNA.
                                             
 V. Any expansion of the scope of practice shall be adopted by
legislation in accordance with RSA 332-G:6.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1. 2009, 54:4, eff. July 21, 2009. 2015, 239:1,
eff. Sept. 11, 2015. 2016, 273:2, eff. June 16, 2016.

### Section 326-B:15

 **326-B:15 Criminal History Record Checks. –**
                                             
 I. Every applicant for initial licensure shall submit to the board a
notarized criminal history record release form, as provided by the New
Hampshire division of state police, department of safety, which
authorizes the release of his or her criminal history record, if any, to
the board.
                                             
 II. The applicant shall submit with the release form a complete set
of fingerprints taken by a qualified law enforcement agency or an
authorized employee of the department of safety. In the event that the
first set of fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern, a
second set of fingerprints shall be necessary in order to complete the
criminal history records check. If, after 2 attempts, a set of
fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern, the board may, in
lieu of the criminal history records check, accept police clearances
from every city, town, or county where the person has lived during the
past 5 years.
                                             
 III. The board shall submit the criminal history records release
form and fingerprint form to the division of state police which shall
conduct a criminal history records check through its records and through
the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Upon completion of the records
check, the division of state police shall release copies of the criminal
history records to the board. The board shall maintain the
confidentiality of all criminal history records information received
pursuant to this section.
                                             
 IV. The applicant shall bear the cost of a criminal history record
check.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1. 2007, 303:6. 2008, 268:3, eff. June 26, 2008;
268:4, eff. date, see contingency note set out below.

### Section 326-B:16

 **326-B:16 Licensure; All Applicants. –** All applicants shall:
                                             
 I. Submit a completed application and fees as established by the
board.
                                             
 II. Have the ability to read and write in the English language.
                                             
 III. Report any pending criminal charges, criminal convictions, or
plea arrangement in lieu of convictions.
                                             
 IV. Have committed no acts or omissions which are grounds for
disciplinary action as set forth in this chapter, or, if such acts have
been committed and would be grounds for disciplinary action, the board
has found, after investigation, that sufficient restitution has been
made.
                                             
 V. Meet continuing competence requirements as defined in rules
adopted under RSA 541-A.
                                             
 VI. Meet other criteria as established by the board.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:17

 **326-B:17 Registered Nurse and Licensed Practical Nurse; Initial
License by Examination. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall administer the examination to applicants for
licensure as RN's or LPN's.
                                             
 II. The board may employ, contract, and cooperate with any entity in
the preparation and process for determining results of a valid,
reliable, legally defensible and uniform licensure examination. When
such an examination is utilized, the board shall restrict access to
questions and answers.
                                             
 III. The board shall determine whether a license examination may be
repeated, the frequency of reexamination, and any requisite education
prior to reexamination.
                                             
 IV. An applicant for licensure by examination to practice as an RN
or LPN who successfully meets the requirements of this section shall be
entitled to licensure as an RN or LPN, whichever is applicable.
                                             
 V. Applicants for licensure by exam as an RN or LPN shall graduate
from or verify successful completion and eligibility for graduation from
a board approved nursing education program or a program that meets
criteria comparable to those established by the board.
                                             
 VI. An internationally educated applicant for RN or LPN licensure by
examination shall meet the requirements as established by the board.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:18

 **326-B:18 Advanced Practice Registered Nurse; Licensure. –**
                                             
 I. An applicant for initial APRN licensure shall:
                                             
 (a) Hold a current license as a registered nurse;
                                             
 (b) Have graduated with a graduate degree earned in an accredited
advanced practice registered nurse education program or have graduated
before July 1, 2004 from an APRN education program accredited by a
national accrediting body;
                                             
 (c) Be currently certified by a board-recognized national
certifying body in the specialty for which the applicant was educated;
and
                                             
 (d) Meet other criteria as established by the board.
                                             
 II. The board may issue one or more licenses to applicants meeting
the qualifications established in paragraph I.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1. 2009, 54:4, 5, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 326-B:19

 **326-B:19 Licensed Nursing Assistant; Licensure by Examination. –**
Applicants for an initial LNA license shall:
                                             
 I. Submit documentation of successful completion and certification
from a board approved nursing assistant education program.
                                             
 II. Pass an examination approved by the board.
                                             
 III. Meet other criteria as established by the board.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:20

 **326-B:20 Registered Nurse and Licensed Practical Nurse; Licensure
by Endorsement. –** An applicant for licensure by endorsement to
practice as an RN or LPN who is currently licensed or certified in any
other state or jurisdiction shall:
                                             
 I. Hold an active unencumbered license as an RN or LPN.
                                             
 II. Have committed no acts or omissions which are grounds for
disciplinary action in another jurisdiction, or, if such acts have been
committed and would be grounds for disciplinary action as set forth in
this chapter, the board has found, after investigation, that sufficient
restitution has been made.
                                             
 III. Pass an examination approved by the board.
                                             
 IV. Submit verification of licensure status directly from the
jurisdiction of licensure by examination.
                                             
 V. Meet other criteria established by the board.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:21

 **326-B:21 Licensed Nursing Assistant; Licensure by Endorsement. –**
An applicant for licensure by endorsement as a licensed nursing
assistant who is currently licensed or certified in any other state or
jurisdiction shall:
                                             
 I. Provide proof of current and original licensing, certification,
or nursing assistant registry status;
                                             
 II. Have committed no acts or omissions which are grounds for
disciplinary action as set forth in this chapter, or, if such acts have
been committed and would be grounds for disciplinary action, the board
has found, after investigation, that sufficient restitution has been
made; and
                                             
 III. Meet other criteria as established by the board.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:22

 **326-B:22 License Renewal; All Licensees. –**
                                             
 I. All license renewals shall be issued biennially.
                                             
 II. Any person licensed who intends to continue practicing as a
nurse or nursing assistant shall:
                                             
 (a) By midnight on his or her date of birth in the renewal year
submit a completed application and fees as established by the board;
                                             
 (b) Report any pending criminal charges, criminal convictions, or
plea arrangements in lieu of convictions;
                                             
 (c) Have committed no acts or omissions which are grounds for
disciplinary action as set forth in this chapter, or, if such acts have
been committed and would be grounds for disciplinary action, the board
has found, after investigation, that sufficient restitution has been
made;
                                             
 (d) Meet continuing competence requirements as defined in rules
adopted under RSA 541-A;
                                             
 (e) For those licensees applying for renewal following
disciplinary action, comply with all board licensure requirements as
well as any specific requirements set forth in the board's discipline
order; and
                                             
 (f) Meet other criteria as established by the board.
                                             
 III. Failure to renew the license shall result in forfeiture of the
ability to practice nursing or nursing activities in the state of New
Hampshire.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:23

 **326-B:23 License Reinstatement; All Licensees. –** An individual
whose license has lapsed by failure to renew may apply for reinstatement
by meeting all requirements for renewal, or satisfying the following
conditions:
                                             
 I. An individual who applies for license reinstatement who does not
meet the continuing competence requirements shall demonstrate current
nursing or nursing assistant knowledge and skill, as defined in rules
adopted by the board under RSA 541-A.
                                             
 II. For those licensees applying for reinstatement following
disciplinary action, compliance with all board licensure requirements as
well as any specific requirements set forth in the board's discipline
order.
                                             
 III. Application for reinstatement of a license which has lapsed
under this section shall include payment of a reinstatement fee and be
made, and granted or denied, in accordance with rules adopted by the
board pursuant to RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:24

 **326-B:24 Temporary Licenses; All Licensees. –**
                                             
 I. The board may issue temporary licenses, as provided in paragraph
II, to applicants who meet entry level licensing requirements in the
license category. A temporary license shall expire on the date the board
approves or denies the permanent license sought by the holder of the
temporary license, or in 120 days, whichever is less.
                                             
 II. The following applicants for licensure as RNs or LPNs may be
issued temporary licenses:
                                             
 (a) Unlicensed applicants for licensure under paragraph I and
applicants for licensure under RSA 326-B who have met all requirements
for licensure except that they have not yet taken the required
examination or the results of the examination are not yet available to
the board.
                                             
 (b) If they can demonstrate proficiency in English, currently
foreign-licensed applicants for licensure under RSA 326-B who have met
all requirements for licensure except that they have not yet taken the
required examination or the results of the examination are not yet
available to the board.
                                             
 (c) Applicants for licensure under RSA 326-B who have met all of
the requirements of that paragraph and are awaiting the board's decision
on their application for permanent licensure.
                                             
 III. Applicants described in paragraph II who have received
temporary licenses shall practice only under the supervision of an RN
currently licensed in New Hampshire.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:25

 **326-B:25 Modified License; Registered Nurse or Licensed Practical
Nurse. –** The board may issue a modified license to an individual who
has met licensure requirements and who is able to practice without
compromising public safety within a modified scope of practice or with
accommodations or both as specified by the board.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:26

 **326-B:26 Nursing Assistant Registry. –** The board shall maintain
a registry of nursing assistants who qualify pursuant to 42 C.F.R.
section 483.156. Nursing assistants who are registered shall comply with
all provisions of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) of 1987,
sections 1819 and 1919 of the Social Security Act, and all provisions of
this chapter.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m. 2011, 245:3,
eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 326-B:27

 **326-B:27 Certificate of Medication Administration for Licensed
Nursing Assistants. –**
                                             
 I. The board may issue a certificate of medication administration to
a current LNA who:
                                             
 (a) Has participated in and completed a board-approved medication
administration education program;
                                             
 (b) Has passed an examination approved by the board; and
                                             
 (c) Has paid the certification fee.
                                             
 II. Certification may be renewed on a biennial basis.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:28

 **326-B:28 Delegation of Nursing Activities and Tasks. –** A nurse
holding a currently valid license as an RN or an LPN may delegate
specific nursing activities and tasks under the circumstances, and in
accordance with the constraints, set forth in rules of the board adopted
under RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:29

 **326-B:29 Delegation; Circumstances Not Subject to Disciplinary
Action by the Board of Nursing. –**
                                             
 I. A licensee who delegates or has delegated a specific nursing
activity or task in compliance with this chapter shall not be subject to
disciplinary action because of the performance of the person to whom the
nursing activity or task is or was delegated.
                                             
 II. No person may coerce an RN or an LPN into compromising client
safety by requiring the nurse to delegate a nursing activity or task
when the nurse determines that it is inappropriate to do so. A licensee
shall not be subject to disciplinary action for refusing to delegate or
refusing to provide training related to such delegation when the
licensee has determined that such delegation may compromise client
safety except as provided in RSA 326-B:37, II(h)(2).

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:30

 **326-B:30 Obligations of Licensees. –**
                                             
 I. In response to board inquiries relevant to a licensee's status or
practice of nursing or nursing-related activities, each licensee shall
provide complete and truthful information.
                                             
 II. Each licensee shall notify the board if a license is lost or
stolen.
                                             
 III. Each licensee shall notify the board of a change of name or
address within 10 days.
                                             
 IV. Each licensee shall report to the board those acts or omissions
which are violations of this chapter or grounds for disciplinary action.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:31

 **326-B:31 Continuing Education. –** Applicants for license renewal
and license reinstatement after lapse shall complete continuing
education as follows:
                                             
 I. An LNA shall complete 12 hours of continuing education in
programs approved by the board each year, provided that licensees who
hold a certificate of medication administration shall complete at least
4 hours of those 12 hours in medication administration.
                                             
 II. An LPN or an RN shall complete 30 hours of continuing education
every 2 years.
                                             
 III. An APRN, in addition to the continuing education requirements
to renew or reinstate a license as an RN, shall complete 30 hours of
continuing education every 2 years, 20 hours of which shall be specific
to the specialty for which renewal or reinstatement is sought, and 5
hours of which shall be training in pharmacology appropriate to the
specialty for which license renewal or reinstatement is sought.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1. 2009, 54:4, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 326-B:32

 **326-B:32 Education Programs. –**
                                             
 I. (a) The board shall establish standards for the establishment and
outcomes for nursing and nursing assistant education programs intended
to prepare students for licensure or for certification, including
clinical learning experiences.
                                             
 (b) The board shall approve, disapprove, or withdraw approval for
nursing education programs that meet or fail to meet the requirements of
this chapter and the rules adopted by the board. Nursing education
programs under this subparagraph shall not include education for nursing
assistants. The board shall require that nursing education programs:
                                             
 (1) Seek and receive approval from the department of
education, division of higher education prior to applying for approval
from the board.
                                             
 (2) Receive institutional regional or national accreditation
in addition to specialized nursing accreditation by accrediting bodies
recognized by the United States Department of Education.
                                             
 (3) Be affiliated with an existing degree-granting institution
with institutional regional or national accreditation recognized by the
United States Department of Education.
                                             
 (c) The board shall approve, disapprove, or withdraw approval for
nursing assistant education programs that meet or fail to meet the
requirements of this chapter and the rules adopted by the board. The
board shall require that nursing assistant education programs seek and
receive approval from the department of education, division of higher
education prior to applying for approval from the board.
                                             
 (d) An educational institution or other entity conducting such an
education program shall comply with paragraphs II and III and rules
adopted by the board pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 II. The board shall establish the process for determining nursing
and nursing assistant education program compliance.
                                             
 III. The board:
                                             
 (a) Shall set requirements for establishment of:
                                             
 (1) New nursing education programs, including requirements
relative to affiliation, accreditation, and site visits required for
initial nursing education program approval and subsequent evaluations.
                                             
 (2) New nursing assistant education programs.
                                             
 (b) Shall periodically review nursing and nursing assistant
education programs and require such programs to submit evidence of
compliance with standards.
                                             
 (c) Shall grant continuing approval if, upon review of evidence,
the board determines that the program meets the established standards.
The board shall publish a list of approved programs.
                                             
 (d) Shall deny or withdraw approval or take such action as deemed
necessary when nursing or nursing assistant education programs fail to
meet the standards established by the board.
                                             
 (e) Shall reinstate approval of a nursing or nursing assistant
education program upon submission of satisfactory evidence that its
program meets the standards established by the board.
                                             
 (f) Shall establish the process for nursing and nursing assistant
programs that cease operation.
                                             
 IV. Any education program conducted in another state shall be deemed
to be an education program approved by the board if that program meets
the requirements for approval established by this section and the
program has been approved by the regulatory authority of its state.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1. 2008, 179:4, eff. Aug. 10, 2008. 2011, 224:141,
142, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 326-B:33

 **326-B:33 Duty to Warn of Violent Acts of Client; Civil Liability.
–**
                                             
 I. A licensee has a duty to warn of, or to take reasonable
precautions to provide protection from, a client's violent behavior when
the client has communicated to the licensee, a serious threat of
physical violence against a clearly identified or reasonably
identifiable victim or victims or a serious threat of substantial damage
to real property.
                                             
 II. A licensee shall discharge the duty either by notifying the
licensee's supervisor or the treating provider. A psychiatric APRN shall
discharge the duty by making reasonable efforts to communicate the
threat to the victim or victims, notifying the police department closest
to the client's or potential victim's residence, or obtaining civil
commitment of the client to the state mental health system.
                                             
 III. No monetary liability or cause of action based on breach of
client privacy, confidentiality, or any other ground shall arise from an
act or communication done in a good faith effort to discharge a duty.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1. 2006, 297:1. 2009, 54:4, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 326-B:34

 **326-B:34 Duties of Licensees Relating to Reports of Sexual
Relations. –**
                                             
 I. If, during the course of diagnosis or treatment by a licensee, a
client alleges that another mental health counselor or health care
practitioner licensed by the board of nursing or another state licensing
or certifying agency has engaged with the client in sexual relations,
the licensee shall have a duty to inform the client that the act
reported by the client may be unprofessional or unethical and may
subject the actor to disciplinary action by the actor's licensing or
certifying agency.
                                             
 II. No liability for breach of client confidentiality, slander, or
defamation, or other civil or criminal liability, shall arise from the
disclosure by a licensee of information related to reported sexual
relations between a client and any mental health counselor or health
care licensee of a state licensing or certifying agency when the
disclosure is made in good faith and made to the board or any other
state licensing or certifying agency.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:35

 **326-B:35 Privileged Communications Between Licensees and Their
Clients. –**
                                             
 I. Confidential communications between licensees and their clients
are privileged in the same manner as those provided by law between
physician and patient, and, except as otherwise provided by law, no
licensee shall be required to disclose such privileged communications.
Confidential communications between a client of a licensee and any
person working under the supervision of such licensee to provide
services that are customary and necessary for diagnosis and treatment
are privileged to the same extent as would be the same communications
between the supervising licensee and the client.
                                             
 II. This section shall not apply to disciplinary proceedings
conducted by:
                                             
 (a) The board;
                                             
 (b) The board of examiners of nursing home administrators under
RSA 151-A:11; or
                                             
 (c) Any other statutorily-created health care occupational
licensing board conducting disciplinary proceedings.
                                             
 III. This section shall not apply to hearings conducted pursuant to
RSA 135-C or RSA 464-A.
                                             
 IV. This section shall also not apply to the release of blood
samples and the results of laboratory tests for blood alcohol content
taken from a person who is under investigation for driving a motor
vehicle while such person was under the influence of intoxicating
liquors or controlled drugs. The use and disclosure of such information
shall be limited to the official criminal proceedings.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:36

 **326-B:36 Emergency Treatment; Assisting the Board; Immunity From
Civil Liability. –**
                                             
 I. No person licensed to practice under this chapter or under the
laws of any other state who, in good faith, renders emergency care at
the scene of an emergency, which occurs outside both the place and the
course of employment, shall be liable for any civil damages as a result
of acts or omissions in rendering such emergency care, or as a result of
any act or failure to act to provide or arrange for further medical
treatment or care.
                                             
 II. Any person acting in good faith shall be immune from civil
liability to a licensee or an applicant for licensure for making any
report or other information available to the board or assisting the
board in carrying out any of its duties.
                                             
 III. Nurses licensed in other states who respond to emergencies in
New Hampshire during a civil disaster event shall be immune from civil
liability and board action for acts or omissions in rendering such
emergency care, or as a result of any act or failure to act to provide
or arrange for further medical treatment or care.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:37

 **326-B:37 Disciplinary Action; Misconduct. –**
                                             
 I. The board may undertake investigations and disciplinary
proceedings:
                                             
 (a) Upon its own initiative.
                                             
 (b) Upon written complaint of any person which charges that a
licensee has committed any acts of misconduct under this section and
which specifies the grounds for such complaint.
                                             
 II. The board may discipline a licensee or applicant for any one or
a combination of the following grounds:
                                             
 (a) Failing to demonstrate the qualifications or satisfy the
requirements.
                                             
 (b) Conduct that violates the security of the examination,
including, but not limited to:
                                             
 (1) Copying, disseminating, or receiving any portion of an
examination.
                                             
 (2) Having unauthorized possession of any portion of a future,
current, or previously administered examination.
                                             
 (3) Violating test administration.
                                             
 (4) Permitting an impersonator to take the examination on
one's behalf or impersonating an examinee.
                                             
 (c) Convictions by a court or any plea to a crime in any
jurisdiction that relates adversely to the practice of nursing or to the
ability to practice nursing.
                                             
 (d) Employing fraud or deceit in procuring or attempting to
procure a license to practice nursing, in filing any reports or
completing client records, in representation of oneself to the board or
public, in authenticating any report or records in the nurse's capacity
as an APRN, RN, LPN, or LNA, or in submitting any information or record
to the board.
                                             
 (e) Unethical conduct including but not limited to conduct likely
to deceive, defraud, or harm the public or demonstrating a willful or
careless disregard for the health or safety of a client. Actual injury
need not be established.
                                             
 (f) If a nurse's license to practice nursing or a multi-state
privilege or another health care related license or other credential has
been denied, revoked, suspended, or restricted, or the licensee has been
otherwise disciplined in this or any other state.
                                             
 (g) Conduct including but not limited to failure or inability to
perform nursing or nursing assistant practice as defined in this
chapter, with reasonable skill and safety.
                                             
 (h) Unprofessional conduct including but not limited to:
                                             
 (1) A departure from or failure to conform to nursing
standards, including improper management of client records.
                                             
 (2) Delegating or accepting the delegation of a nursing
function or a prescribed health function when the delegation or
acceptance could reasonably be expected to result in unsafe or
ineffective client care.
                                             
 (3) Failure to supervise the performance of acts by any
individual working at the nurse's delegation or assignment.
                                             
 (4) Failure of a clinical nursing instructor to supervise
student experiences.
                                             
 (i) Failure of a chief administrative nurse to follow appropriate
and recognized standards and guidelines in providing oversight of the
nursing organization and nursing services of a health care delivery
system.
                                             
 (j) Failure to practice within a modified scope of practice or
with the required accommodations, as specified by the board in granting
a modified license under this act.
                                             
 (k) Any nursing practice that may create unnecessary danger to a
client's life, health, or safety. Actual injury to a client need not be
established.
                                             
 (l) Inability to practice safely, including demonstration of
actual or potential inability to practice nursing with reasonable skill
and safety to clients by reason of illness or as a result of any mental
or physical condition.
                                             
 (m) Actions or conduct that include, but are not limited to,
falsifying reports, client documentation, agency records, or other
essential health documents, failure to cooperate with a lawful
investigation conducted by the board, failure to maintain professional
boundaries with clients or family members, use of excessive force upon
or mistreatment or abuse of any client, engaging in sexual conduct with
a client, touching a client in a sexual manner, requesting or offering
sexual favors or language or behaviors suggestive of same, or
threatening or violent behavior in the workplace.
                                             
 (n) Diversion or attempts to divert drugs or controlled
substances.
                                             
 (o) Failure of a licensee to comply with terms of any alternative
program agreement made with the board.
                                             
 (p) Other drug-related actions or conduct that include but are
not limited to:
                                             
 (1) Use of any controlled substance or any drug or device or
alcoholic beverages to an extent or in a manner dangerous or injurious
to himself or herself, any other person, or the public, or to the extent
that such use may impair his or her ability to conduct with safety to
the public the practice of nursing.
                                             
 (2) Falsification or making incorrect, inconsistent, or
unintelligible entries in any agency, client, or other record pertaining
to drugs or controlled substances.
                                             
 (3) A positive drug screen for which there is no lawful
prescription.
                                             
 (q) Actions or conduct that include but are not limited to:
                                             
 (1) Knowingly aiding, assisting, advising, or allowing an
unlicensed person to engage in the practice of nursing.
                                             
 (2) Violating a rule adopted by the board under RSA 541-A, an
order of the board, a state or federal law relating to the practice of
nursing, or a state or federal narcotics or controlled substance law.
                                             
 (3) Practicing beyond the scope of practice as stated in this
chapter, and failing to report violations of this chapter.
                                             
 (r) Upon notification by the licensing authority of another
jurisdiction that a licensee has been disciplined.
                                             
 III. The board may refuse to renew or reinstate a license on
disciplinary grounds, or take disciplinary action in any one or more of
the following ways:
                                             
 (a) By reprimand or by suspension, limitation, conditions, or
probation of a licensee for a period of time as determined reasonable by
the board.
                                             
 (b) By revocation of a license.
                                             
 (c) By requiring licensees to participate in educational or
rehabilitative programs in the area or areas in which they have been
found deficient or incompetent.
                                             
 (d) By requiring the licensee to submit to the care, counseling,
or treatment of a physician, counseling service, health care facility,
professional assistance program, or any comparable person or facility
approved by the board.
                                             
 (e) By requiring the person to practice under the direct
supervision of an RN for a period of time specified by the board.
                                             
 (f) By imposition, after notice and the opportunity for hearing,
of fines not to exceed 
                                             $1,000 for each violation or, in the case of a
continuing violation, 
                                             $100 for each day the violation continues.
                                             
 IV. In cases involving imminent danger to public health, safety, or
welfare, the board may order the immediate suspension of a license
pending an adjudicative proceeding. The board shall commence this
adjudicative proceeding not later than 10 working days after the date of
the board order suspending the license. The licensee may waive the
10-day commencement requirement to allow for additional time to prepare
for a hearing. If the licensee waives the requirement, the license shall
remain suspended until the completion of the hearing. A record of the
proceeding shall be made by a certified court reporter provided by the
board. Unless expressly waived by the licensee, board failure to
commence an adjudicative proceeding within 10 working days shall mean
that the suspension order is automatically vacated. The board shall not
again suspend the license for the same conduct which formed the basis of
the vacated suspension without granting the licensee prior notice and an
opportunity for an adjudicative proceeding.
                                             
 V. Every individual, agency, facility, institution, or organization
that employs licensed nursing personnel within the state shall report to
the board within 30 days any action by a licensee that willfully
violates any provision of paragraph II. The board shall have authority,
after notice and the opportunity for hearing, to impose civil penalties
of up to 
                                             $1,000 per violation upon persons found to have willfully
violated the reporting requirements of this paragraph.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1. 2009, 54:4, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 326-B:38

 **326-B:38 Investigations and Hearings. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall investigate possible misconduct by licensees and
other matters governed by the provisions of this chapter. Investigations
shall be conducted with or without the issuance of a board order setting
forth the general scope of the investigation. Board investigations and
any information obtained by the board pursuant to such investigations
shall be exempt from the public disclosure provisions of RSA 91-A,
unless such information subsequently becomes part of a public
disciplinary hearing. However, the board may disclose information
acquired in an investigation to law enforcement or health licensing
agencies in this state or any other jurisdiction, or in accordance with
specific statutory requirements or court orders.
                                             
 II. The board may appoint legal counsel, health care advisors, or
other investigators retained through the office of professional
licensure and certification to assist with any investigation and with
adjudicative hearings.
                                             
 III. The form taken by an investigation is a matter within the
discretion of the board. The board may conduct investigations on an ex
parte basis.
                                             
 IV. (a) The board may administer oaths or affirmations, preserve
testimony, and issue subpoenas for witnesses, documents, and things,
relative to investigations or adjudicative hearings, except that
subpoenas for records issued pursuant to paragraph V may be issued at
any time.
                                             
 (b) The board may serve a subpoena on any licensee by certified
mail, but shall serve a subpoena on any other person in accordance with
the procedures and the fee schedules established by the superior court.
                                             
 (c) A person licensed by the board shall not be entitled to a
witness fee or mileage expenses for travel within the state related to
his or her appearance at a hearing or investigatory proceeding.
                                             
 (d) In order to be valid, any subpoena issued by the board,
except one issued to a licensee, shall be annotated "Fees guaranteed by
the New Hampshire board of nursing.''
                                             
 (e) A minimum of 48 hours' notice shall be given for compliance
with a subpoena issued under this paragraph.
                                             
 V. The board may at any time subpoena a licensee's health care
records, employment records, and nursing education academic records in
the possession of its licensees, nursing education programs licensed by
the board, or hospitals, and other health care providers and facilities
regulated in this state, except that it may not subpoena quality
assurance records of health facilities licensed under RSA 151. Subpoenas
shall be served by certified mail or personal delivery to the address
currently on file with the board in the case of delivery to a licensee.
No witness or other fee shall be required. A minimum of 15 days' advance
notice shall be allowed for complying with a subpoena issued under this
paragraph.
                                             
 VI. Complaints of licensee misconduct shall be in writing and shall
be treated as petitions for the commencement of a disciplinary hearing.
The board shall determine whether a complaint alleges misconduct
sufficient to support disciplinary proceedings. If the board determines
that it does, the board shall forward a copy of the complaint to the
licensee complained against within 5 business days of its determination.
If the board determines that it does not, the board shall send the
complainant a written notice of dismissal of the complaint. Some or all
of the allegations in a complaint may be consolidated with another
complaint or with issues the board wishes to investigate or hear on its
own motion. If an investigation of a complaint results in an offer of
settlement by the licensee, the board may settle the allegations against
the licensee without the consent of a complainant, provided that
material facts are not in dispute.
                                             
 VII. At any time during an investigation of a complaint, and without
issuing a subpoena, the board may mail a copy of a complaint to the
licensee named in the complaint, and may require in a written request
that the licensee and the licensee's employer provide detailed and good
faith written responses to allegations identified by the board and also
provide copies of all records concerning any client identified in the
complaint. The licensee and others receiving inquiries from the board
shall respond within a reasonable time period of not less than 15 days
as the board may specify. This procedure may also be used in connection
with matters the board has undertaken to investigate on its own motion.
                                             
 VIII. The board may hold adjudicative hearings concerning
allegations of misconduct or other matters within the scope of this
chapter. Such hearings shall be public proceedings. Any member of the
board other than the public members, or any other qualified person
appointed by the board, shall have authority to preside at such a
hearing and to issue oaths or affirmations to witnesses.
                                             
 IX. The board shall give the respondent and the complainant, if any,
at least 15 days' written notice of the date, time, and place of a
hearing, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Such notice shall
comply with RSA 541-A and include an itemization of the issues to be
heard, and, in the case of a disciplinary hearing, a statement as to
whether the action has been initiated by a written complaint or upon the
board's own motion, or both. If a written complaint is involved, the
notice shall provide the complainant with a reasonable opportunity to
intervene as a party. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the complainant and to the respondent at
the address provided by the respondent currently on file at the board
offices. Notice mailed in compliance with this section shall be deemed
served.
                                             
 X. The board may at any time dispose of allegations in a complaint,
investigation, or disciplinary hearing by settlement, default, or
consent order, by issuing an order of dismissal for failing to state a
proper basis for disciplinary action, or by summary judgment order based
upon undisputed material facts. In disciplinary hearings, the board may
hold prehearing conferences which shall be exempt from the provisions of
RSA 91-A, but any final disciplinary action or decision which occurs
without holding a public hearing shall be publicly released at the time
it is served upon the parties.
                                             
 XI. Final disciplinary actions and other adjudicative decisions made
by the board shall be in writing and served upon the parties. Such
decisions shall not be released to the public until they are served upon
the parties.
                                             
 XII. Any person appearing at a board hearing or investigation may be
represented by legal counsel or other representative, but the board
shall have no obligation or authority to appoint or provide such
representation.
                                             
 XIII. The board shall hear any complaint not resolved at or prior to
a preliminary hearing.
                                             
 XIV. In the case of sanctions for discipline in another
jurisdiction, the decision of the other jurisdiction's disciplinary
authority may not be collaterally attacked and the board may impose any
of the sanctions set forth in this chapter, but shall provide notice and
an opportunity to be heard if it intends to impose sanctions above those
imposed by the other jurisdiction.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m. 2015, 276:71,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 326-B:39

 **326-B:39 Rehearing; Appeals. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who has been refused a license by the board or has
been disciplined by the board shall have the right to petition for a
rehearing within 30 days after the original decision.
                                             
 II. Appeals from a decision on rehearing shall be by appeal pursuant
to RSA 541.
                                             
 III. No sanction shall be stayed by the board during an appeal.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:40

 **326-B:40 Injunctive Relief. –** The attorney general, the board of
nursing, any citizen, or the prosecuting attorney of any county or
municipality where the act occurs may maintain an action to enjoin a
person not currently licensed to do so from practicing, or purporting to
practice, nursing or nursing-related activities. The action to enjoin
shall not replace any other civil, criminal, or regulatory remedy. An
injunction without bond is available to the board.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:41

 **326-B:41 Unlawful Acts. –** It shall be unlawful for any person or
entity to:
                                             
 I. Sell or fraudulently obtain or furnish any nursing diploma,
license, or record, or to aid and abet in such an act.
                                             
 II. Practice as a licensee without a license or when the license to
do so has been revoked or suspended or when the license to do so has
lapsed.
                                             
 III. Use, in connection with the individual's name, any designation
tending to imply licensure as an RN, an LPN, or an LNA unless so
licensed.
                                             
 IV. Represent or imply that the person or entity is conducting a
nursing education program or a program for the education of nursing
assistants which has been approved by the board when the program has not
been so approved.
                                             
 V. Disclose, solicit, or compile information regarding the contents
of any licensing examinations relative to this chapter, except as
authorized by the board.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1. 2006, 76:7, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 326-B:41-a

 **326-B:41-a Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who shall practice or attempt to practice as a
registered nurse, advanced practice registered nurse, licensed practical
nurse, or licensed nursing assistant in this state without a license
shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor if a natural person or guilty
of a felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any of the other provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2006, 76:8. 2009, 54:5, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 326-B:42

 **326-B:42 Persons Licensed Under Previous Laws. –** Any person
authorized to practice nursing by authority of this state as of the
effective date of this section shall continue to be licensed under the
provisions of this chapter and shall be eligible for license renewal
pursuant to this chapter.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:43

 **326-B:43 Exemptions. –** The provisions of this chapter shall not
prohibit or limit:
                                             
 I. The employment in federal government institutions and agencies of
nurses who are members of federal agencies and are currently licensed in
some state of the United States.
                                             
 II. The practice of nursing by persons enrolled in nursing programs
approved by the board when such practice is part of their program of
study.
                                             
 III. The furnishing of nursing assistance in an emergency.
                                             
 IV. Nursing services by anyone when done in accordance with the
practice of the religious principles or tenets of any well-recognized
church or denomination which relies upon prayer or spiritual means alone
for healing.
                                             
 V. The practice of nursing in this state by any nurse currently
licensed by another state engaged to accompany and care for a person
passing through or temporarily residing in this state, during the period
of one visit not to exceed 2 months.
                                             
 VI. The administration of medications, by any person employed or
under contract, to provide direct care to clients receiving
community-based services pursuant to RSA 135-C or RSA 171-A, provided
that persons delivering such care who administer medications shall have
successfully completed a medication administration educational program
conducted by an RN and approved by the board under rules adopted
pursuant to RSA 541-A. The commissioner of health and human services, in
consultation with the board, shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A
establishing criteria for the administration of medications, and for the
process of approving an RN to conduct the medication administration
educational program.
                                             
 VII. The practice of any nurse currently licensed in another state
who is in this state on a non-routine basis to provide nursing
consulting services.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:44

 **326-B:44 Certified Midwifery Not the Practice of Nursing. –**
Midwives certified under RSA 326-D, and practicing midwifery as defined
by RSA 326-D:2, V, shall not be construed as practicing nursing.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:45

 **326-B:45 Direct Care in Community-Based Services. –** The
administration of medications by non-licensees to individuals receiving
community-based services pursuant to RSA 135-C or RSA 171-A shall not be
construed as practicing nursing.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 326-B:46


                                             


                                             [RSA 326-B:46 effective until the date provided by 2016, 238:2; see
also RSA 326-B:46 set out below.
                                             ]

 **326-B:46 Nurse Licensure Compact. –**
                                             
 The nurse licensure compact is adopted and entered into with all
other jurisdictions that legally join the compact, which is
substantially as follows:

**ARTICLE I**


                                             
 Findings and Declaration of Purpose
                                             

                                             
 (a) The party states find that:
                                             
 (1) The health and safety of the public are affected by the
degree of compliance with and the effectiveness of enforcement
activities related to state nurse licensure laws;
                                             
 (2) Violations of nurse licensure and other laws regulating
the practice of nursing may result in injury or harm to the public;
                                             
 (3) The expanded mobility of nurses and the use of advanced
communication technologies as part of our nation's health care delivery
system require greater coordination and cooperation among states in the
areas of nurse licensure and regulation;
                                             
 (4) New practice modalities and technology make compliance
with individual state nurse licensure laws difficult and complex; and
                                             
 (5) The current system of duplicative licensure for nurses
practicing in multiple states is cumbersome and redundant to both nurses
and states.
                                             
 (b) The general purposes of this compact are to:
                                             
 (1) Facilitate the states' responsibility to protect the
public's health and safety;
                                             
 (2) Ensure and encourage the cooperation of party states in
the areas of nurse licensure and regulation;
                                             
 (3) Facilitate the exchange of information between party
states in the areas of nurse regulation, investigation, and adverse
actions;
                                             
 (4) Promote compliance with the laws governing the practice of
nursing in each jurisdiction; and
                                             
 (5) Invest all party states with the authority to hold a nurse
accountable for meeting all state practice laws in the state in which
the patient is located at the time care is rendered through the mutual
recognition of party state licenses.

**ARTICLE II**


                                             
 Definitions
                                             

                                             
 In this compact:
                                             
 (a) "Adverse action'' means a home or remote state action.
                                             
 (b) "Alternative program'' means a voluntary, nondisciplinary
monitoring program approved by a nurse licensing board.
                                             
 (c) "Coordinated licensure information system'' means an
integrated process for collecting, storing, and sharing information on
nurse licensure and enforcement activities related to nurse licensure
laws, which is administered by a nonprofit organization composed of and
controlled by state nurse licensing boards.
                                             
 (d) "Current significant investigative information'' means:
                                             
 (1) Investigative information that a licensing board, after a
preliminary inquiry that includes notification and an opportunity for
the nurse to respond if required by state law, has reason to believe is
not groundless and, if proved true, would indicate more than a minor
infraction; or
                                             
 (2) Investigative information that indicates that the nurse
represents an immediate threat to public health and safety regardless of
whether the nurse has been notified and had an opportunity to respond.
                                             
 (e) "Home state'' means the party state which is the nurse's
primary state of residence.
                                             
 (f) "Home state action'' means any administrative, civil,
equitable, or criminal action permitted by the home state's laws which
are imposed on a nurse by the home state's licensing board or other
authority including actions against an individual's license such as:
revocation, suspension, probation, or any other action which affects a
nurse's authorization to practice.
                                             
 (g) "Licensing board'' means a party state's regulatory body
responsible for issuing nurse licenses.
                                             
 (h) "Multistate licensure privilege'' means current, official
authority from a remote state permitting the practice of nursing as
either a registered nurse or a licensed practical/vocational nurse in
such party state. All party states have the authority, in accordance
with existing state due process law, to take actions against the nurse's
privilege such as: revocation, suspension, probation, or any other
action which affects a nurse' s authorization to practice.
                                             
 (i) "Nurse'' means a registered nurse or licensed
practical/vocational nurse, as those terms are defined by each party's
state practice laws.
                                             
 (j) "Party state'' means any state that has adopted this
compact.
                                             
 (k) "Remote state'' means a party state, other than the home
state:
                                             
 (1) Where the patient is located at the time nursing care is
provided; or
                                             
 (2) In the case of the practice of nursing not involving a
patient, in such party state where the recipient of nursing practice is
located.
                                             
 (l) "Remote state action'' means:
                                             
 (1) Any administrative, civil, equitable, or criminal action
permitted by a remote state's laws which are imposed on a nurse by the
remote state's licensing board or other authority including actions
against an individual's multistate licensure privilege to practice in
the remote state; and
                                             
 (2) Cease and desist and other injunctive or equitable orders
issued by remote states or the licensing boards thereof.
                                             
 (m) "State'' means a state, territory, or possession of the
United States, the District of Columbia, or the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico.
                                             
 (n) "State practice laws'' means those individual party's state
laws and regulations that govern the practice of nursing, define the
scope of nursing practice, and create the methods and grounds for
imposing discipline. The term state practice laws does not include the
initial qualifications for licensure or requirements necessary to obtain
and retain a license, except for qualifications or requirements of the
home state.

**ARTICLE III**


                                             
 General Provisions and Jurisdiction
                                             

                                             
 (a) A license to practice registered nursing issued by a home
state to a resident in that state will be recognized by each party state
as authorizing a multistate licensure privilege to practice as a
registered nurse in such party state. A license to practice licensed
practical/vocational nursing issued by a home state to a resident in
that state will be recognized by each party state as authorizing a
multistate licensure privilege to practice as a licensed
practical/vocational nurse in such party state. In order to obtain or
retain a license, an applicant must meet the home state's qualifications
for licensure and license renewal as well as all other applicable state
laws.
                                             
 (b) Party states may, in accordance with state due process laws,
limit or revoke the multistate licensure privilege of any nurse to
practice in their states and may take any other actions under their
applicable state laws necessary to protect the health and safety of
their citizens. If a party state takes such action, it shall promptly
notify the administrator of the coordinated licensure information
system. The administrator of the coordinated licensure information
system shall promptly notify the home state of any such actions by
remote states.
                                             
 (c) Every nurse practicing in a party state must comply with the
state practice laws of the state in which the patient is located at the
time care is rendered. In addition, the practice of nursing is not
limited to patient care, but shall include all nursing practice as
defined by the state practice laws of a party state. The practice of
nursing will subject a nurse to the jurisdiction of the nurse licensing
board and the courts, as well as the laws, in that party state.
                                             
 (d) This compact does not affect additional requirements imposed
by states for advanced practice registered nursing. However, a
multistate licensure privilege to practice registered nursing granted by
a party state shall be recognized by other party states as a license to
practice registered nursing if one is required by state law as a
precondition for qualifying for advanced practice registered nurse
authorization.
                                             
 (e) Individuals not residing in a party state shall continue to
be able to apply for nurse licensure as provided for under the laws of
each party state. However, the license granted to these individuals will
not be recognized as granting the privilege to practice nursing in any
other party state unless explicitly agreed to by that party state.

**ARTICLE IV**


                                             
 Applications for Licensure in a Party State
                                             

                                             
 (a) Upon application for a license, the licensing board in a
party state shall ascertain, through the coordinated licensure
information system, whether the applicant has ever held, or is the
holder of, a license issued by any other state, whether there are any
restrictions on the multistate licensure privilege, and whether any
other adverse action by any state has been taken against the license.
                                             
 (b) A nurse in a party state shall hold licensure in only one
party state at a time, issued by the home state.
                                             
 (c) A nurse who intends to change primary state of residence may
apply for licensure in the new home state in advance of such change.
However, new licenses will not be issued by a party state until after a
nurse provides evidence of change in primary state of residence
satisfactory to the new home state's licensing board.
                                             
 (d) When a nurse changes primary state of residence by:
                                             
 (1) Moving between 2 party states, and obtains a license from
the new home state, the license from the former home state is no longer
valid;
                                             
 (2) Moving from a nonparty state to a party state, and obtains
a license from the new home state, the individual state license issued
by the nonparty state is not affected and will remain in full force if
so provided by the laws of the nonparty state;
                                             
 (3) Moving from a party state to a nonparty state, the license
issued by the prior home state converts to an individual state license,
valid only in the former home state, without the multistate licensure
privilege to practice in other party states.

**ARTICLE V**


                                             
 Adverse Actions
                                             

                                             
 In addition to the general provisions described in Article III, the
following provisions apply:
                                             
 (a) The licensing board of a remote state shall promptly report
to the administrator of the coordinated licensure information system any
remote state actions including the factual and legal basis for such
action, if known. The licensing board of a remote state shall also
promptly report any significant current investigative information yet to
result in a remote state action. The administrator of the coordinated
licensure information system shall promptly notify the home state of any
such reports.
                                             
 (b) The licensing board of a party state shall have the authority
to complete any pending investigations for a nurse who changes primary
state of residence during the course of such investigations. It shall
also have the authority to take appropriate action, and shall promptly
report the conclusions of such investigations to the administrator of
the coordinated licensure information system. The administrator of the
coordinated licensure information system shall promptly notify the new
home state of any such actions.
                                             
 (c) A remote state may take adverse action affecting the
multistate licensure privilege to practice within that party state.
However, only the home state shall have the power to impose adverse
action against the license issued by the home state.
                                             
 (d) For purposes of imposing adverse action, the licensing board
of the home state shall give the same priority and effect to reported
conduct received from a remote state as it would if such conduct had
occurred within the home state. In so doing, it shall apply its own
state laws to determine appropriate action.
                                             
 (e) The home state may take adverse action based on the factual
findings of the remote state, so long as each state follows its own
procedures for imposing such adverse action.
                                             
 (f) Nothing in this compact shall override a party state's
decision that participation in an alternative program may be used in
lieu of licensure action and that such participation shall remain
nonpublic if required by the party state's laws. Party states must
require nurses who enter any alternative programs to agree not to
practice in any other party state during the term of the alternative
program without prior authorization from such other party state.

**ARTICLE VI**


                                             
 Additional Authorities Invested in Party State
                                             
Nurse Licensing Boards
                                             

                                             
 Notwithstanding any other powers, party state nurse licensing boards
shall have the authority to:
                                             
 (a) If otherwise permitted by state law, recover from the
affected nurse the costs of investigations and disposition of cases
resulting from any adverse action taken against that nurse;
                                             
 (b) Issue subpoenas for both hearings and investigations which
require the attendance and testimony of witnesses, and the production of
evidence. Subpoenas issued by a nurse licensing board in a party state
for the attendance and testimony of witnesses, and/or the production of
evidence from another party state, shall be enforced in the latter state
by any court of competent jurisdiction, according to the practice and
procedure of that court applicable to subpoenas issued in proceedings
pending before it. The issuing authority shall pay any witness fees,
travel expenses, mileage, and other fees required by the service
statutes of the state where the witnesses and/or evidence are located;
                                             
 (c) Issue cease and desist orders to limit or revoke a nurse's
authority to practice in their states;
                                             
 (d) Promulgate uniform rules and regulations as provided for in
Article VIII(c).

**ARTICLE VII**


                                             
 Coordinated Licensure Information System
                                             

                                             
 (a) All party states shall participate in a cooperative effort to
create a coordinated data base of all licensed registered nurses and
licensed practical/vocational nurses. This system will include
information on the licensure and disciplinary history of each nurse, as
contributed by party states, to assist in the coordination of nurse
licensure and enforcement efforts.
                                             
 (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all party states'
licensing boards shall promptly report adverse actions, actions against
multistate licensure privileges, any current significant investigative
information yet to result in adverse action, denials of applications,
and the reasons for such denials, to the coordinated licensure
information system.
                                             
 (c) Current significant investigative information shall be
transmitted through the coordinated licensure information system only to
party state licensing boards.
                                             
 (d) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all party states'
licensing boards contributing information to the coordinated licensure
information system may designate information that may not be shared with
nonparty states or disclosed to other entities or individuals without
the express permission of the contributing state.
                                             
 (e) Any personally identifiable information obtained by a party
states' licensing board from the coordinated licensure information
system may not be shared with nonparty states or disclosed to other
entities or individuals except to the extent permitted by the laws of
the party state contributing the information.
                                             
 (f) Any information contributed to the coordinated licensure
information system that is subsequently required to be expunged by the
laws of the party state contributing that information, shall also be
expunged from the coordinated licensure information system.
                                             
 (g) The compact administrators, acting jointly with each other
and in consultation with the administrator of the coordinated licensure
information system, shall formulate necessary and proper procedures for
the identification, collection, and exchange of information under this
compact.

**ARTICLE VIII**


                                             
 Compact Administration and Interchange of Information
                                             

                                             
 (a) The head of the nurse licensing board, or his or her
designee, of each party state shall be the administrator of this compact
for his or her state.
                                             
 (b) The compact administrator of each party state shall furnish
to the compact administrator of each other party state any information
and documents including, but not limited to, a uniform data set of
investigations, identifying information, licensure data, and disclosable
alternative program participation information to facilitate the
administration of this compact.
                                             
 (c) Compact administrators shall have the authority to develop
uniform rules to facilitate and coordinate implementation of this
compact. These uniform rules shall be adopted by party states, under the
authority invested under Article VI (d).

**ARTICLE IX**


                                             
 Immunity
                                             

                                             
 No party state or the officers or employees or agents of a party
state's nurse licensing board who act in accordance with the provisions
of this compact are liable on account of any act or omission in good
faith while engaged in the performance of their duties under this
compact. Good faith in this article does not include willful misconduct,
gross negligence, or recklessness.

**ARTICLE X**


                                             
 Entry into Force, Withdrawal, and Amendment
                                             

                                             
 (a) This compact shall enter into force and become effective as
to any state when it has been enacted into the laws of that state. Any
party state may withdraw from this compact by enacting a statute
repealing the same, but no such withdrawal shall take effect until 6
months after the withdrawing state has given notice of the withdrawal to
the executive heads of all other party states.
                                             
 (b) No withdrawal affects the validity or applicability by the
licensing boards of states remaining party to the compact of any report
of adverse action occurring prior to the withdrawal.
                                             
 (c) Nothing contained in this compact may be construed to
invalidate or prevent any nurse licensure agreement or other cooperative
arrangement between a party state and a nonparty state that is made in
accordance with the other provisions of this compact.
                                             
 (d) This compact may be amended by the party states. No amendment
to this compact becomes effective and binding upon the party states
unless and until it is enacted into the laws of all party states.

**ARTICLE XI**


                                             
 Construction and Severability
                                             

                                             
 (a) This compact shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate
the purposes thereof. The provisions of this compact shall be severable
and if any phrase, clause, sentence, or provision of this compact is
declared to be contrary to the constitution of any party state or of the
United States or the applicability thereof to any government, agency,
person, or circumstance is held invalid, the validity of the remainder
of this compact and the applicability thereof to any government, agency,
person, or circumstance may not be affected thereby. If this compact is
held contrary to the constitution of any state party thereto, the
compact remains in full force and effect as to the remaining party
states and in full force and effect as to the party state affected as to
all severable matters.
                                             
 (b) In the event party states find a need for settling disputes
arising under this compact:
                                             
 (1) The party states may submit the issues in dispute to an
arbitration panel which will be comprised of an individual appointed by
the compact administrator in the home state; an individual appointed by
the compact administrator in the remote state or states involved; and an
individual mutually agreed upon by the compact administrators of all the
party states involved in the dispute; and
                                             
 (2) The decision of a majority of the arbitrators shall be
final and binding.


                                             [RSA 326-B:46 effective as provided by 2016, 238:2; see also RSA
326-B:46 set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
**326-B:46 Nurse Licensure Compact.** --
                                             
 The nurse licensure compact is adopted and entered into with all
other jurisdictions that legally join the compact, which is
substantially as follows:

ARTICLE I

Findings and Declaration of Purpose


                                             
 (a) The party states find that:
                                             
 (1) The health and safety of the public are affected by the
degree of compliance with and the effectiveness of enforcement
activities related to state nurse licensure laws;
                                             
 (2) Violations of nurse licensure and other laws regulating the
practice of nursing may result in injury or harm to the public;
                                             
 (3) The expanded mobility of nurses and the use of advanced
communication technologies as part of our nation's health care delivery
system require greater coordination and cooperation among states in the
areas of nurse licensure and regulation;
                                             
 (4) New practice modalities and technology make compliance with
individual state nurse licensure laws difficult and complex;
                                             
 (5) The current system of duplicative licensure for nurses
practicing in multiple states is cumbersome and redundant for both
nurses and states; and
                                             
 (6) Uniformity of nurse licensure requirements throughout the
states promotes public safety and public health benefits.
                                             
 (b) The general purposes of this compact are to:
                                             
 (1) Facilitate the states' responsibility to protect the public's
health and safety;
                                             
 (2) Ensure and encourage the cooperation of party states in the
areas of nurse licensure and regulation;
                                             
 (3) Facilitate the exchange of information between party states
in the areas of nurse regulation, investigation, and adverse actions;
                                             
 (4) Promote compliance with the laws governing the practice of
nursing in each jurisdiction;
                                             
 (5) Invest all party states with the authority to hold a nurse
accountable for meeting all state practice laws in the state in which
the patient is located at the time care is rendered through the mutual
recognition of party state licenses;
                                             
 (6) Decrease redundancies in the consideration and issuance of
nurse licenses; and
                                             
 (7) Provide opportunities for interstate practice by nurses who
meet uniform licensure requirements.

ARTICLE II

Definitions


                                             
 As used in this compact:
                                             
 (a) "Adverse action'' means any administrative, civil, equitable or
criminal action permitted by a state's laws which is imposed by a
licensing board or other authority against a nurse, including actions
against an individual's license or multistate licensure privilege such
as revocation, suspension, probation, monitoring of the licensee,
limitation on the licensee's practice, or any other encumbrance on
licensure affecting a nurse's authorization to practice, including
issuance of a cease and desist action.
                                             
 (b) "Alternative program'' means a nondisciplinary monitoring
program approved by a licensing board.
                                             
 (c) "Coordinated licensure information system'' means an integrated
process for collecting, storing, and sharing information on nurse
licensure and enforcement activities related to nurse licensure laws
that is administered by a nonprofit organization composed of and
controlled by licensing boards.
                                             
 (d) "Current significant investigative information'' means:
                                             
 (1) Investigative information that a licensing board, after a
preliminary inquiry that includes notification and an opportunity for
the nurse to respond, if required by state law, has reason to believe is
not groundless and, if proved true, would indicate more than a minor
infraction; or
                                             
 (2) Investigative information that indicates that the nurse
represents an immediate threat to public health and safety regardless of
whether the nurse has been notified and had an opportunity to respond.
                                             
 (e) "Encumbrance'' means a revocation or suspension of, or any
limitation on, the full and unrestricted practice of nursing imposed by
a licensing board.
                                             
 (f) "Home state'' means the party state which is the nurse's primary
state of residence.
                                             
 (g) "Licensing board'' means a party state's regulatory body
responsible for issuing nurse licenses.
                                             
 (h) "Multistate license'' means a license to practice as a
registered or a licensed practical/vocational nurse (LPN/VN) issued by a
home state licensing board that authorizes the licensed nurse to
practice in all party states under a multistate licensure privilege.
                                             
 (i) "Multistate licensure privilege'' means a legal authorization
associated with a multistate license permitting the practice of nursing
as either a registered nurse (RN) or LPN/VN in a remote state.
                                             
 (j) "Nurse'' means RN or LPN/VN, as those terms are defined by each
party state's practice laws.
                                             
 (k) "Party state'' means any state that has adopted this compact.
                                             
 (l) "Remote state'' means a party state, other than the home state.
                                             
 (m) "Single-state license'' means a nurse license issued by a party
state that authorizes practice only within the issuing state and does
not include a multistate licensure privilege to practice in any other
party state.
                                             
 (n) "State'' means a state, territory, or possession of the United
States and the District of Columbia.
                                             
 (o) "State practice laws'' means a party state's laws, rules, and
regulations that govern the practice of nursing, define the scope of
nursing practice, and create the methods and grounds for imposing
discipline. "State practice laws'' do not include requirements necessary
to obtain and retain a license, except for qualifications or
requirements of the home state.

ARTICLE III

General Provisions and Jurisdiction


                                             
 (a) A multistate license to practice registered or licensed
practical/vocational nursing issued by a home state to a resident in
that state will be recognized by each party state as authorizing a nurse
to practice as a registered nurse (RN) or as a licensed
practical/vocational nurse (LPN/VN), under a multistate licensure
privilege, in each party state.
                                             
 (b) A state must implement procedures for considering the criminal
history records of applicants for initial multistate license or
licensure by endorsement. Such procedures shall include the submission
of fingerprints or other biometric-based information by applicants for
the purpose of obtaining an applicant's criminal history record
information from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the agency
responsible for retaining that state's criminal records.
                                             
 (c) Each party state shall require the following for an applicant to
obtain or retain a multistate license in the home state:
                                             
 (1) Meets the home state's qualifications for licensure or
renewal of licensure as well as all other applicable state laws;
                                             
 (2)(i) Has graduated or is eligible to graduate from a licensing
board-approved RN or LPN/VN prelicensure education program; or
                                             
 (ii) Has graduated from a foreign RN or LPN/VN prelicensure
education program that (a) has been approved by the authorized
accrediting body in the applicable country and (b) has been verified by
an independent credentials review agency to be comparable to a licensing
board-approved prelicensure education program;
                                             
 (3) Has, if a graduate of a foreign prelicensure education
program not taught in English or if English is not the individual's
native language, successfully passed an English proficiency examination
that includes the components of reading, speaking, writing, and
listening;
                                             
 (4) Has successfully passed an NCLEX-RN or NCLEX-PN Examination
or recognized predecessor, as applicable;
                                             
 (5) Is eligible for or holds an active, unencumbered license;
                                             
 (6) Has submitted, in connection with an application for initial
licensure or licensure by endorsement, fingerprints or other biometric
data for the purpose of obtaining criminal history record information
from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the agency responsible for
retaining that state's criminal records;
                                             
 (7) Has not been convicted or found guilty, or has entered into
an agreed disposition, of a felony offense under applicable state or
federal criminal law;
                                             
 (8) Has not been convicted or found guilty, or has entered into
an agreed disposition, of a misdemeanor offense related to the practice
of nursing as determined on a case-by-case basis;
                                             
 (9) Is not currently enrolled in an alternative program;
                                             
 (10) Is subject to self-disclosure requirements regarding current
participation in an alternative program; and
                                             
 (11) Has a valid United States Social Security number.
                                             
 (d) All party states shall be authorized, in accordance with
existing state due process law, to take adverse action against a nurse's
multistate licensure privilege such as revocation, suspension, probation
or any other action that affects a nurse's authorization to practice
under a multistate licensure privilege, including cease and desist
actions. If a party state takes such action, it shall promptly notify
the administrator of the coordinated licensure information system. The
administrator of the coordinated licensure information system shall
promptly notify the home state of any such actions by remote states.
                                             
 (e) A nurse practicing in a party state must comply with the state
practice laws of the state in which the client is located at the time
service is provided. The practice of nursing is not limited to patient
care, but shall include all nursing practice as defined by the state
practice laws of the party state in which the client is located. The
practice of nursing in a party state under a multistate licensure
privilege will subject a nurse to the jurisdiction of the licensing
board, the courts and the laws of the party state in which the client is
located at the time service is provided.
                                             
 (f) Individuals not residing in a party state shall continue to be
able to apply for a party state's single-state license as provided under
the laws of each party state. However, the single-state license granted
to these individuals will not be recognized as granting the privilege to
practice nursing in any other party state. Nothing in this compact shall
affect the requirements established by a party state for the issuance of
a single-state license.
                                             
 (g) Any nurse holding a home state multistate license, on the
effective date of this compact, may retain and renew the multistate
license issued by the nurse's then-current home state, provided that:
                                             
 (1) A nurse, who changes primary state of residence after this
compact's effective date, must meet all applicable Article III(c)
requirements to obtain a multistate license from a new home state.
                                             
 (2) A nurse who fails to satisfy the multistate licensure
requirements in Article III(c) due to a disqualifying event occurring
after this compact's effective date shall be ineligible to retain or
renew a multistate license, and the nurse's multistate license shall be
revoked or deactivated in accordance with applicable rules adopted by
the Interstate Commission of Nurse Licensure Compact Administrators
("commission'').

ARTICLE IV

Applications for Licensure in a Party State


                                             
 (a) Upon application for a multistate license, the licensing board
in the issuing party state shall ascertain, through the coordinated
licensure information system, whether the applicant has ever held, or is
the holder of, a license issued by any other state, whether there are
any encumbrances on any license or multistate licensure privilege held
by the applicant, whether any adverse action has been taken against any
license or multistate licensure privilege held by the applicant and
whether the applicant is currently participating in an alternative
program.
                                             
 (b) A nurse may hold a multistate license, issued by the home state,
in only one party state at a time.
                                             
 (c) If a nurse changes primary state of residence by moving between
2 party states, the nurse must apply for licensure in the new home
state, and the multistate license issued by the prior home state will be
deactivated in accordance with applicable rules adopted by the
commission.
                                             
 (1) The nurse may apply for licensure in advance of a change in
primary state of residence.
                                             
 (2) A multistate license shall not be issued by the new home
state until the nurse provides satisfactory evidence of a change in
primary state of residence to the new home state and satisfies all
applicable requirements to obtain a multistate license from the new home
state.
                                             
 (d) If a nurse changes primary state of residence by moving from a
party state to a nonparty state, the multistate license issued by the
prior home state will convert to a single-state license, valid only in
the former home state.

ARTICLE V

Additional Authorities Invested in Party State Licensing Boards


                                             
 (a) In addition to the other powers conferred by state law, a
licensing board shall have the authority to:
                                             
 (1) Take adverse action against a nurse's multistate licensure
privilege to practice within that party state.
                                             
 (i) Only the home state shall have the power to take adverse
action against a nurse's license issued by the home state.
                                             
 (ii) For purposes of taking adverse action, the home state
licensing board shall give the same priority and effect to reported
conduct received from a remote state as it would if such conduct had
occurred within the home state. In so doing, the home state shall apply
its own state laws to determine appropriate action.
                                             
 (2) Issue cease and desist orders or impose an encumbrance on a
nurse's authority to practice within that party state.
                                             
 (3) Complete any pending investigations of a nurse who changes
primary state of residence during the course of such investigations. The
licensing board shall also have the authority to take appropriate
actions and shall promptly report the conclusions of such investigations
to the administrator of the coordinated licensure information system.
The administrator of the coordinated licensure information system shall
promptly notify the new home state of any such actions.
                                             
 (4) Issue subpoenas for both hearings and investigations that
require the attendance and testimony of witnesses as well as the
production of evidence. Subpoenas issued by a licensing board in a party
state for the attendance and testimony of witnesses or the production of
evidence from another party state shall be enforced in the latter state
by any court of competent jurisdiction, according to the practice and
procedure of that court applicable to subpoenas issued in proceedings
pending before it. The issuing authority shall pay any witness fees,
travel expenses, mileage and other fees required by the service statutes
of the state in which the witnesses or evidence are located.
                                             
 (5) Obtain and submit, for each nurse licensure applicant,
fingerprint or other biometric-based information to the Federal Bureau
of Investigation for criminal background checks, receive the results of
the Federal Bureau of Investigation record search on criminal background
checks and use the results in making licensure decisions.
                                             
 (6) If otherwise permitted by state law, recover from the
affected nurse the costs of investigations and disposition of cases
resulting from any adverse action taken against that nurse.
                                             
 (7) Take adverse action based on the factual findings of the
remote state, provided that the licensing board follows its own
procedures for taking such adverse action.
                                             
 (b) If adverse action is taken by the home state against a nurse's
multistate license, the nurse's multistate licensure privilege to
practice in all other party states shall be deactivated until all
encumbrances have been removed from the multistate license. All home
state disciplinary orders that impose adverse action against a nurse's
multistate license shall include a statement that the nurse's multistate
licensure privilege is deactivated in all party states during the
pendency of the order.
                                             
 (c) Nothing in this compact shall override a party state's decision
that participation in an alternative program may be used in lieu of
adverse action. The home state licensing board shall deactivate the
multistate licensure privilege under the multistate license of any nurse
for the duration of the nurse's participation in an alternative program.

ARTICLE VI

Coordinated Licensure Information System and Exchange of Information


                                             
 (a) All party states shall participate in a coordinated licensure
information system of all licensed registered nurses (RNs) and licensed
practical/vocational nurses (LPNs/VNs). This system will include
information on the licensure and disciplinary history of each nurse, as
submitted by party states, to assist in the coordination of nurse
licensure and enforcement efforts.
                                             
 (b) The commission, in consultation with the administrator of the
coordinated licensure information system, shall formulate necessary and
proper procedures for the identification, collection, and exchange of
information under this compact.
                                             
 (c) All licensing boards shall promptly report to the coordinated
licensure information system any adverse action, any current significant
investigative information, denials of applications (with the reasons for
such denials) and nurse participation in alternative programs known to
the licensing board regardless of whether such participation is deemed
nonpublic or confidential under state law.
                                             
 (d) Current significant investigative information and participation
in nonpublic or confidential alternative programs shall be transmitted
through the coordinated licensure information system only to party state
licensing boards.
                                             
 (e) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all party state
licensing boards contributing information to the coordinated licensure
information system may designate information that may not be shared with
nonparty states or disclosed to other entities or individuals without
the express permission of the contributing state.
                                             
 (f) Any personally identifiable information obtained from the
coordinated licensure information system by a party state licensing
board shall not be shared with nonparty states or disclosed to other
entities or individuals except to the extent permitted by the laws of
the party state contributing the information.
                                             
 (g) Any information contributed to the coordinated licensure
information system that is subsequently required to be expunged by the
laws of the party state contributing that information shall also be
expunged from the coordinated licensure information system.
                                             
 (h) The compact administrator of each party state shall furnish a
uniform data set to the compact administrator of each other party state,
which shall include, at a minimum:
                                             
 (1) Identifying information;
                                             
 (2) Licensure data;
                                             
 (3) Information related to alternative program participation;
and
                                             
 (4) Other information that may facilitate the administration of
this compact, as determined by commission rules.
                                             
 (i) The compact administrator of a party state shall provide all
investigative documents and information requested by another party
state.

ARTICLE VII

Establishment of the Interstate Commission of Nurse Licensure Compact
Administrators


                                             
 (a) The party states hereby create and establish a joint public
entity known as the Interstate Commission of Nurse Licensure Compact
Administrators.
                                             
 (1) The commission is an instrumentality of the party states.
                                             
 (2) Venue is proper, and judicial proceedings by or against the
commission shall be brought solely and exclusively, in a court of
competent jurisdiction where the principal office of the commission is
located. The commission may waive venue and jurisdictional defenses to
the extent it adopts or consents to participate in alternative dispute
resolution proceedings.
                                             
 (3) Nothing in this compact shall be construed to be a waiver of
sovereign immunity.
                                             
 (b) Membership, Voting and Meetings.
                                             
 (1) Each party state shall have and be limited to one
administrator. The head of the state licensing board or designee shall
be the administrator of this compact for each party state. The
administrator for New Hampshire shall hold a current license issued by
the New Hampshire board of nursing and shall represent the board of
nursing. Any administrator may be removed or suspended from office as
provided by the law of the state from which the administrator is
appointed. Any vacancy occurring in the commission shall be filled in
accordance with the laws of the party state in which the vacancy
exists.
                                             
 (2) Each administrator shall be entitled to one vote with regard
to the adoption of rules and creation of bylaws and shall otherwise have
an opportunity to participate in the business and affairs of the
commission. An administrator shall vote in person or by such other means
as provided in the bylaws. The bylaws may provide for an administrator's
participation in meetings by telephone or other means of communication.
                                             
 (3) The commission shall meet at least once during each calendar
year. Additional meetings shall be held as set forth in the bylaws or
rules of the commission.
                                             
 (4) All meetings shall be open to the public, and public notice
of meetings shall be given in the same manner as required under the
rulemaking provisions in Article VIII.
                                             
 (5) The commission may convene in a closed, nonpublic meeting if
the commission must discuss:
                                             
 (i) Noncompliance of a party state with its obligations under
this compact;
                                             
 (ii) The employment, compensation, discipline or other
personnel matters, practices or procedures related to specific employees
or other matters related to the commission's internal personnel
practices and procedures;
                                             
 (iii) Current, threatened, or reasonably anticipated
litigation;
                                             
 (iv) Negotiation of contracts for the purchase or sale of
goods, services, or real estate;
                                             
 (v) Accusing any person of a crime or formally censuring any
person;
                                             
 (vi) Disclosure of trade secrets or commercial or financial
information that is privileged or confidential;
                                             
 (vii) Disclosure of information of a personal nature where
disclosure would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal
privacy;
                                             
 (viii) Disclosure of investigatory records compiled for law
enforcement purposes;
                                             
 (ix) Disclosure of information related to any reports prepared
by or on behalf of the commission for the purpose of investigation of
compliance with this compact; or
                                             
 (x) Matters specifically exempted from disclosure by
federal or state statute.
                                             
 (6) If a meeting, or portion of a meeting, is closed pursuant to
this provision, the commission's legal counsel or designee shall certify
that the meeting may be closed and shall reference each relevant
exempting provision. The commission shall keep minutes that fully and
clearly describe all matters discussed in a meeting and shall provide a
full and accurate summary of actions taken, and the reasons therefor,
including a description of the views expressed. All documents considered
in connection with an action shall be identified in such minutes. All
minutes and documents of a closed meeting shall remain under seal,
subject to release by a majority vote of the commission or order of a
court of competent jurisdiction.
                                             
 (c) The commission shall, by a majority vote of the administrators,
prescribe bylaws or rules to govern its conduct as may be necessary or
appropriate to carry out the purposes and exercise the powers of this
compact, including but not limited to:
                                             
 (1) Establishing the fiscal year of the commission;
                                             
 (2) Providing reasonable standards and procedures:
                                             
 (i) For the establishment and meetings of other committees;
and
                                             
 (ii) Governing any general or specific delegation of any
authority or function of the commission;
                                             
 (3) Providing reasonable procedures for calling and conducting
meetings of the commission, ensuring reasonable advance notice of all
meetings and providing an opportunity for attendance of such meetings by
interested parties, with enumerated exceptions designed to protect the
public's interest, the privacy of individuals, and proprietary
information, including trade secrets. The commission may meet in closed
session only after a majority of the administrators vote to close a
meeting in whole or in part. As soon as practicable, the commission must
make public a copy of the vote to close the meeting revealing the vote
of each administrator, with no proxy votes allowed;
                                             
 (4) Establishing the titles, duties, and authority and reasonable
procedures for the election of the officers of the commission;
                                             
 (5) Providing reasonable standards and procedures for the
establishment of the personnel policies and programs of the commission.
Notwithstanding any civil service or other similar laws of any party
state, the bylaws shall exclusively govern the personnel policies and
programs of the commission; and
                                             
 (6) Providing a mechanism for winding up the operations of the
commission and the equitable disposition of any surplus funds that may
exist after the termination of this compact after the payment or
reserving of all of its debts and obligations;
                                             
 (d) The commission shall publish its bylaws and rules, and any
amendments thereto, in a convenient form on the website of the
commission.
                                             
 (e) The commission shall maintain its financial records in
accordance with the bylaws.
                                             
 (f) The commission shall meet and take such actions as are
consistent with the provisions of this compact and the bylaws.
                                             
 (g) The commission shall have the following powers:
                                             
 (1) To adopt uniform rules to facilitate and coordinate
implementation and administration of this compact. The rules shall have
the force and effect of law and shall be binding in all party states;
                                             
 (2) To bring and prosecute legal proceedings or actions in the
name of the commission, provided that the standing of any licensing
board to sue or be sued under applicable law shall not be affected;
                                             
 (3) To purchase and maintain insurance and bonds;
                                             
 (4) To borrow, accept or contract for services of personnel,
including, but not limited to, employees of a party state or nonprofit
organizations;
                                             
 (5) To cooperate with other organizations that administer state
compacts related to the regulation of nursing, including but not limited
to sharing administrative or staff expenses, office space or other
resources;
                                             
 (6) To hire employees, elect or appoint officers, fix
compensation, define duties, grant such individuals appropriate
authority to carry out the purposes of this compact, and to establish
the commission's personnel policies and programs relating to conflicts
of interest, qualifications of personnel and other related personnel
matters;
                                             
 (7) To accept any and all appropriate donations, grants and gifts
of money, equipment, supplies, materials and services, and to receive,
utilize and dispose of the same; provided that at all times the
commission shall avoid any appearance of impropriety or conflict of
interest;
                                             
 (8) To lease, purchase, accept appropriate gifts or donations of,
or otherwise to own, hold, improve or use, any property, whether real,
personal or mixed; provided that at all times the commission shall avoid
any appearance of impropriety;
                                             
 (9) To sell, convey, mortgage, pledge, lease, exchange, abandon
or otherwise dispose of any property, whether real, personal or mixed;
                                             
 (10) To establish a budget and make expenditures;
                                             
 (11) To borrow money;
                                             
 (12) To appoint committees, including advisory committees
comprised of administrators, state nursing regulators, state legislators
or their representatives, and consumer representatives, and other such
interested persons;
                                             
 (13) To provide and receive information from, and to cooperate
with, law enforcement agencies;
                                             
 (14) To adopt and use an official seal; and
                                             
 (15) To perform such other functions as may be necessary or
appropriate to achieve the purposes of this compact consistent with the
state regulation of nurse licensure and practice.
                                             
 (h) Financing of the commission.
                                             
 (1) The commission shall pay, or provide for the payment of, the
reasonable expenses of its establishment, organization, and ongoing
activities.
                                             
 (2) The commission may also levy on and collect an annual
assessment from each party state to cover the cost of its operations,
activities, and staff in its annual budget as approved each year. The
aggregate annual assessment amount, if any, shall be allocated based
upon a formula to be determined by the commission, which shall adopt a
rule that is binding upon all party states.
                                             
 (3) The commission shall not incur obligations of any kind prior
to securing the funds adequate to meet the same; nor shall the
commission pledge the credit of any of the party states, except by, and
with the authority of, such party state.
                                             
 (4) The commission shall keep accurate accounts of all receipts
and disbursements. The receipts and disbursements of the commission
shall be subject to the audit and accounting procedures established
under its bylaws. However, all receipts and disbursements of funds
handled by the commission shall be audited yearly by a certified or
licensed public accountant, and the report of the audit shall be
included in and become part of the annual report of the commission.
                                             
 (i) Qualified Immunity, Defense and Indemnification.
                                             
 (1) The administrators, officers, executive director, employees,
and representatives of the commission shall be immune from suit and
liability, either personally or in their official capacity, for any
claim for damage to or loss of property or personal injury or other
civil liability caused by or arising out of any actual or alleged act,
error, or omission that occurred, or that the person against whom the
claim is made had a reasonable basis for believing occurred, within the
scope of commission employment, duties or responsibilities; provided
that nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to protect any such
person from suit or liability for any damage, loss, injury, or liability
caused by the intentional, willful, or wanton misconduct of that
person.
                                             
 (2) The commission shall defend any administrator, officer,
executive director, employee, or representative of the commission in any
civil action seeking to impose liability arising out of any actual or
alleged act, error, or omission that occurred within the scope of
commission employment, duties or responsibilities, or that the person
against whom the claim is made had a reasonable basis for believing
occurred within the scope of commission employment, duties, or
responsibilities; provided that nothing herein shall be construed to
prohibit that person from retaining his or her own counsel; and provided
further that the actual or alleged act, error, or omission did not
result from that person's intentional, willful, or wanton misconduct.
                                             
 (3) The commission shall indemnify and hold harmless any
administrator, officer, executive director, employee, or representative
of the commission for the amount of any settlement or judgment obtained
against that person arising out of any actual or alleged act, error, or
omission that occurred within the scope of commission employment,
duties, or responsibilities, or that such person had a reasonable basis
for believing occurred within the scope of commission employment,
duties, or responsibilities, provided that the actual or alleged act,
error, or omission did not result from the intentional, willful, or
wanton misconduct of that person.

ARTICLE VIII

Rulemaking


                                             
 (a) The commission shall exercise its rulemaking powers pursuant to
the criteria set forth in this Article and the rules adopted thereunder.
Rules and amendments shall become binding as of the date specified in
each rule or amendment and shall have the same force and effect as
provisions of this compact.
                                             
 (b) Rules or amendments to the rules shall be adopted at a regular
or special meeting of the commission.
                                             
 (c) Prior to adoption of a final rule or rules by the commission,
and at least 60 days in advance of the meeting at which the rule will be
considered and voted upon, the commission shall file a notice of
proposed rulemaking:
                                             
 (1) On the website of the commission; and
                                             
 (2) On the website of each licensing board or the publication in
which each state would otherwise publish proposed rules.
                                             
 (d) The notice of proposed rulemaking shall include:
                                             
 (1) The proposed time, date and location of the meeting in which
the rule will be considered and voted upon;
                                             
 (2) The text of the proposed rule or amendment, and the reason
for the proposed rule;
                                             
 (3) A request for comments on the proposed rule from any
interested person; and
                                             
 (4) The manner in which interested persons may submit notice to
the commission of their intention to attend the public hearing and any
written comments.
                                             
 (e) Prior to adoption of a proposed rule, the commission shall allow
persons to submit written data, facts, opinions, and arguments, which
shall be made available to the public.
                                             
 (f) The commission shall grant an opportunity for a public hearing
before it adopts a rule or amendment.
                                             
 (g) The commission shall publish the place, time, and date of the
scheduled public hearing.
                                             
 (1) Hearings shall be conducted in a manner providing each person
who wishes to comment a fair and reasonable opportunity to comment
orally or in writing. All hearings will be recorded, and a copy will be
made available upon request.
                                             
 (2) Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring a
separate hearing on each rule. Rules may be grouped for the convenience
of the commission at hearings required by this section.
                                             
 (h) If no one appears at the public hearing, the commission may
proceed with adoption of the proposed rule.
                                             
 (i) Following the scheduled hearing date, or by the close of
business on the scheduled hearing date if the hearing was not held, the
commission shall consider all written and oral comments received.
                                             
 (j) The commission shall, by majority vote of all administrators,
take final action on the proposed rule and shall determine the effective
date of the rule, if any, based on the rulemaking record and the full
text of the rule.
                                             
 (k) Upon determination that an emergency exists, the commission may
consider and adopt an emergency rule without prior notice, opportunity
for comment, or hearing, provided that the usual rulemaking procedures
provided in this compact and in this section shall be retroactively
applied to the rule as soon as reasonably possible, in no event later
than 90 days after the effective date of the rule. For the purposes of
this provision, an emergency rule is one that must be adopted
immediately in order to:
                                             
 (1) Meet an imminent threat to public health, safety or welfare;
                                             
 (2) Prevent a loss of commission or party state funds; or
                                             
 (3) Meet a deadline for the adoption of an administrative rule
that is required by federal law or rule.
                                             
 (l) The commission may direct revisions to a previously adopted rule
or amendment for purposes of correcting typographical errors, errors in
format, errors in consistency or grammatical errors. Public notice of
any revisions shall be posted on the website of the commission. The
revision shall be subject to challenge by any person for a period of 30
days after posting. The revision may be challenged only on grounds that
the revision results in a material change to a rule. A challenge shall
be made in writing, and delivered to the commission, prior to the end of
the notice period. If no challenge is made, the revision will take
effect without further action. If the revision is challenged, the
revision may not take effect without the approval of the commission.

ARTICLE IX

Oversight, Dispute Resolution and Enforcement


                                             
 (a) Oversight.
                                             
 (1) Each party state shall enforce this compact and take all
actions necessary and appropriate to effectuate this compact's purposes
and intent.
                                             
 (2) The commission shall be entitled to receive service of
process in any proceeding that may affect the powers, responsibilities,
or actions of the commission, and shall have standing to intervene in
such a proceeding for all purposes. Failure to provide service of
process in such proceeding to the commission shall render a judgment or
order void as to the commission, this compact, or adopted rules.
                                             
 (b) Default, Technical Assistance and Termination.
                                             
 (1) If the commission determines that a party state has defaulted
in the performance of its obligations or responsibilities under this
compact or the adopted rules, the commission shall:
                                             
 (i) Provide written notice to the defaulting state and other
party states of the nature of the default, the proposed means of curing
the default, or any other action to be taken by the commission; and
                                             
 (ii) Provide remedial training and specific technical
assistance regarding the default.
                                             
 (2) If a state in default fails to cure the default, the
defaulting state's membership in this compact may be terminated upon an
affirmative vote of a majority of the administrators, and all rights,
privileges, and benefits conferred by this compact may be terminated on
the effective date of termination. A cure of the default does not
relieve the offending state of obligations or liabilities incurred
during the period of default.
                                             
 (3) Termination of membership in this compact shall be imposed
only after all other means of securing compliance have been exhausted.
Notice of intent to suspend or terminate shall be given by the
commission to the governor of the defaulting state and to the executive
officer of the defaulting state's licensing board and each of the party
states.
                                             
 (4) A state whose membership in this compact has been terminated
is responsible for all assessments, obligations, and liabilities
incurred through the effective date of termination, including
obligations that extend beyond the effective date of termination.
                                             
 (5) The commission shall not bear any costs related to a state
that is found to be in default or whose membership in this compact has
been terminated unless agreed upon in writing between the commission and
the defaulting state.
                                             
 (6) The defaulting state may appeal the action of the commission
by petitioning the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia or
the federal district in which the commission has its principal offices.
The prevailing party shall be awarded all costs of such litigation,
including reasonable attorneys' fees.
                                             
 (c) Dispute Resolution.
                                             
 (1) Upon request by a party state, the commission shall attempt
to resolve disputes related to the compact that arise among party states
and between party and nonparty states.
                                             
 (2) The commission shall adopt a rule providing for both
mediation and binding dispute resolution for disputes, as appropriate.
                                             
 (3) In the event the commission cannot resolve disputes among
party states arising under this compact:
                                             
 (i) The party states may submit the issues in dispute to an
arbitration panel, which will be comprised of individuals appointed by
the compact administrator in each of the affected party states and an
individual mutually agreed upon by the compact administrators of all the
party states involved in the dispute.
                                             
 (ii) The decision of a majority of the arbitrators shall be
final and binding.
                                             
 (d) Enforcement.
                                             
 (1) The commission, in the reasonable exercise of its discretion,
shall enforce the provision and rules of this compact.
                                             
 (2) By majority vote, the commission may initiate legal action in
the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia or the federal
district in which the commission has its principal offices against a
party state that is in default to enforce compliance with the provisions
of this compact and its adopted rules and bylaws. The relief sought may
include both injunctive relief and damages. In the event judicial
enforcement is necessary, the prevailing party shall be awarded all
costs of such litigation, including reasonable attorneys' fees.
                                             
 (3) The remedies herein shall not be the exclusive remedies of
the commission. The commission may pursue any other remedies available
under federal or state law.

ARTICLE X

Effective Date, Withdrawal and Amendment


                                             
 (a) This compact shall become effective and binding on the earlier
of the date of legislative enactment of this compact into law by no less
than 26 states or December 31, 2018. All party states to this compact,
that also were parties to the prior nurse licensure compact, superseded
by this compact, ("prior compact''), shall be deemed to have withdrawn
from said prior compact within 6 months after the effective date of this
compact.
                                             
 (b) Each party state to this compact shall continue to recognize a
nurse's multistate licensure privilege to practice in that party state
issued under the prior compact until such party state has withdrawn from
the prior compact.
                                             
 (c) Any party state may withdraw from this compact by enacting a
statute repealing the same. A party state's withdrawal shall not take
effect until 6 months after enactment of the repealing statute.
                                             
 (d) A party state's withdrawal or termination shall not affect the
continuing requirement of the withdrawing or terminated state's
licensing board to report adverse actions and significant investigations
occurring prior to the effective date of such withdrawal or
termination.
                                             
 (e) Nothing contained in this compact shall be construed to
invalidate or prevent any nurse licensure agreement or other cooperative
arrangement between a party state and a nonparty state that is made in
accordance with the other provisions of this compact.
                                             
 (f) This compact may be amended by the party states. No amendment to
this compact shall become effective and binding upon the party states
unless and until it is enacted into the laws of all party states.
                                             
 (g) Representatives of nonparty states to this compact shall be
invited to participate in the activities of the commission, on a
nonvoting basis, prior to the adoption of this compact by all states.
                                             
 ARTICLE XI
                                             
 Construction and Severability
                                             
 This compact shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate the
purposes thereof. The provisions of this compact shall be severable, and
if any phrase, clause, sentence or provision of this compact is declared
to be contrary to the constitution of any party state or of the United
States, or if the applicability thereof to any government, agency,
person or circumstance is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of
this compact and the applicability thereof to any government, agency,
person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby. If this compact
shall be held to be contrary to the constitution of any party state,
this compact shall remain in full force and effect as to the remaining
party states and in full force and effect as to the party state affected
as to all severable matters.

**Source.** 2005, 293:1, eff. July 1, 2005 at 12:01 a.m. 2016, 238:1,
eff. as provided by 2016, 238:2.
