---
title: 'CHAPTER 326-D MIDWIFERY'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 326-D
                                             
MIDWIFERY
--------------

### Section 326-D:1

 **326-D:1 Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. The general court finds that the practice of midwifery has been a
part of the culture and tradition of New Hampshire since colonial days
and that it is in the public interest to remove impediments to the
practice of midwifery.
                                             
 II. For personal and economic reasons some New Hampshire citizens
will have home births. It is the intent of the general court to preserve
the rights of women to deliver children at home, to remove obstacles to
safe out-of-hospital deliveries, and to assure quality care.
                                             
 III. The general court further finds that childbirth is a
culmination of pregnancy and is a natural process rather than an
illness.
                                             
 IV. The general court acknowledges that the services of a certified
midwife are a reasonable alternative for healthy pregnant women.
                                             
 V. The general court hereby intends that the scope of practice of
midwifery shall be modeled on The International Definition of Midwifery
as accepted by the World Health Organization and the International
Confederation of Midwives. However, in no event shall the scope of
midwifery practice exceed the parameters of the definition of
"midwifery'' under RSA 326-D:2, V.

**Source.** 1999, 213:8, eff. July 6, 1999.

### Section 326-D:2

 **326-D:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Client'' means a woman who has retained the services of a
midwife for the duration of her pregnancy, labor and the postpartum
period and as defined in the scope of practice adopted by the council
pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 II. "Council'' means the midwifery council established in RSA
326-D:3.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 IV. "Midwife'' means one who is certified to practice midwifery
pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 V. "Midwifery'' means the practice, by persons other than physicians
or surgeons licensed under RSA 329, nurses registered under RSA 326-B,
or physician's assistants licensed under RSA 328-D, of:
                                             
 (a) Providing the necessary supervision, care and advice to women
during pregnancy, labor and the postpartum period;
                                             
 (b) Conducting vaginal deliveries on the midwife's own
responsibility, and caring for the newborn and the infant; such care to
mother and child to include preventive measures, the detection of
abnormal conditions, the procurement of medical assistance, and the
execution of emergency measures in the absence of medical help; and
                                             
 (c) Consulting with a physician whenever there are significant
deviations from normal or whenever there is a medical emergency in
either the mother or the infant.

**Source.** 1999, 213:8, eff. July 6, 1999.

### Section 326-D:3

 **326-D:3 Council Established. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a midwifery council consisting of 6 members to be
appointed by the governor with the advice and consent of the executive
council. Members shall be appointed for 4-year terms. No member shall be
appointed to more than 2 consecutive terms. All members of the council
shall have been residents of this state for at least 5 years preceding
appointment and shall include:
                                             
 (a) An obstetrician licensed to practice medicine under RSA 329
with experience in working with midwives certified pursuant to this
chapter.
                                             
 (b) A pediatrician licensed to practice medicine under RSA 329
with experience in working with midwives certified pursuant to this
chapter.
                                             
 (c) Three midwives certified under this chapter, who have each
attended at least 50 deliveries as midwives.
                                             
 (d) One member of the general public who has familiarity with the
practice of midwifery.
                                             
 II. Members appointed to the council shall serve without
compensation.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. Members of the council shall elect a chairperson annually from
among their members. The council shall meet at least quarterly and may
hold additional meetings at such times as it may deem necessary. A
quorum of the council shall consist of no fewer than 4 members.

**Source.** 1999, 213:8. 2010, 118:8, eff. July 1, 2010. 2015, 276:108,
XXVIII, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 326-D:4

 **326-D:4 Powers and Duties of the Council. –**
                                             
 I. The powers and duties of the council shall include:
                                             
 (a) Certifying eligible applicants for certification under this
chapter.
                                             
 (b) Establishing fees for examination of applicants.
                                             
 (c) Investigating complaints against persons certified under this
chapter.
                                             
 (d) Undertaking, when appropriate, disciplinary proceedings and
disciplinary action against persons certified under this chapter.
                                             
 (e) Reporting to the commissioner immediately on all complaints
received and disciplinary action taken.
                                             
 II. The council shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and
administer oaths in any hearing or disciplinary proceedings, and to
compel, by subpoena duces tecum, the production of papers and records.
Witnesses summoned before the council shall be paid the same fees as
witnesses summoned to appear before the superior court, and such summons
shall have the same effect as though issued for appearance before such
court.

**Source.** 1999, 213:8, eff. July 6, 1999. 2014, 167:24, eff. July 1,
2014.

### Section 326-D:5

 **326-D:5 Rulemaking. –**
                                             
 I. The council shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative
to:
                                             
 (a) Qualifications for the practice of midwifery.
                                             
 (b) The teaching of midwifery.
                                             
 (c) The scope of practice and procedures in the practice of
midwifery, including policies for professional direction and
supervision.
                                             
 (d) Procedures for the certification of midwives and the issuance
of certificates of midwifery, including procedures for provisional
certification and recertification after certification has lapsed.
                                             
 (e) Renewal procedures, including requirements for continuing
education and peer review.
                                             
 (f) Diagnostic and laboratory tests midwives may administer and
perform and the proper administration of RSA 326-D:12.
                                             
 (g) Standards for reciprocity.
                                             
 (h) Establishing examination fees authorized under RSA 326-D:4,
I(b).
                                             
 (i) Establishing all administrative fines authorized under RSA
326-D:8, III(a)(4).
                                             
 (j) Reporting requirements relative to client information and
notification of transfers.
                                             
 II. No rule relative to the scope of midwifery practice shall exceed
the parameters of the definition of "midwifery'' under RSA 326-D:2, V.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding RSA 541-A:16, I(b)(2), the council shall adopt
the model rules for adjudicative hearings adopted by the attorney
general under RSA 541-A:30-a. The council may adopt supplements or
modifications to the model rules pursuant to RSA 541-A:30-a, IV.
Rehearings and appeals to the council shall be conducted pursuant to the
provisions of RSA 541.

**Source.** 1999, 213:8, eff. July 6, 1999. 2014, 167:25, eff. July 1,
2014.

### Section 326-D:6

 **326-D:6 Certification. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall practice midwifery in this state without first
obtaining certification from the council. The council shall certify for
the practice of midwifery any person applying for such certification who
meets the qualifications adopted under RSA 326-D:5, I(a) and who submits
a 
                                             $110 certification fee.
                                             
 II. Certification issued under this chapter shall be subject to
renewal every 2 years and shall expire unless renewed in accordance with
rules adopted by the council and upon payment of a 
                                             $110 renewal fee.
                                             
 III. The title "certified midwife'' shall be used only by persons
certified under this chapter. No person shall continue to represent
himself or herself as a certified midwife after certification has been
suspended under this chapter. Any person whose certification under this
chapter has been suspended or revoked by the council for disciplinary
action under RSA 326-D:8, shall not engage in the practice of midwifery
unless and until the suspension or revocation of certification has been
lifted.
                                             
 IV. Any person who shall practice or attempt to practice as a
certified midwife in this state without certification shall be guilty of
a class A misdemeanor if a natural person or guilty of a felony if any
other person. Any person violating any other provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1999, 213:8. 2006, 76:9, eff. July 1, 2006. 2014, 167:26,
eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 326-D:7

 **326-D:7 Qualifications. –** In order to be certified as a midwife
by the council, a person shall:
                                             
 I. Have completed high school or its equivalent.
                                             
 II. Complete one college-level course in human anatomy and
physiology, or pass a college-level equivalency program or credit by
exam.
                                             
 III. Express an intent to engage in the active practice of midwifery
in the state.
                                             
 IV. Submit an affidavit disclosing any criminal convictions. If the
council determines that such conviction has a direct bearing on the
applicant's ability to serve as a midwife, such conviction may serve as
a basis for denial of certification.
                                             
 V. Meet practical experience requirements prescribed by the council,
including specific numbers of prenatal visits, post-partum follow-up
exams, attendance at live births as an observer and primary birth
attendant under supervision, performance of newborn examinations,
performance of laceration repairs, performance of postpartum visits, and
observation of in-hospital births.
                                             
 VI. Present evidence of technical skills as prescribed by the
council.
                                             
 VII. Present evidence of a passing grade on a certification
examination approved by the council.
                                             
 VIII. Pass both a written and an oral examination administered by
the council. Such examinations shall include, but shall not be limited
to, questions relative to New Hampshire laws and rules governing
midwives.

**Source.** 1999, 213:8, eff. July 6, 1999.

### Section 326-D:8

 **326-D:8 Disciplinary Action. –**
                                             
 I. The council may undertake disciplinary proceedings:
                                             
 (a) Upon its own initiative; or
                                             
 (b) Upon written complaint of any person which charges that a
person certified by the council has committed misconduct under paragraph
II and which specifies the grounds for the misconduct.
                                             
 II. Misconduct sufficient to support disciplinary proceedings under
this section shall include:
                                             
 (a) The practice of fraud or deceit in procuring or attempting to
procure certification to practice under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Conviction of any crime which demonstrates unfitness to
practice midwifery.
                                             
 (c) Demonstrable gross incompetence of the certificate holder.
                                             
 (d) Addiction to the use of alcohol or other habit-forming drugs
to a degree which renders the certificate holder unfit to practice under
this chapter.
                                             
 (e) A legal finding of mental incompetence.
                                             
 (f) Willful or repeated violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
                                             
 (g) Suspension or revocation without subsequent reinstatement of
certification, similar to one issued under this chapter, in another
jurisdiction.
                                             
 III. (a) The council may take disciplinary action in any one or more
of the following ways:
                                             
 (1) By public or private reprimand.
                                             
 (2) By suspension, limitation, or restriction of
certification.
                                             
 (3) By revocation of certification.
                                             
 (4) By assessing administrative fines in amounts established
by the council which shall not exceed 
                                             $2,000 per offense, or in the
case of a continuing offense, 
                                             $250 for each day the violation
continues.
                                             
 (b) Disciplinary action taken under this paragraph may be ordered
by the council in a decision made after a hearing in the manner provided
by the rules adopted by the council and reviewed in accordance with RSA
541.

**Source.** 1999, 213:8, eff. July 6, 1999.

### Section 326-D:9

 **326-D:9 Report. –** The council shall report biennially to the
commissioner of the department of health and human services concerning
the practice of midwifery in this state. The report shall include any
recommendations of the council to increase the quality and safety of
midwife services and generally to assure competence in the practice.

**Source.** 1999, 213:8, eff. July 6, 1999.

### Section 326-D:10

 **326-D:10 Powers and Duties of Commissioner. –** The powers and
duties of the commissioner shall include:
                                             
 I. Providing the public with such information, relative to
certification in and the practice of midwifery, as the commissioner
deems sufficient to enable the public to make informed decisions in
selecting a competent midwife.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1999, 213:8, eff. July 6, 1999. 2015, 276:108, XXIX, eff.
July 1, 2015.

### Section 326-D:11

 **326-D:11 Certificate Renewal; Continuing Education. –** Every
person certified under this chapter shall apply to the council for
certificate renewal every 2 years. Renewals of certificates shall be
contingent upon presentation of satisfactory evidence to the council of
having met the continuing education requirements established by the
council pursuant to RSA 326-D:5, I(e) and shall be accompanied by the
renewal fee established pursuant to RSA 326-D:4, I(b). All certificates
shall automatically lapse 2 years after the date of issuance unless a
timely and complete renewal application has been filed with the council.
In no event shall a certificate, for which a timely and complete
application for renewal has been submitted, expire before the council
has taken final action upon the application.

**Source.** 1999, 213:8, eff. July 6, 1999.

### Section 326-D:12

 **326-D:12 Administration of Drugs and Medications. –**
                                             
 I. A midwife certified under this chapter may obtain, possess, and
administer the following medications under the conditions indicated:
                                             
 (a) Rh immune globin (Rhogam), if indicated.
                                             
 (b) Eye prophylaxis in accordance with RSA 132:6.
                                             
 (c) Oxygen for fetal distress and infant resuscitation.
                                             
 (d) Lidocaine Hydrochloride by infiltration and suture material,
but only for the purpose of postpartum repair of tears, lacerations, or
episiotomy.
                                             
 (e) Vitamin K by injection or oral vitamin K for control and
prevention of acute and late onset hemorrhagic disease in the newborn.
                                             
 (f) Oxytocins such as pitocin, ergotrate, and methergine, by
injection or orally, only for postpartum control of maternal
hemorrhage.
                                             
 (g) Intravenous fluids such as Ringer's Lactate with or without
D5W and Normosol-R with or without D5W, with no additional medications
unless specifically ordered by physician.
                                             
 (h) Other drugs or medications as prescribed by a physician,
consistent with the scope of midwifery practice as defined by the
council.
                                             
 II. A midwife certified pursuant to this chapter may lawfully
purchase and have possession of the medications named in RSA 326-D:12,
I, and the equipment normally required for administration. The labels
attached to such medications and equipment shall indicate that they are
for administrative use only.
                                             
 III. A pharmacist who dispenses such medications to a certified
midwife shall not be liable for any adverse reactions caused by any
method of use by the midwife.

**Source.** 1999, 213:8, eff. July 6, 1999.

### Section 326-D:13

 **326-D:13 Reciprocity. –** The council may certify any applicant
who is licensed in any other state, provided the other state's licensing
or certification requirements are substantially equivalent to or higher
than those of this state.

**Source.** 1999, 213:8, eff. July 6, 1999.

### Section 326-D:14

 **326-D:14 Exceptions. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who was certified as a lay-midwife under the previous
provisions of RSA 326-D shall be immediately eligible for certification
as a midwife upon the effective date of this section.
                                             
 II. Residents of this state who held themselves out as midwives
prior to July 1, 1999, may continue to practice in this state without
certification until June 30, 2001. Such midwives, however, shall obtain
certification under this chapter by July 1, 2001 in order to practice
midwifery. Such midwives may be certified under this chapter, if they
meet all of the qualifications under RSA 326-D:7, except that experience
requirements under RSA 326-D:7, V, shall be waived if the applicant can
document at least 50 successful home births.

**Source.** 1999, 213:8, eff. July 6, 1999.
