---
title: 'CHAPTER 326-F SPEECH-LANGUAGE PATHOLOGY PRACTICE'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 326-F
                                             
SPEECH-LANGUAGE PATHOLOGY PRACTICE
----------------------------------

### Section 326-F:1

 **326-F:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter and RSA 328-F:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means the governing board of speech-language
pathologists established in RSA 328-F.
                                             
 II. "Practice of speech-language pathology'' means, but shall not be
limited to:
                                             
 (a) Screening, identifying, assessing, interpreting, diagnosing,
rehabilitating, and preventing disorders of speech and language.
                                             
 (b) Screening, identifying, assessing, interpreting, diagnosing,
and rehabilitating disorders of oral-pharyngeal function and related
disorders.
                                             
 (c) Screening, identifying, assessing, interpreting, diagnosing,
and rehabilitating cognitive communication disorders.
                                             
 (d) Assessing, selecting, and developing augmentative and
alternative communication systems and providing training in their use.
                                             
 (e) Providing aural rehabilitation and related counseling
services to hearing-impaired individuals and their families.
                                             
 (f) Enhancing speech-language proficiency and communication
effectiveness.
                                             
 (g) Screening of hearing and other factors for the purpose of
speech-language evaluation or the initial identification of individuals
with other communication disorders.
                                             
 II-a. "Speech-language assistant'' means any person certified by the
board who meets minimum qualifications established by the board which
are less than those established by this chapter as necessary for
licensing as a speech-language pathologist, and who does not act
independently but works under the direction and supervision of a
speech-language pathologist licensed under this chapter.
                                             
 III. "Speech-language pathologist'' means any person who renders or
offers to render to the public any service involving the application of
principles, methods, and procedures for the measurement of testing,
identification, appraisal, consultation, counseling, instruction and
research related to the development and disorders of speech, voice, or
language for the purpose of diagnosing, designing, and implementing
programs for the amelioration of such disorders and conditions.
                                             
 IV. "Speech-language pathology'' means the application of
principles, methods, and procedures related to the development and
disorders of human communication, which disorders shall include any and
all conditions whether of organic or nonorganic origin, that impede the
normal process of human communication including, but not limited to,
disorders and related disorders of speech, articulation, fluency, voice,
verbal and written language, auditory comprehension, cognition,
communication, swallowing, and oral, pharyngeal or laryngeal
sensorimotor competencies.

**Source.** 2003, 310:3. 2006, 268:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 326-F:2

 **326-F:2 Exemptions. –**
                                             
 I. The following persons are exempt from the licensure and
certification requirements of this chapter and RSA 328-F:
                                             
 (a) Speech-language specialists who are certified under rules
adopted by the board of education pursuant to RSA 21-N:9, II(s), unless
they are also licensed under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Speech-language pathology students or their activities as
students fulfilling their academic or supervised clinical practicum
experience requirements under the direction and supervision of a
speech-language pathologist licensed in this state, provided that the
students are designated by a title which clearly indicates their status
as students.
                                             
 (c) Individuals employed at a public school or nonpublic school
approved by the department of education who do not act independently but
work under the direction and supervision of a speech-language
pathologist licensed under this chapter or a speech language specialist
certified by the department of education.
                                             
 II. A person exempt from licensure or certification under this
section shall not be exempt from the requirements of RSA 326-F:8.

**Source.** 2003, 310:3. 2006, 268:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2007. 2016, 222:1,
eff. Aug. 8, 2016.

### Section 326-F:3

 **326-F:3 Eligibility for Initial Licensure. –**
                                             
 I. To be eligible for initial licensure as a speech-language
pathologist an applicant shall:
                                             
 (a) Demonstrate sufficient evidence of good professional
character and reliability to satisfy the board that the applicant shall
faithfully and conscientiously avoid professional misconduct and adhere
to this chapter, RSA 328-F and the board's rules.
                                             
 (b) Meet any continuing competency requirements established by
the board in rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 (c) Either hold a currently valid certificate of clinical
competence issued by the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association,
or its successor organization, or meet the requirements of paragraph
II.
                                             
 II. To be eligible for initial licensure as a speech-language
pathologist an applicant not holding a currently valid certificate of
clinical competence shall:
                                             
 (a) Possess a master's degree or higher academic degree in
speech-language pathology, communications sciences and disorders, or
communications disorders.
                                             
 (b) Have completed a supervised clinical practicum experience
complying with the requirements set forth in rules adopted by the board
pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 (c) Have completed a postgraduate professional experience under
the direction and supervision of a licensed speech-language pathologist
and meeting the requirements of rules adopted by the board pursuant to
RSA 541-A.
                                             
 (d) Pass an examination approved by the board in rules adopted by
the board pursuant to RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 2003, 310:3, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-F:4

 **326-F:4 Provisional License. –**
                                             
 I. The purpose of a provisional license is to permit an individual
to practice speech-language pathology while completing the postgraduate
professional experience required for initial licensure. The board shall
issue a provisional license to an applicant who has met the eligibility
requirements for initial licensure except for completion of the required
postgraduate professional experience and has completed the application
procedure for initial licensure except for submitting documentation of
completion of the postgraduate professional experience.
                                             
 II. A holder of a provisional license is authorized to practice
speech-language pathology under the direction and supervision of a
speech-language pathologist currently licensed in this state.
                                             
 III. A holder of a provisional license practicing speech-language
pathology full time shall complete 9 months of postgraduate professional
experience in accordance with rules adopted by the board.
                                             
 IV. A holder of a provisional license practicing speech-language
pathology less than full time shall complete the postgraduate
professional experience within the time period specified by the board in
rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 V. A provisional license shall expire automatically on the date
stated on the license.
                                             
 VI. The board is authorized to issue conditional provisional
licenses in accordance with rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 2003, 310:3, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-F:5

 **326-F:5 Rulemaking. –** The board shall adopt rules, pursuant to
RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Eligibility requirements for provisional licenses.
                                             
 II. Application procedures for provisional licenses.
                                             
 III. The requirements for direction and supervision of those
practicing under provisional licenses.
                                             
 IV. The limitations on practice imposed on those practicing under
provisional licenses.
                                             
 V. The minimum qualifications of, requirements for direction and
supervision of, and scope of tasks that may be performed by
speech-language assistants. Such qualifications shall include a minimum
of a 2-year associate's degree granted by a speech-language pathology
program accredited by an accrediting organization approved by the
board.
                                             
 V-a. The requirements for direction and supervision of persons whose
work is exempted from licensure or certification requirements pursuant
to RSA 326-F:2.
                                             
 VI. The application and qualification for initial certification,
certification renewal, and certification reinstatement of
speech-language assistants.
                                             
 VII. The investigation and discipline of certified speech-language
assistants.

**Source.** 2003, 310:3. 2006, 268:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007. 2016, 222:3,
eff. Aug. 8, 2016.

### Section 326-F:6

 **326-F:6 Eligibility for Renewal of Licenses. –** Licensees are
eligible for renewal of their licenses if they:
                                             
 I. Have completed 30 hours of continuing education which meet the
requirements established by the board through rulemaking pursuant to RSA
541-A and at least 50 percent of which are directly related to the
practice of speech-language pathology.
                                             
 II. Have not violated this chapter or RSA 328-F nor demonstrated
poor professional character.
                                             
 III. Meet any continuing competency requirements established by the
board in rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 2003, 310:3, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-F:6-a

 **326-F:6-a Renewal of Certification. –** Certification shall be
renewed biennially in accordance with rules adopted pursuant to RSA
541-A.

**Source.** 2006, 268:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 326-F:7

 **326-F:7 Reinstatement of Lapsed License. –** Any license that has
not been renewed within 2 years from its expiration date may not be
reinstated, restored, or reissued unless the applicant for reinstatement
complies with the eligibility and application requirements set forth in
rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 2003, 310:3. 2009, 118:1, eff. Aug. 21, 2009.

### Section 326-F:7-a

 **326-F:7-a Reinstatement of Certification. –** The board shall
reinstate a certification which has lapsed as a result of failure of the
applicant to qualify for renewal or to submit the renewal application on
time if the applicant:
                                             
 I. Meets eligibility requirements for renewal.
                                             
 II. Meets any reinstatement requirements established by the board in
rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 III. Complies with any reinstatement application procedures
established by the board in rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 IV. Pays the reinstatement fee.

**Source.** 2006, 268:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 326-F:8

 **326-F:8 Professional Identification. –**
                                             
 I. Individuals holding currently valid licenses issued under this
chapter may use the title "speech-language pathologist'' and write the
designation "licensed speech-language pathologist'' following his or her
written name.
                                             
 II. No person shall represent himself or herself or the services
offered by using the letters "SLP'' or the words "speech-language
pathologist'', "speech-language pathology'', "speech pathologist'',
"speech pathology'', "speech therapist'', "speech therapy'', "speech
correctionist'', "speech correction'', "speech clinician'', "language
pathologist'', "language pathology'', "aphasiologist'', "voice
pathologist'', "voice pathology'', "language therapist'', "language
therapy'', "communication disorders'', or any similar words if the
intent of such use is to imply that the person is licensed, unless
licensed under this chapter.
                                             
 III. Any person who states or implies by word or act that he or she
is currently licensed to practice speech-language pathology at a time
when she or he does not hold a currently valid license shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
                                             
 IV. No person shall represent himself or herself by using the
letters "SLA'' or "SLPA,'' or the words "speech-language assistant,''
"speech assistant,'' or "speech therapy assistant,'' unless the person
is certified by the board pursuant to rules adopted under RSA 326-F:5,
VI.

**Source.** 2003, 310:3, eff. July 1, 2003. 2016, 222:2, eff. Aug. 8,
2016.
