---
title: 'CHAPTER 326-H LICENSED DIETITIANS'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 326-H
                                             
LICENSED DIETITIANS
-------------------

### Section 326-H:1

 **326-H:1 Short Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the
"Dietitians Licensure Act.''

**Source.** 2000, 168:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 326-H:2

 **326-H:2 Purpose. –** The general court recognizes that dietitians
play an important role in treating illness, injury, and other medical
conditions; and in improving the quality of life of seriously ill
patients; all of which can result in cost savings to the health care
system. The general court finds and declares that the practices of
dietitians in the state of New Hampshire affect public health, safety,
and welfare; these practices make important and distinct contributions
to patient care, and it is in the public's best interest to have
qualified individuals who practice in this profession. In doing so, the
general court recognizes that there are many aspects of nutrition and it
is not the purpose of this act to restrict the ability of any person to
provide advice, counseling, or assessments in matters of food, diet, or
nutrition and to receive compensation for such services, thereby
assuring that all persons can obtain nutrition and dietary information,
dietary counseling, and information regarding food, food products,
dietary supplements, and their proper use, from any source of that
person's choosing. The purpose of this act, therefore, is to establish
regulations and standards of qualification, training, and experience for
individuals who are practicing dietitians.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 326-H:3

 **326-H:3 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means the board of licensed dietitians.
                                             
 II. "Commission on Dietetic Registration'' means the national
autonomous credentialing body.
                                             
 III. "Dietitian'' means a person who is a food and nutrition
professional who meets the minimum academic and professional
requirements that have enabled that individual to be credentialed by the
Commission on Dietetic Registration as a registered dietitian.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 326-H:4

 **326-H:4 Exceptions. –**
                                             
 I. This chapter shall not apply to a dietitian who is:
                                             
 (a) Serving in the armed forces of the United States;
                                             
 (b) Engaged in a state or federally funded public health
program;
                                             
 (c) Employed by the Veterans Administration, provided such
dietetic activities are related to such service or employment; or
                                             
 (d) Licensed, certified, or registered under other laws of this
state who is performing services within his or her authorized scope of
practice.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict, prevent,
or otherwise interfere with a person who does not hold himself or
herself out as a licensed dietitian from providing advice, counseling or
assessments in matters of food, diet or nutrition; or from marketing or
distributing food products, including dietary supplements as defined by
the federal Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act; or from
providing explanations to or communicating with customers with regard to
the uses of such products.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 326-H:5

 **326-H:5 License Required; License Title. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall practice or represent himself or herself as a
dietitian in this state without first applying for and receiving a
license from the board to practice as a licensed dietitian.
                                             
 II. Licensees shall use the title "licensed dietitian'' and the
recognized abbreviation "LD''.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 326-H:6

 **326-H:6 Scope of Practice. –** Licensed dietitians shall be
authorized to practice applications from food, nutrition, biochemistry,
physiology, management, behavioral, and social sciences used in the
treatment of illness, injury and other medical conditions, and the
maintenance of human health.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 326-H:7

 **326-H:7 Board of Licensed Dietitians; Removal; Expenses. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a board of licensed dietitians, consisting
of 5 members. Initial appointments shall be made pursuant to RSA
326-H:8. Thereafter, the board shall be appointed by the governor with
consent of the executive council and shall consist of 4 licensed
dietitians and one public member.
                                             
 II. Members of the board shall serve 3-year terms, shall hold office
until successors are appointed and qualified, and shall serve no more
than 2 consecutive terms.
                                             
 III. The board may remove a member for malfeasance, misfeasance, or
nonfeasance.
                                             
 IV. Each member of the board shall be reimbursed for in-state actual
and necessary travel expenses incurred in the discharge of official
duties at the state employee mileage rate.
                                             
 V. All members of the board shall have been residents of this state
for at least 3 years immediately preceding appointment to the board. The
public member shall not be, nor ever have been, a member of the
dietitian profession nor have or have had a material, financial interest
in either the provision of dietitian services or an activity directly
related to the dietitian profession, including the representation of the
board or profession for a fee at any time during the 5 years preceding
appointment.
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 2000, 168:1. 2010, 118:9, eff. July 1, 2010. 2015, 276:108,
XXXIII, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 326-H:8

 **326-H:8 Initial Appointments; Meeting; Election of Initial
Chairperson. –**
                                             
 I. The initial appointments to the board shall be made by the
governor with the consent of the executive council and shall serve
initial terms as follows: 2 practicing dietitians who shall serve a term
of one year; and 2 practicing dietitians and one public member who shall
serve a term of 2 years.
                                             
 II. The initial board members shall be appointed within 6 months of
January 1, 2001. The initial chairperson shall be elected from among the
board members no later than the second meeting of the board.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 326-H:9

 **326-H:9 Duties of the Board. –** The board shall:
                                             
 I. Conduct meetings as required.
                                             
 II. Select a chairperson and officers from the members of the
board.
                                             
 III. Maintain a true record of the board's official acts which shall
be public and open to inspection at all reasonable times, except for
records compiled in connection with disciplinary proceedings.
                                             
 IV. Adopt a code of ethics for the practices of licensed dietitians
in this state.
                                             
 V. Establish appropriate disciplinary actions including penalties,
sanctions, supplemental training requirements and treatment and
counseling requirements for licensees involved in violations of the code
of ethics, which may include revocation of license, suspension of
license, fines, community service, oral or written reprimand, additional
education or training, and supervised training and counseling, including
substance abuse treatment and counseling.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1. 2004, 165:1, eff. July 23, 2004.

### Section 326-H:10

 **326-H:10 Rulemaking. –** The board shall adopt rules, pursuant to
RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The application procedures for licensure or temporary licensure
to practice as a licensed dietitian in this state.
                                             
 II. The renewal, suspension, revocation, and reinstatement of
licenses.
                                             
 III. The establishment of fees for reinstatement of licenses.
                                             
 IV. Educational qualifications for licensure.
                                             
 V. The conditions and fees for licensing out-of-state dietitians.
                                             
 VI. Continuing education requirements.
                                             
 VII. Procedures for investigations and hearings held under this
chapter.
                                             
 VIII. Procedures for appealing hearing board decisions.
                                             
 IX. Disciplinary actions including penalties, sanctions,
supplemental training requirements, and treatment and counseling
requirements for licensees involved in violations of the code of ethics,
which may include revocation of license, suspension of license, fines,
community service, oral or written reprimand, additional education or
training, and supervised training and counseling, including substance
abuse treatment and counseling.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1. 2004, 165:2, 3, eff. July 23, 2004. 2014,
167:9, eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 326-H:11

 **326-H:11 Immunity From Civil Action. –** No civil action shall be
maintained against the board or any member of the board or its agents or
employees, against any organization or its members, or against any other
person for or by reason of any statement, report, communication, or
testimony to the board or determination by the board in relation to
proceedings under this chapter.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 326-H:12

 **326-H:12 Requirements for Licensure. –** To be eligible to be a
licensed dietitian under this chapter, an applicant shall be a person of
good character and shall:
                                             
 I. Hold a baccalaureate or higher degree from a college or
university approved by the board with a major course of study in human
nutrition, nutrition education, food and nutrition, dietetics, public
health nutrition, or food systems management;
                                             
 II. Have successfully completed a dietetic internship of no less
than 900 hours, pre-professional practice program, or coordinated
program with documented experience in the practice of dietetics under
supervision of a registered, certified, or licensed dietitian;
                                             
 III. Have successfully passed the examination administered by the
Commission on Dietetic Registration;
                                             
 IV. Maintain continuing professional education requirements as
determined by the board; and
                                             
 V. Pay the 
                                             $110 license fee.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1. 2002, 163:2. 2004, 165:5, eff. July 23, 2004.
2014, 167:10, eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 326-H:12-a

 **326-H:12-a Exception of Requirements for Licensure. –** An
applicant for licensure as a dietitian under this chapter who was
registered as a dietitian with the Commission on Dietetic Registration
on or before December 31, 2000, shall be deemed to have met the
requirements for licensure under RSA 326-H:12, I, II, and III.

**Source.** 2002, 163:1, eff. May 15, 2002.

### Section 326-H:13

 **326-H:13 Reciprocity. –** The board may, in its discretion, grant
a license under this chapter to an individual certified or licensed in
another state if it determines that the requirements or standards for
certification or licensure in that state are equivalent to, or greater
than, those established by this chapter.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 326-H:14

 **326-H:14 Issuance, Expiration, and Renewal of License. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall license as a dietitian each applicant who proves
to the satisfaction of the board his or her qualifications under this
chapter and under rules adopted by the board under RSA 326-H:10. The
board shall issue to each person qualified a license, which shall be
prima facie evidence of the right of the person to whom it is issued to
represent himself or herself as a licensed dietitian subject to the
conditions and limitations of this chapter.
                                             
 II. All licenses issued by the board shall be renewed biennially or
reissued pursuant to rules adopted and upon payment of a 
                                             $110 license
renewal fee. The board shall cause notification of impending license
expiration to be sent to each licensed person at least 60 days prior to
the expiration of the license. Licenses shall continue as valid until
final action is exercised by the board on an application for renewal,
provided that the application is filed before the expiration date of the
license.
                                             
 III. Any person licensed under this chapter who seeks to renew his
or her license shall provide to the board satisfactory documentation of
the required continuing professional education.
                                             
 IV. Any person who fails to renew a license issued under this
chapter may be issued a license only upon reapplication for licensure.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1. 2004, 165:5, eff. July 23, 2004. 2014, 167:11,
eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 229:9, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 326-H:15

 **326-H:15 Continuing Professional Education. –** It shall be deemed
sufficient for the renewal of a license issued under this chapter for an
applicant for renewal to have completed 20 hours of continuing
professional education related to the relevant practice in the previous
24 months. Continuing education programs shall be approved by the board.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 326-H:16

 **326-H:16 Suspension and Revocation of License. –** The board,
after providing an opportunity for a hearing, may take appropriate
disciplinary action as follows:
                                             
 I. Suspend or revoke the license if the person has obtained the
license by fraudulent or deceitful means.
                                             
 II. Suspend or revoke the license if the person has been convicted
of a class A felony or found guilty of malpractice or gross misconduct
in practice as a dietitian.
                                             
 III. Suspend or revoke if by reason of negligent habits, neglect,
willful action, or other causes engaged in actions inconsistent with the
health of the person or persons under the care of the licensee.
                                             
 IV. Take appropriate disciplinary action such as suspension,
revocation, penalties, sanctions, additional training or other
requirements for all other violations of this chapter, and the rules and
code of ethics adopted by the board.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1. 2004, 165:6, eff. July 23, 2004.

### Section 326-H:17

 **326-H:17 Hearings. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall take no disciplinary action without providing an
opportunity for a hearing. At least 14 days prior to hearing, both
parties to a disciplinary proceeding shall be served, either personally
or by registered mail, with a written copy of the complaint filed and
notice of the time and place for hearing. All complaints shall be
objectively received and fairly heard by the board, but no complaint
shall be acted upon unless in writing. A hearing shall be held on all
written complaints received by the board within one year of the date
notice of a complaint was received by the accused, unless otherwise
agreed to by the parties. Written notice of all disciplinary decisions
made by the board shall be given to both parties to the proceeding upon
their issuance.
                                             
 II. The board may administer oaths or affirmations, preserve
testimony, and issue subpoenas, upon the approval of the attorney
general, for witnesses and for documents relative to formal
investigations or adjudicatory hearings.
                                             
 III. Witnesses summoned before the board shall be paid the same fees
as witnesses summoned to appear before the superior court, and such
summons issued by any justice of the peace shall have the same effect as
though issued for appearance before such court.
                                             
 IV. All notice and hearing procedures shall comply with RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1. 2004, 165:7, eff. July 23, 2004. 2014, 34:11,
eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 326-H:18

 **326-H:18 Reinstatement. –** Any person whose license has been
suspended or revoked by the board may apply to the board, in writing, to
request a hearing for reinstatement. Upon a hearing, the board may issue
a new license or modify the suspension or revocation of the license.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 326-H:19

 **326-H:19 Offenses. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be a class A misdemeanor for any natural person, and a
felony for any other person to:
                                             
 (a) Practice as a licensed dietitian under the guise of any
diploma, permit, certificate, license, or record illegally or
fraudulently obtained or issued.
                                             
 (b) Impersonate in any manner a licensed dietitian by use of any
title that contains the word "dietitian'', use of the abbreviation
"LD'', or use any words, signs, symbols, or devices which represent a
person licensed under this chapter.
                                             
 II. It shall be a class B misdemeanor for any person to:
                                             
 (a) Sell, fraudulently obtain, or furnish any license established
under this chapter or aid and abet such conduct.
                                             
 (b) Fail to notify the board of the suspension, probation, or
revocation of any past or present license, certification, or
registration required to practice as a dietitian in this or any other
jurisdiction.
                                             
 (c) Make false representations or impersonate or act as proxy for
another person or allow or aid any person to impersonate him or her in
connection with any examination or application for licensure or request
to be licensed.
                                             
 (d) Violate any other provision of this chapter.

**Source.** 2000, 168:1. 2006, 76:10, eff. July 1, 2006.
