---
title: 'CHAPTER 326-C OCCUPATIONAL THERAPISTS'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 326-C
                                             
OCCUPATIONAL THERAPISTS
-----------------------

### Section 326-C:1

 **326-C:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter and RSA 328-F, unless the
context otherwise requires:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means the occupational therapy governing board
established in RSA 328-F.
                                             
 II. "Occupational therapist'' means a person currently licensed to
practice occupational therapy in the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 III. "Occupational therapy'' means the therapeutic use of purposeful
and meaningful occupations or goal-directed activities to evaluate and
treat individuals who have a disease or disorder, impairment, activity
limitation, or participation restriction which interferes with their
ability to function independently in daily life roles, and to promote
health and wellness.
                                             
 (a) Occupational therapy intervention may include:
                                             
 (1) Remediation or restoration of performance abilities that
are limited due to impairment in biological, physiological,
psychological, or neurological processes.
                                             
 (2) Adaptation of task, process, or the environment, or the
teaching of compensatory techniques, in order to enhance performance.
                                             
 (3) Disability prevention methods and techniques which
facilitate the development or safe application of performance skills.
                                             
 (4) Health promotion strategies and practices which enhance
performance abilities.
                                             
 (b) Occupational therapy services include, but are not limited
to:
                                             
 (1) Evaluating, developing, improving, sustaining or restoring
skills in activities of daily living, work or productive activities,
including instrumental activities of daily living, and play and leisure
activities.
                                             
 (2) Evaluating, developing, remediating, or restoring
sensorimotor, cognitive, or psychosocial components of performance.
                                             
 (3) Designing, fabricating, applying, or training in the use
of assistive technology or orthotic devices, and training in the use of
prosthetic devices.
                                             
 (4) Adaptation of environments and processes, including the
application of ergonomic principles, to enhance performance and safety
in daily life roles.
                                             
 (5) Application of physical agent modalities as an adjunct to,
or in preparation for, engagement in purposeful activities and
occupations.
                                             
 (6) Evaluating and providing intervention in collaboration
with the client, family, caregiver, or others.
                                             
 (7) Educating the client, family, caregiver, or others in
carrying out appropriate non-skilled interventions.
                                             
 (8) Consulting with groups, programs, organizations, or
communities to provide population-based services.
                                             
 IV. "Occupational therapy assistant'' means a person currently
licensed to assist in the practice of occupational therapy, under the
supervision of an occupational therapist, in the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 2003, 310:1, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-C:2

 **326-C:2 Evaluation and Treatment Authorization. –**
                                             
 I. Consultation and evaluation by an occupational therapist may be
performed without a referral. Initiation of occupational therapy
services to individuals with medically related conditions shall be based
on a referral from a physician or physician assistant licensed by the
state board of medicine, an advanced practice registered nurse licensed
under RSA 326-B, a chiropractor licensed under RSA 316-A, an optometrist
licensed under RSA 327, or any other qualified health care professional
who, within the scope of the professional's licensure, is authorized to
refer for health care services.
                                             
 II. Prevention, wellness, and education-related services shall not
require a referral. These services may be provided in a variety of
settings such as educational, work, recreational, and residential
settings and community centers for adults and children.

**Source.** 2003, 310:1. 2009, 54:5, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 326-C:3

 **326-C:3 Prohibition on Unauthorized Practice; Professional
Identification. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall practice or hold oneself out as being able to
practice occupational therapy or assist in the practice of occupational
therapy or provide occupational therapy services in this state unless
the person is licensed under this chapter and RSA 328-F. Nothing in this
paragraph shall be construed to prohibit students enrolled in board
approved schools or courses in occupational therapy from performing
occupational therapy which is incidental to their respective courses of
study or supervised field work.
                                             
 II. Licensed occupational therapists may use the letters "OT'' and
"OT/L'' and occupational therapy assistants may use the letters "OTA''
and "OTA/L'' in connection with their names or places of business.

**Source.** 2003, 310:1, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-C:4

 **326-C:4 Coercion Prohibited. –** No person shall coerce a licensed
occupational therapist or occupational therapy assistant into
compromising patient safety by requiring the licensed occupational
therapist or occupational therapy assistant to delegate activities or
tasks if the licensed occupational therapist or occupational therapy
assistant determines that it is inappropriate to do so. Licensed
occupational therapists or occupational therapy assistants shall not be
subject to disciplinary action by the board for refusing to delegate
activities or tasks or refusing to provide the required training for
delegation if the licensed occupational therapist or occupational
therapy assistant determines that delegation may compromise patient
safety.

**Source.** 2003, 310:1, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-C:5

 **326-C:5 Eligibility for Licensure. –**
                                             
 I. An applicant shall possess the following qualifications to be
licensed:
                                             
 (a) Be at least 17 years of age.
                                             
 (b) Be of good moral character.
                                             
 (c) Successfully complete an academic program in occupational
therapy accredited by the American Council for Occupational Therapy
Education (ACOTE) or its successor organization or be certified by the
National Board for Certification in Occupational Therapy, Inc., or its
successor organization.
                                             
 (d) Successfully complete a period, as specified in paragraph II,
of supervised field work experience approved by the educational
institution where the applicant met his or her academic requirements, or
be certified by the National Board for Certification in Occupational
Therapy, Inc., or its successor organization.
                                             
 (e) Successfully complete the entry level certification
examination for occupational therapists or occupational therapy
assistants approved by the board, such as the examination administered
by the National Board for Certification in Occupational Therapy, Inc. or
by another nationally recognized credentialing body.
                                             
 (f) If passing the required examination more than one year before
submitting the application for licensure, meet the continuing competency
requirements established by the board in rules adopted pursuant to RSA
541-A.
                                             
 II. A minimum of 6 months of supervised fieldwork experience is
required for licensure as an occupational therapist, and a minimum of 2
months of supervised fieldwork experience is required for licensure as
an occupational therapy assistant.
                                             
 III. The board may, upon notice and opportunity for a hearing, deny
an application for initial licensure or issue a conditional license. The
board may, upon notice and opportunity for a hearing, deny an
application for reinstatement of a license or reinstate the license with
conditions. Conditions imposed may include a requirement for continuing
education, practice under the supervision of a licensed occupational
therapist, or any other condition set forth in the section addressing
conditional licenses in RSA 328-F.

**Source.** 2003, 310:1, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-C:6

 **326-C:6 Renewal of License. –**
                                             
 I. Persons licensed as occupational therapists or occupational
therapy assistants are eligible for renewal of their licenses if they:
                                             
 (a) Have not violated this chapter or RSA 328-F or demonstrated
poor moral character.
                                             
 (b) Meet any continuing competency requirements and any
requirements for continuing education, clinical experience, or training
established by the board in rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 II. The board shall approve continuing education programs approved
through the American Occupational Therapy Association's approved
provider program.

**Source.** 2003, 310:1, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-C:7

 **326-C:7 Rulemaking. –** The board shall adopt rules pursuant to
RSA 541-A specifying:
                                             
 I. The physical agent modalities which may be applied as an adjunct
to, or in preparation for, engagement in purposeful activities and
occupations;
                                             
 II. The eligibility requirements to be met by licensees seeking a
certificate authorizing the application of physical agent modalities;
                                             
 III. The documentation required by the board for the issuance of a
certificate authorizing a licensee to apply physical agent modalities;
                                             
 IV. The requirements for supervision of licensed occupational
therapy assistants by licensed occupational therapists; and
                                             
 V. The use and supervision of non-licensed persons providing
supportive services to licensed occupational therapists or occupational
therapy assistants.

**Source.** 2003, 310:1, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 326-C:8

 **326-C:8 Physical Agent Modalities; Certificates. –**
                                             
 I. Licensed occupational therapists and licensed occupational
therapy assistants are required to hold a certificate issued by the
board authorizing their use of specified physical agent modalities.
                                             
 II. Licensees who have been using specified physical agent
modalities for 3 consecutive years and who have been educated or trained
on the job in their use may continue their use without holding
authorizing certificates, but such licensees shall meet the eligibility
and application requirements for authorizing certificates no later than
6 months after the adoption of rules establishing such requirements.
                                             
 III. The board is authorized to issue certificates authorizing the
use of specified physical agent modalities to eligible licensed
occupational therapists and licensed occupational therapy assistants.
Such certificates are not required to be renewed.
                                             
 IV. The board may suspend a certificate authorizing the use of
specified physical agent modalities as one of the conditions of a
conditional license issued pursuant to this chapter and RSA 328-F. Such
a certificate shall be suspended or revoked when the underlying license
is suspended or revoked.

**Source.** 2003, 310:1, eff. July 1, 2003.
