---
title: 'CHAPTER 327-A OPHTHALMIC DISPENSING'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 327-A
                                             
OPHTHALMIC DISPENSING
---------------------

### Section 327-A:1

 **327-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Ophthalmic dispensing'' means the design, verification, and
delivery to the intended wearer of lenses, frames, and other specially
fabricated optical devices upon prescription. It includes, but is not
limited to, prescription analysis and interpretation; the taking of
measurements to determine the size, shape, and specifications of the
spectacle lenses, frames, or lens forms best suited to the wearer's
needs; the preparation and delivery of work orders to laboratory
technicians engaged in grinding lenses and fabricating eyewear; the
verification of the quality of finished ophthalmic products, the
adjustment of lenses or frames to the intended wearer's face; the
delivery of such ophthalmic products including instruction in hygiene
and insertion and removal of contact lenses; and the adjustment,
replacement, and reproduction of previously prepared ophthalmic lenses,
frames, contact lenses, or other specially fabricated ophthalmic
devices. It does not include the alteration without permission of the
prescriber of any prescriptions, nor does it include the fitting of
contact lenses which may only be performed by ophthalmologists or
optometrists pursuant to law regulating such practices, unless the
ophthalmic dispenser is in possession of a statement of delegation
authorizing the fitting of contact lenses.
                                             
 II. "Fitting contact lenses'' means measurement of the shape of the
eye, as well as determining the lens specifications, including base
curve, size, shape, thickness, color, and material composition.
                                             
 III. "Prescription for spectacle lenses'' means a dated and signed,
written or oral direction not more than 24 months old from an
ophthalmologist or optometrist for therapeutic or corrective lenses
which states the prescribed refractive power and when necessary, the
vertex distance, cylinder axis, and prism. The oral prescription must be
recorded and kept on file for one year by the ophthalmic dispenser.
                                             
 IV. "Prescription for contact lenses'' means a dated and signed,
written direction specifying that it is for contact lenses or plano
lenses, and shall include at least the power, size, curvature, color,
and material composition of the lenses. A prescription for contact
lenses may also include, at the prescriber's professional discretion,
other parameters or instructions such as lens manufacturer, prescription
expiration date, number of permitted refills, and a statement
prohibiting substitutions. Such parameters or instructions shall be
honored by a person filling the prescription. Unless otherwise specified
by the prescriber for health reasons, a contact lens prescription shall
expire one year from the date of issue.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI-a. "Executive director'' means the executive director of the
office of professional licensure and certification.
                                             
 VII. "Ophthalmic dispenser/optician'' means anyone who sells or
dispenses, upon prescription, spectacles, eyeglasses or contact lenses.
                                             
 VIII. "Statement of delegation'' means a written, signed statement
from the prescribing ophthalmologist or optometrist which authorizes a
named ophthalmic dispenser to fit the prescription for contact lenses.
The statement shall be written on the prescription for contact lenses or
shall be a letter which shall be attached to the prescription for
contact lenses.
                                             
 IX. "Plano lenses'' means contact lenses with no refractive power.

**Source.** 1989, 389:1. 1995, 310:157, 158. 1998, 308:1, eff. Jan. 1,
1999. 2011, 121:4, 5, eff. Aug. 1, 2011. 2015, 276:92, 108, XXI, eff.
July 1, 2015.

### Section 327-A:2

 **327-A:2 Registration of Ophthalmic Dispensers. –** It shall be
unlawful for any person to engage in the business of ophthalmic
dispensing or the practice of dispensing contact lenses unless such
person is registered in accordance with this chapter and unless the
registration of such person is current and valid. No person shall engage
in the fitting of contact lenses unless the person has a statement of
delegation from an ophthalmologist or optometrist.

**Source.** 1989, 389:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 327-A:3

 **327-A:3 Application for Registration. –** An application for a
certificate of registration for ophthalmic dispensing under this chapter
shall be filed with the department in such form and detail as the
commissioner shall require in accordance with rules adopted under RSA
541-A, shall be duly signed and verified, shall be available for public
inspection, and shall include, but not be limited to:
                                             
 I. The name and the business address of the applicant; if an
individual, the name under which he intends to conduct business; if a
partnership, the name and business address of each member thereof, and
the name under which the business is to be conducted; if a corporation,
the name of the corporation and the name and business address of each of
the officers of the corporation.
                                             
 II. The place or places, including the complete address or
addresses, where the business is to be conducted.

**Source.** 1989, 389:1. 1995, 310:175, 183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 327-A:4

 **327-A:4 Advisory Council; Establishment, Duties. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2010, 368:1(27), eff. Dec. 31, 2010.
                                             ]

### Section 327-A:5

 **327-A:5 Powers and Duties of the Executive Director. –** The
powers and duties of the executive director under this chapter include:
                                             
 I. Accepting applications for certificates of registration under
this chapter, and approving or denying such applications.
                                             
 II. Renewing certificates of registration.
                                             
 III. Suspending or revoking certificates of registration upon the
grounds listed in RSA 327-A:9, and conducting hearings regarding the
denial, suspension, revocation and renewal of certificates as provided
in RSA 327-A:11.
                                             
 IV. Accepting written complaints from the public against registrants
and conducting necessary investigations upon such written complaints.
                                             
 V. Publicizing the complaint procedure.
                                             
 VI. Adopting such rules under RSA 541-A as are necessary to carry
out the purposes of this chapter, but in no instance shall the executive
director adopt rules limiting competition, prohibiting truthful
advertising, affecting the location or number of practices or the
employment of any person registered under this chapter.
                                             
 VII. Reporting to the governor and council annually on the
activities conducted under this chapter.
                                             
 VIII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1989, 389:1. 1995, 310:183. 2010, 368:28, V, eff. Dec. 31,
2010. 2015, 276:93, 94, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 327-A:6

 **327-A:6 Issuance of Certificate. –** Except as provided in RSA
327-A:9, the executive director shall issue a certificate of
registration for ophthalmic dispensing to any person who files an
application for such certificate accompanied by the required application
and registration fees within 30 days after the filing of such
application.

**Source.** 1989, 389:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995. 2015, 276:93,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 327-A:7

 **327-A:7 Application and Registration Fees. –** Every application
for a certificate of registration for ophthalmic dispensing shall be
accompanied by a non-refundable registration fee of 
                                             $110. Upon approval
of the application by the executive director, the applicant shall be
issued a certificate of registration for ophthalmic dispensing, which
shall be renewed biennially on or before June 30 upon payment of the
renewal fee. The fee for renewal of any certificate of registration
shall be 
                                             $110.

**Source.** 1989, 389:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995. 2012, 171:18,
eff. Aug. 10, 2012. 2014, 167:48, eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 229:12, eff.
July 1, 2015; 276:93, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 327-A:8

 **327-A:8 Display of Certificate. –** Any person who has been issued
a certificate of registration under this chapter shall conspicuously
display such certificate in his principal place of business.

**Source.** 1989, 389:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 327-A:9

 **327-A:9 Suspension, Revocation or Refusal to Issue Certificate.
–** The commissioner may deny the application for a certificate of
registration and may suspend or revoke the registration of any
ophthalmic dispenser issued pursuant to this chapter or refuse to issue
a renewal thereof if it is determined after hearing that such applicant
or registrant:
                                             
 I. Has made a material false statement or concealed a material fact
in connection with his application for certificate of registration;
                                             
 II. Has had a certificate of registration issued under this chapter
revoked or suspended previously;
                                             
 III. Has been found guilty of fraud or fraudulent practices after
prosecution by the attorney general, or has used dishonest or misleading
advertising;
                                             
 IV. Has failed to follow the orders on the prescription of an
ophthalmologist or optometrist;
                                             
 V. Has failed to comply with any other provision of this chapter or
any rules promulgated by the commissioner.

**Source.** 1989, 389:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 327-A:10

 **327-A:10 Return of Certificate. –** Upon the suspension or
revocation of a certificate of registration by the commissioner and the
issuance of a notice thereof, the registrant shall within 5 days, not
including Sundays and holidays, deliver to the commissioner the
certificate of registration. If surrendered by mail, the certificate of
registration must be sent by registered or certified mail, postmarked no
later than 3 days, not including Sundays and holidays, following notice
of suspension or revocation. Failure to return a certificate of
registration which has been revoked or suspended hereunder within the
prescribed time shall constitute a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1989, 389:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 327-A:11

 **327-A:11 Procedure for Complaints; Hearings; Judicial Review. –**
                                             
 I. No certificate of registration shall be suspended or revoked
until after a hearing before the commissioner, which shall be held in
accordance with RSA 541-A, and upon written notice mailed to the
registrant by certified or registered mail. However, when a notice of
hearing is mailed to a registrant at the address shown in the records of
the department and such a registrant fails to attend such hearing, the
commissioner may suspend his registration without a hearing pending his
attendance at such hearing. Upon the denial of an application for a
certificate of registration, the commissioner shall grant a hearing to
an applicant therefor upon receipt of a request for a hearing made
within 30 days after the applicant is notified of denial. The
commissioner shall have the power to require the attendance of witnesses
and issue subpoenas duces tecum in the conduct of such hearing. If a
certificate of registration is revoked or suspended or an application is
denied, no such certificate shall be issued to such former registrant or
applicant for at least 6 months, or thereafter, except in the discretion
of the commissioner. The applicant or registrant may be heard in person
or by counsel. The commissioner shall notify the applicant of the time
and place of the hearing. The commissioner shall have the power to
subpoena any person in this state, or document, record or other relevant
evidence, and administer an oath to and take the testimony of any such
person or cause his deposition to be taken.
                                             
 II. Appeals from an order of suspension or revocation or a denial of
an application of a certificate of registration shall be made under RSA
541.

**Source.** 1989, 389:1. 1995, 310:175, 183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 327-A:12

 **327-A:12 Rulemaking. –** The executive director shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The registration application form and content, and the license
application procedures.
                                             
 II. The application form, content, and procedure for a renewal or
reinstatement of a registration to practice ophthalmic dispensing, in
accordance with RSA 327-A:3.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. Ethical and professional standards required to be met by
registrants.
                                             
 V. The conduct of investigations, in accordance with RSA 327-A:11.
                                             
 VI. A schedule of administrative fines pursuant to RSA 327-A:17 for
the violation of the provisions of this chapter or rules adopted
pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 VII. Procedures for notice and hearing prior to denial, suspension,
or revocation of a registration, and the imposition of administrative
fines.
                                             
 VIII. Procedures for the handling of complaints.
                                             
 IX. Procedures for the approval or denial of an application.
                                             
 X. Procedures for suspension or revocation of a registration.
                                             
 XI. Procedures for appeal of decisions of the executive director
made pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision and rules adopted
pursuant to this subdivision.
                                             
 XII. Waivers of applicable rules.
                                             
 XIII. Ophthalmic dispensing to young children, as necessary.

**Source.** 1989, 389:1. 1995, 310:182. 1998, 308:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.
2012, 171:17, eff. Aug. 10, 2012. 2014, 167:51, III, eff. July 1, 2014.
2015, 276:93, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 327-A:13

 **327-A:13 Persons and Practices Not Affected. –** Nothing in this
chapter shall apply to:
                                             
 I. Licensed physicians and surgeons authorized to practice medicine
or surgery and licensed optometrists authorized to practice optometry
under the laws of this state.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. Any individual, firm, or corporation employing persons
registered under this chapter.
                                             
 IV. The activities of any employee of an ophthalmic dispenser,
licensed physician, or optometrist if the employee is not engaged in
ophthalmic dispensing as defined in RSA 327-A:1, I. Such activities
shall include, but not be limited to, the sale of related products, work
performed by laboratory technicians, and the making of minor mechanical
repairs on eyeglasses or frames.

**Source.** 1989, 389:1. 1998, 308:3. 1999, 221:1, 2, eff. Sept. 4,
1999.

### Section 327-A:14

 **327-A:14 Renewal of Registration; Continuing Education. –**
Certificates of registration issued under this chapter shall be subject
to renewal every 2 years and shall expire unless renewed in the manner
prescribed by the commissioner. Certificates of registration for
ophthalmic dispensing shall be renewed upon the payment of the renewal
fee and the completion of 8 credits of continuing education during the
previous 2-year period. Any national, regional, or state optical
company, trade, or professional group is authorized to sponsor
continuing education programs approved by the American Board of
Opticianry, the National Contact Lens Examiners, or the commissioner.
The executive director shall authorize continuing education programs
which contribute to the advancement, extension, or enhancement of the
professional skills and the technical knowledge of opticians.

**Source.** 1989, 389:1. 1995, 310:183. 1998, 308:4. 2010, 368:13, eff.
Dec. 31, 2010. 2015, 276:95, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 327-A:15

 **327-A:15 Injunction. –** The executive director may request the
attorney general to commence an action to enjoin the operation of any
person engaged in the selling or fitting of ophthalmic devices or
contact lenses in violation of this chapter. Said action shall be filed
in the superior court in Merrimack county.

**Source.** 1989, 389:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995. 2015, 276:93,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 327-A:16

 **327-A:16 Civil Claims. –** Any person injured by the actions of a
person engaged in the dispensing of ophthalmic devices or contact lenses
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may bring a civil
action to recover damages suffered by reason of the violation.

**Source.** 1989, 389:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 327-A:17

 **327-A:17 Administrative Fines. –** The executive director after
notice and hearing, pursuant to rules adopted under RSA 541-A, may
impose an administrative fine of 
                                             $250 for each offense upon any person
who violates any provision of this chapter or rules adopted under this
chapter. Rehearings and appeals from a decision of the executive
director shall be in accordance with RSA 541. Any administrative fine
imposed under this section shall not preclude the imposition of further
penalties or administrative actions under this chapter. The sums
obtained from the levying of administrative fines under this chapter
shall be forwarded to the state treasurer to be deposited into the
general fund.

**Source.** 2002, 155:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2003. 2015, 276:93, eff. July 1,
2015.
