---
title: CHAPTER 327 OPTOMETRY
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 327
                                             
OPTOMETRY
------------

### Section 327:1

 **327:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means the board of registration in optometry.
                                             
 II. "Dispensing pharmaceutical agents'' means that a licensed
optometrist authorized to use pharmaceutical agents may dispense a
pharmaceutical agent to a patient if no charge is imposed for the
pharmaceutical agent and the amount dispensed does not exceed a 24-hour
supply, except that if the minimum available quantity for dispensing is
greater than a 24-hour supply, the optometrist may dispense the minimum
available quantity. Nothing in this paragraph shall prohibit a licensed
optometrist authorized to use pharmaceutical agents pursuant to RSA
327:6-a from dispensing therapeutic contact lenses for a fee.
                                             
 III. "Pharmaceutical agent'' means the following pharmaceutical
products:
                                             
 (a) Non-legend, over the counter, agents.
                                             
 (b) Mydriatic and cycloplegic agents which are topically
applied.
                                             
 (c) Miotic agents approved pursuant to RSA 327:6-a, VI.
                                             
 (d) Antibiotics, sulfonomides, and combinations thereof, which
are topically applied or orally administered to treat or alleviate the
effects of disease or abnormal conditions of the human eye, adnexa, and
eyelids, excluding the lacrimal gland, or structures posterior to the
iris, approved pursuant to RSA 327:6-a, VI.
                                             
 (e) Anti-allergy medications, including but not limited to
antihistamines, decongestants, and mast-cell stabilizers which are
topically applied.
                                             
 (f) Anesthetics and dyes which are topically applied.
                                             
 (g) Ocular lubricants and hypertonic agents which are topically
applied.
                                             
 (h) Orally administered analgesic agents used for the purpose of
alleviating pain caused by a disease or abnormal condition of the human
eye or eyelid, excluding the lacrimal gland, or structures posterior to
the iris. This may include class III and IV controlled substances
approved pursuant to RSA 327:6-a, VI and included in the formulary.
                                             
 (i) Other pharmaceutical agents, any solely diagnostic agents,
and diagnostic agents combined with pharmaceutical agents as defined in
this paragraph and as approved pursuant to RSA 327:6-a, VI.
                                             
 (j) Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents approved pursuant to
RSA 327:6-a, VI.
                                             
 (k) Anti-glaucoma agents provided that an optometrist may
dispense or prescribe such agents if the optometrist has met the
requirements of RSA 327:6-c.
                                             
 (l) Corticosteroids which are topically applied, as approved by
the board.
                                             
 (m) Antivirals which are approved pursuant to RSA 327:6-a, VI.
                                             
 (n) Corticosteroids or antivirals, provided that optometrists
with patients on corticosteroids or antivirals who demonstrate no
improvement in 10 days shall be referred to an ophthalmologist.
                                             
 IV. "Practice of optometry'' means the employment of any methods or
means, other than surgery, for the:
                                             
 (a) Diagnosis and treatment of any optical defect, deficiency,
deformity, or disease of the human eye, adnexa and eyelids.
                                             
 (b) Diagnosis and treatment of any visual or muscular anomaly of
the visual system.
                                             
 (c) Adaptation or prescribing of spectacle lenses, contact
lenses, prisms or ocular exercises for the correction, relief or aid of
the visual functions.
                                             
 (d) Prescribing, administering or dispensing of pharmaceutical
agents.
                                             
 (e) Application, prescribing, or removal of Food and Drug
Administration approved medical devices, as approved by the board and
consistent with the practice of optometry as set forth in this chapter,
including, but not limited to, contact lenses, plano lenses, and punctal
plugs. The term "plano lenses'' means contact lenses with no refractive
power.
                                             
 (f) Diagnosis of acute angle closure glaucoma. Upon such
diagnosis, an optometrist may administer emergency care and shall
immediately refer the patient to an ophthalmologist. Oral pharmaceutical
agents may be used for the emergency treatment of acute angle closure
glaucoma.
                                             
 V. "Prescription of pharmaceutical agents'' means a written or oral
direction to dispense a pharmaceutical agent, including inscription,
subscription, transcription, and renewal.
                                             
 VI. "Surgery'' means any procedure in which human tissue is cut,
altered, or otherwise infiltrated by mechanical means. Surgical
procedures shall include the use of lasers for therapeutic and
photorefractive purposes, ionizing radiation, therapeutic ultrasound, or
medication administered by injection, provided that the removal of
superficial foreign bodies from the eye, adnexa or eyelid shall not be
considered a surgical procedure prohibited by this chapter. With respect
to a foreign body, any part of which is situated within 3 millimeters of
the visual axis, "superficial foreign body'' means that which has not
penetrated deeper than the corneal epithelium.
                                             
 VII. "Therapeutic contact lenses'' means contact lenses which
contain one or more medications and which deliver such medication to the
eye.

**Source.** 1911, 167:3. PL 207:1. RL 253:1. 1951, 72:1. RSA 327:1.
1985, 245:1. 1993, 333:8. 2002, 274:1. 2006, 182:1. 2010, 37:2, 3, eff.
July 17, 2010. 2011, 121:1, eff. Aug. 1, 2011. 2016, 83:1, eff. July 18,
2016.

Examining Board
---------------

### Section 327:2

 **327:2 Board. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a board of registration in optometry consisting of
5 members; including 4 optometrists and one public member, each to be
appointed by the governor, with the approval of the council, to a term
of 5 years. No member shall be appointed to more than 2 consecutive
terms.
                                             
 II. Optometrist members of the board shall be of good professional
character and shall reside and be practicing within the state.
                                             
 III. The public member of the board shall be a person who is not,
and never was, a member of the optometric profession or the spouse of
any such person, and who does not have, and never has had, a material
financial interest in either the provision of optometric services or an
activity directly related to optometry, including the representation of
the board or profession for a fee at any time during the 5 years
preceding appointment.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1911, 167:1. PL 207:2. 1935, 64:1. RL 253:2. 1943, 138:1.
1945, 56:1. RSA 327:2. 1957, 36:1. 1981, 355:3. 1985, 416:7. 1999,
197:1, 2. 2010, 118:10, eff. July 1, 2010. 2015, 276:108, XIV, eff. July
1, 2015.

### Section 327:3

 **327:3 Appointment; Term; Removal. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 355:12,
eff. July 1, 1981.
                                             ]

### Section 327:4

 **327:4 Organization; Reports. –** The board shall choose from its
number a president and secretary and it shall meet at least once in each
year. The board shall make a report of its proceedings to the governor
by December 31 every 2 years.

**Source.** 1911, 167:2, 7. 1919, 78:1. PL 207:4. RL 253:4.

### Section 327:5

 **327:5 Compensation. –** The compensation of the board shall be

                                             $50 each for every day actually spent in the discharge of their duties
and their necessary expenses.

**Source.** 1911, 167:8. PL 207:5. RL 253:5. 1951, 72:2. RSA 327:5.
1967, 256:1. 1999, 197:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 327:5-a

 **327:5-a Fees. –** The board shall establish fees for license
reinstatement and for transcribing and transferring records and other
services.

**Source.** 1981, 355:4. 1999, 197:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000. 2014, 167:33,
eff. July 1, 2014.

Examinations and Licenses
-------------------------

### Section 327:6

 **327:6 Licenses; Qualifications. –** No person, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, shall practice optometry without a license.
The board shall not issue a license to any applicant until the person
has passed an examination approved by the board, and has presented
satisfactory evidence in the form of affidavits properly sworn to, that
the person is over 18 years of age and of good moral character, has
completed a minimum of 2 years at a college of arts and sciences and has
graduated from a school or college of optometry approved by the board,
maintaining a minimum of 4 years in optometric training. Persons who
submit an application which demonstrates that they meet the eligibility
requirements of this chapter and any rules adopted by the board pursuant
to RSA 541-A, and pay the 
                                             $300 licensing fee, shall be licensed by the
board.

**Source.** 1911, 167:7. 1919, 78:1. PL 207:6. 1937, 92:1. RL 253:6.
1951, 72:3. RSA 327:6. 1957, 36:2. 1969, 273:1. 1973, 72:47. 1977,
563:20. 1981, 355:5. 1985, 245:2. 1999, 197:5. 2006, 76:12, eff. July 1,
2006. 2014, 167:34, eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 229:10, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 327:6-a

 **327:6-a Authorization for Pharmaceutical Agents. –**
                                             
 I. Only licensed optometrists who have successfully completed
examinations on pharmacological substances and other treatments of
diseases of the eye, adnexa and eyelids, who have met acceptable
standards of education and professional competence as determined by the
board, and who hold current certification in cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR), shall be authorized to use pharmaceutical agents in
the practice of optometry.
                                             
 II. An optometrist licensed to practice optometry prior to January
1, 1993, shall complete a post-graduate course of study approved by the
board covering the subjects of ocular pharmacology and the treatment and
management of eye diseases and shall pass an examination administered by
the National Board of Examiners in Optometry or its successor and
approved by the board. Every optometrist licensed to practice optometry
after January 1, 1993, shall pass an examination administered by the
National Board of Examiners in Optometry or its successor and approved
by the board. To meet the requirements of this section, an approved
course shall be given by an accredited school or college of optometry in
the United States and shall consist of a minimum of 105 hours, of which
a minimum of 25 hours shall be in direct clinical training. The board
shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, to carry out the provisions of this
section and to insure the safety of the public.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any licensed
pharmacist is authorized to fill prescriptions issued by optometrists
for pharmaceutical agents authorized under this chapter or included in
the approved formulary.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit an
optometrist to administer any pharmaceutical product by injection; or to
administer, prescribe or dispense any pharmaceutical product designated
as a schedule I or schedule II controlled substance under RSA 318-B:1-a;
or to administer, prescribe or dispense any pharmaceutical product
except for the diagnosis or treatment of disease or conditions of the
human eye, adnexa or eyelids.
                                             
 V. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an optometrist who is
certified to use pharmaceutical agents in the practice of optometry
shall be permitted to administer diphenhydramine, epinephrine or an
equivalent medication administered by injection to counter anaphylaxis
or anaphylactic reaction.
                                             
 VI. To the extent approval of pharmaceuticals is referenced in RSA
327:1, III, the board shall have the authority to review and approve
pharmaceuticals for use by optometrists certified to use pharmaceutical
agents in the practice of optometry.
                                             
 VII. The board shall provide the pharmacy board with a current list
of pharmaceutical agents approved pursuant to paragraph VI. The current
optometric formulary shall be available from the board and posted on the
board's website.
                                             
 VIII. Upon certification to treat glaucoma patients pursuant to RSA
327:6-c, the board shall issue a license to the optometrist with a
"tpa/g'' certification. A current list of "tpa/g'' certified
optometrists with date of certification shall be available from the
board and posted on the board's website.

**Source.** 1985, 245:2. 1993, 333:9. 1999, 197:6. 2006, 182:2, eff.
July 24, 2006. 2016, 83:2, 3, eff. July 18, 2016.

### Section 327:6-b

 **327:6-b Joint Credentialing Committee. –**
                                             
 I. The joint credentialing committee shall be comprised of 3
optometrists licensed under RSA 327 appointed by the New Hampshire
Optometric Association, 3 ophthalmologists licensed under RSA 329
appointed by the New Hampshire Society of Eye Physicians and Surgeons,
and 3 pharmacists licensed under RSA 318 appointed by the pharmacy
board. Members shall serve terms of 5 years and shall not be eligible
for a second consecutive term. The initial members shall be appointed
for staggered terms as follows: one optometrist, one ophthalmologist,
and one pharmacist for a term of 5 years; one optometrist, one
ophthalmologist, and one pharmacist for a term of 4 years; and one
optometrist, one ophthalmologist, and one pharmacist for a term of 3
years. All members shall be residents of the state of New Hampshire.
Neither they nor their spouses shall have any material financial
interest in the provision of eye care services other than that which is
directly related to the practice of their professions. Matters to be
brought before the committee shall be filed in writing with the
chairperson at least 30 days prior to the scheduled meeting. Any member
of the committee may submit items to be assigned to the agenda for
consideration. Agendas shall be posted on the board of optometry's
public access Internet site at least 10 days prior to committee
meetings.
                                             
 II. The committee shall meet quarterly to:
                                             
 (a) Review and develop glaucoma reporting forms;
                                             
 (b) Develop a glaucoma credentialing form and patient consent
form;
                                             
 (c) Review suggestions, complaints, and concerns regarding the
glaucoma certification process described in RSA 327:6-c, II, and report
the results of its review to the board. This subparagraph shall not
grant the committee additional authority or powers not stated in this
subparagraph;
                                             
 (d) Provide minutes of their meetings to the board, the board of
medicine, and the pharmacy board; and
                                             
 (e) Determine which optometrists have successfully completed the
requirements of RSA 327:6-c and maintain a list of such optometrists.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1985, 245:2. 1993, 333:10. 2002, 274:2. 2006, 182:3, 6, eff.
July 24, 2006. 2016, 83:4, eff. July 18, 2016.

### Section 327:6-c

 **327:6-c Treatment of Glaucoma. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Optometrists seeking authorization to treat glaucoma shall
complete at least 40 hours of classroom education, approved by the
board, incorporating: epidemiology of the glaucomas; genetics of the
glaucomas; anatomy, physiology, and mechanics of aqueous inflow and
aqueous outflow; optic nerve anatomy and pathophysiology; neurotoxicity
and neuroprotectants; receptor biology; pharmacology, clinical use and
toxic effects of alpha and beta adrenergic agents, carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors, prostanoids and cholinergic agents.
                                             
 (b) Optometrists shall pass an examination approved by the board
that covers the educational components listed in subparagraph (a). Upon
passage of such exam, an optometrist shall have prescriptive authority
during the clinical management period pursuant to RSA 327:6-a.
                                             
 (c) The board shall waive the requirements of this paragraph and
of paragraph II for optometrists who have either graduated after 2002 or
who have proof of 12 months of credentialed privileges to treat glaucoma
by the United States Department of Defense or Department of Veteran
Affairs or the national Indian Health Service, verified by the board.
                                             
 II. (a) To be authorized to initiate treatment of glaucoma for
patients 18 years of age or older, a therapeutic pharmaceutical agent
certified optometrist shall complete the educational requirements in
paragraph I and provide evidence of written referrals and consultations
with an ophthalmologist. For purposes of this section, "glaucoma'' means
primary open-angle glaucoma; and "ophthalmologist''; means a physician
licensed under RSA 329 with a specialty in ophthalmology. The joint
credentialing committee shall review evidence of glaucoma co-management
submitted pursuant to subparagraph (b).
                                             
 (b) Except as provided in subparagraph I(c) or paragraph III,
therapeutic pharmaceutical agent certified optometrists are required to
provide evidence of successful collaborative treatment and co-management
of 25 glaucoma patients, up to 5 of which may be established patients,
during a period of not less than 18 months for each patient, to
ophthalmologists according to the following criteria:
                                             
 (1) A new or existing glaucoma patient is examined and
diagnosed by the optometrist;
                                             
 (2) The optometrist develops a proposed treatment plan and
forwards the plan with examination documentation to an ophthalmologist
for consultation;
                                             
 (3) The ophthalmologist examines the patient and reviews the
optometrist's examination documentation and proposed treatment plan;
                                             
 (4) The ophthalmologist, optometrist, and patient mutually
agree to and document a treatment plan;
                                             
 (5) The optometrist shall consult with the co-managing
ophthalmologist when any of the following occurs: the patient's target
pressure is not reached within 90 days; the patient is experiencing
documented progression of optic nerve damage; the patient develops
documented and repeated progression of visual field loss; or the patient
develops angle-closure or other secondary glaucoma; and
                                             
 (6) For each successfully co-managed glaucoma patient the
optometrist and co-managing ophthalmologist shall complete a glaucoma
credentialing reporting form and submit the form to the joint
credentialing committee upon completion of the 18 months of treatment.
                                             
 III. The joint credentialing committee may waive or reduce the
requirements of RSA 327:6-c, I and II for the following categories of
optometrists:
                                             
 (a) Optometrists with a license and proof of practice for 12
months treating glaucoma patients in another state that currently
authorizes the treatment of glaucoma by optometrists; or
                                             
 (b) Optometrists who have proof of successful completion of a
12-month accredited optometric residency program or its equivalent.
                                             
 IV. Upon certification to treat glaucoma patients:
                                             
 (a) For a period of 24 months, optometrists shall consult with an
ophthalmologist within 30 days for each new glaucoma patient for
confirmation of diagnosis and review of treatment plan.
                                             
 (b) An optometrist shall consult with an ophthalmologist within
30 days when any of the following occurs:
                                             
 (1) The patient is experiencing documented progression of
optic nerve damage or the patient develops documented and repeated
progression of visual field loss on maximum tolerated topical medical
therapy; or
                                             
 (2) The patient develops angle-closure or other secondary
glaucoma.

**Source.** 2002, 274:3. 2006, 182:4, eff. July 24, 2006. 2016, 83:5, 6,
eff. July 18, 2016.

### Section 327:7

 **327:7 Disposal of Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 197:21, I, eff. Jan.
1, 2000.
                                             ]

### Section 327:8

 **327:8 Certificates. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 197:21, II, eff. Jan. 1,
2000.
                                             ]

### Section 327:9

 **327:9 Applicants Licensed in Other Jurisdictions. –** The board
may license any applicant who is licensed in any other state, provided
the other state's licensing requirements are substantially equivalent to
or higher than those of this state.

**Source.** 1911, 167:12. PL 207:10. RL 253:10. 1951, 72:6. RSA 327:9.
1975, 174:1. 1981, 355:6. 1999, 197:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 327:10

 **327:10 Registration of. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 197:21, III, eff.
Jan. 1, 2000.
                                             ]

### Section 327:11

 **327:11 Record of Licenses. –** Every license issued by the board
shall be numbered and recorded in the office of the board. A photograph
of the person licensed shall be filed with the record.

**Source.** 1911, 167:6. PL 207:12. RL 253:12. RSA 327:11. 1957, 36:3.
1999, 197:8, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 327:12

 **327:12 Persons Excepted. –** Nothing in this chapter shall apply
to physicians or surgeons authorized to practice medicine or surgery
under the laws of this state, nor to persons who neither practice nor
profess to practice optometry, but who sell spectacles, eyeglasses or
lenses either on prescription from such physicians or surgeons or from
duly qualified optometrists, or as merchandise from permanently located
and established places of business.

**Source.** 1911, 167:12. PL 207:13. RL 253:13.

License Renewal
---------------

### Section 327:13

 **327:13 Renewal of Licenses. –**
                                             
 I. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be renewed
biennially on or before June 30 upon payment of a 
                                             $300 license renewal
fee.
                                             
 II. Before May 1 of the year in which the license expires, the board
shall mail to every optometrist licensed in the state an application for
renewal addressed to the post office address provided by the applicant.
                                             
 III. Any licensee whose license has expired shall be barred from the
practice of optometry in New Hampshire until such time as a
reinstatement application is granted by the board.

**Source.** 1911, 167:9. 1919, 78:2. PL 207:14. RL 253:14. 1999, 197:10.
2014, 167:35, eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 229:11, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 327:13-a

 **327:13-a Reinstatement. –** Any person who has voluntarily
surrendered a license, has allowed a license to expire, or whose license
has been revoked by the board, may request reinstatement of the license
by filing an application with the board. The board pursuant to RSA 541-A
shall establish criteria in rules adopted by the board for reinstatement
which include reasonable professional character and competence
requirements.

**Source.** 1999, 197:11, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 327:14

 **327:14 Applications; Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 197:21, IV, eff.
Jan. 1, 2000.
                                             ]

### Section 327:15

 **327:15 Certificates. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 197:21, V, eff. Jan. 1,
2000.
                                             ]

### Section 327:16

 **327:16 Display of License and License Renewal. –** The original or
a copy of the license renewal must be displayed in a conspicuous place
in every office wherein the holder practices optometry; and, whenever
required, the holder shall exhibit such license to the board or its
authorized representatives.

**Source.** 1911, 167:9. 1919, 78:2. PL 207:17. RL 253:17. 1999, 197:12,
eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 327:17

 **327:17 Expiration. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 197:21, VI, eff. Jan. 1,
2000.
                                             ]

### Section 327:18

 **327:18 List of Registrants. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 197:21, VII, eff.
Jan. 1, 2000.
                                             ]

### Section 327:19

 **327:19 Nonactive Certificate of Registration. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999,
197:21, VIII, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.
                                             ]

### Section 327:20

 **327:20 Disciplinary Action. –**
                                             
 I. The board may undertake disciplinary proceedings:
                                             
 (a) Upon its own initiative; or
                                             
 (b) Upon written complaint of any person which charges that a
person licensed by the board has committed misconduct under paragraph II
and which specifies the grounds therefor.
                                             
 II. Misconduct sufficient to support disciplinary proceedings under
this section shall include:
                                             
 (a) The practice of fraud or deceit in procuring or attempting to
procure a license to practice under this chapter;
                                             
 (b) Conviction of a felony or any offense involving moral
turpitude;
                                             
 (c) Any unprofessional conduct, or dishonorable conduct unworthy
of, and affecting the practice of, the profession;
                                             
 (d) Unfitness or incompetency by reason of negligent habits or
other causes; or negligent or willful acts performed in a manner
inconsistent with the health or safety of persons under the care of the
licensee;
                                             
 (e) Addiction to the use of alcohol or other habit-forming drugs
to a degree which renders him unfit to practice under this chapter;
                                             
 (f) Mental or physical incompetency to practice under this
chapter;
                                             
 (g) Willful or repeated violation of the provisions of this
chapter;
                                             
 (h) Suspension or revocation of a license, similar to one issued
under this chapter, in another jurisdiction and not reinstated; or
                                             
 (i) The use of any pharmaceutical agent by an optometrist not
authorized under RSA 327:6-a or the use of any pharmaceutical agent
other than those agents described in RSA 327:1 or those previously
approved by the joint credentialing committee.
                                             
 III. The board may take disciplinary action in any one or more of
the following ways:
                                             
 (a) By reprimand;
                                             
 (b) By suspension, limitation or restriction of license for a
period of up to 5 years;
                                             
 (c) By revocation of license;
                                             
 (d) By requiring the person to participate in a program of
continuing education in the area or areas in which the person has been
found deficient; or
                                             
 (e) By assessing administrative fines established by the board
which shall not exceed 
                                             $2,000 per offense or, in the case of continuing
offenses, 
                                             $200 for each day the violation continues after notice,
whichever is greater.

**Source.** 1911, 167:10. PL 207:22. RL 253:22. 1949, 111:1. 1951,
72:10. RSA 327:20. 1977, 131:1. 1981, 355:8. 1999, 197:13. 2006, 182:5,
eff. July 24, 2006. 2016, 83:7, eff. July 18, 2016.

### Section 327:20-a

 **327:20-a Advertising Permitted. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 197:21, IX,
eff. Jan. 1, 2000.
                                             ]

### Section 327:21

 **327:21 Complaints. –** Proceedings for revocation shall be begun
by written charges, which may be made by the board on its own motion or
by any other person.

**Source.** 1911, 167:10. PL 207:23. RL 253:23.

### Section 327:22

 **327:22 Hearings; Investigations. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall take no disciplinary action without a hearing. At
least 14 days prior to hearing, both parties to a disciplinary
proceeding shall be served, either personally or by certified mail, with
a written copy of the complaint filed and notice of the time and place
of hearing. All complaints shall be objectively received and fairly
heard by the board, but no complaint shall be acted upon unless in
writing. A hearing shall be held on all written complaints received by
the board, within one year of the date notice of a complaint was
received by the accused, unless otherwise agreed to by the parties.
Written notice of all disciplinary decisions made by the board shall be
given to both parties to the proceeding upon their issuance.
                                             
 II. (a) The board shall have the power to administer oaths or
affirmations, preserve testimony, subpoena witnesses, and to compel, by
subpoena duces tecum, the production of all books, records, files and
documents, whether originals, copies, or in electronic or other form,
and other materials, relevant to its investigation of any grievance,
complaint, or disciplinary proceeding before the board.
                                             
 (b) The board may issue subpoenas with the approval of the office
of the attorney general.
                                             
 (c) A minimum of 10 business days' notice shall be given for
compliance with a subpoena under this chapter.
                                             
 III. At any hearing, the named person or licensee shall have the
right to:
                                             
 (a) Appear in person, by counsel, or both.
                                             
 (b) Produce evidence and witnesses.
                                             
 (c) Cross-examine witnesses.
                                             
 IV. If the named person fails or refuses to appear, the board may
proceed to hear and determine the validity of the charges.

**Source.** 1911, 167:10. PL 207:24. RL 253:24. RSA 327:22. 1981, 355:9.
1999, 197:14, eff. Jan. 1, 2000. 2014, 34:13, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 327:23

 **327:23 Notice of Suspension or Revocation. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999,
197:21, X, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.
                                             ]

### Section 327:24

 **327:24 Reinstatement. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 197:21, XI, eff. Jan.
1, 2000.
                                             ]

Regulations and Penalties
-------------------------

### Section 327:25

 **327:25 Bill of Purchase. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 197:21, XII, eff.
Jan. 1, 2000.
                                             ]

### Section 327:25-a

 **327:25-a Contact Lens Prescriptions to be Provided to Patient.
–**
                                             
 I. After contact lenses have been adequately fitted and the patient
released from immediate follow-up care by an optometrist licensed under
this chapter or an ophthalmologist registered under RSA 329, the
prescribing optometrist or ophthalmologist shall, upon the patient's
request, provide to the patient a prescription in writing for
replacement contact lenses.
                                             
 II. Optometrists and ophthalmologists shall not be required to
service contact lenses that they did not dispense.
                                             
 III. An optometrist or ophthalmologist may refuse to give the
patient a copy of the patient's contact lens prescription until the
patient has paid for the eye examination, but only if that optometrist
or ophthalmologist would have required immediate payment from that
patient had the examination revealed that no ophthalmic goods were
required.
                                             
 IV. (a) No person shall conduct or operate a business outside of the
state for the sale at retail of contact lenses to individuals within the
state unless such business is registered with a permit issued by the
board of pharmacy if the out-of-state business is a pharmacy, or by the
board of registration in optometry if the out-of-state business is not a
pharmacy.
                                             
 (b) The board of pharmacy or the board of registration in
optometry shall issue a permit to such out-of-state business if the
business discloses and provides proof:
                                             
 (1) That the business is in compliance with all applicable
laws and rules in the state in which the business is located;
                                             
 (2) Of the operating locations and the names and titles of all
principal corporate officers;
                                             
 (3) That the business complies with all lawful directions and
requests for information from the board of pharmacy and the board of
registration in optometry of all states in which it conducts business;
and
                                             
 (4) That the business agrees in writing to comply with all New
Hampshire laws and rules relating to the sale or dispensing of contact
lenses.
                                             
 (c) The board of pharmacy or the board of registration in
optometry shall assess the following registration fees for out-of-state
contact lens sale companies:
                                             
 (1) 
                                             $300 for the initial registration.
                                             
 (2) 
                                             $150 for an annual registration renewal.
                                             
 V. For purposes of this section, "prescription for contact lenses''
means a dated and signed written direction specifying that it is for
contact lenses and which shall include at least the power, size,
curvature, color and material composition of the contact lenses. Other
parameters or instructions, including but not limited to lens
manufacturer, prescription expiration date, number of permitted refills,
and a statement prohibiting substitutions may be included at the
prescriber's professional discretion and shall be honored by the person
who fills the prescription. Unless otherwise specified by the prescriber
for health reasons, a contact lens prescription shall expire one year
from the date of issue.
                                             
 VI. No person shall sell contact lenses without a valid prescription
as defined in paragraph V.

**Source.** 1994, 146:1. 1999, 197:15, eff. Jan. 1, 2000. 2011, 121:2,
eff. Aug. 1, 2011.

### Section 327:26

 **327:26 Prohibitions. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 197:21, XIII, eff. Jan.
1, 2000.
                                             ]

### Section 327:27

 **327:27 Unprofessional Conduct. –** No corporation shall engage in
the practice of optometry nor shall any person practice optometry under
any lease, contract or other arrangement whereby any person not duly
authorized to practice optometry shares, directly or indirectly, in any
fees received in connection with said practice of optometry.

**Source.** 1951, 72:12 par. 28-a. 1999, 197:16, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 327:28

 **327:28 Misrepresentation. –** It shall be unlawful for any person
or persons whomsoever to represent himself or themselves as an
optometrist or optometrists unless qualified under the provisions of
this chapter.

**Source.** 1951, 72:12 par. 28-b, eff. July 1, 1951.

### Section 327:29

 **327:29 Evidence of. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 197:21, XIV, eff. Jan. 1,
2000.
                                             ]

### Section 327:30

 **327:30 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Any natural person who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor, or guilty of a
felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person regulated by this chapter who is guilty of an
unlawful act, as defined in RSA 358-A, shall be subject to prosecution
thereunder.
                                             
 III. In addition to any other penalties, the board may assess,
compromise, and collect administrative fines against persons who violate
this chapter.
                                             
 IV. The board is authorized to issue a cease and desist order
against any person or entity acting in violation of this chapter. The
cease and desist order shall be enforceable in superior court.
                                             
 V. The attorney general, the board, or the prosecuting attorney of
any county or municipality where the violation takes place may maintain
an action to enjoin any person or entity from continuing to violate the
provisions of this chapter. The action to enjoin shall not replace any
other civil, criminal, or regulatory remedy. An injunction without bond
is available to the board.

**Source.** 1911, 167:11. PL 207:30. RL 253:30. RSA 327:30. 1973,
529:78. 1977, 131:3. 1999, 197:17. 2006, 76:13, eff. July 1, 2006. 2011,
121:3, eff. Aug. 1, 2011.

### Section 327:31

 **327:31 Rulemaking Authority. –** The board shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The application procedure for a license to practice optometry;
                                             
 II. The qualifications of applicants in addition to those
requirements set by RSA 327:6 and RSA 327:6-a;
                                             
 III. How an applicant shall be examined including:
                                             
 (a) Time and place of examination, and
                                             
 (b) Passing grade;
                                             
 IV. How a license to practice optometry shall be renewed or
reinstated;
                                             
 V. Ethical and professional standards, in addition to those
specified by RSA 327:20, required to be met by each holder of a license
to practice optometry and how disciplinary actions by the board shall be
implemented pursuant to RSA 327:21, RSA 327:22, and RSA 327:27 for
violations of these standards;
                                             
 VI. The establishment of fees for license reinstatement, and for
transcribing and transferring records and other services;
                                             
 VII. Requirements for continuing education in addition to those
requirements set by RSA 327:33 and RSA 327:33-a;
                                             
 VIII. Additions or alterations to the defined pharmaceutical agents
for diagnostic purposes as set forth in RSA 327:1, III; and
                                             
 IX. Procedural and substantive requirements for assessing,
compromising, and collecting administrative fines as authorized by RSA
327:20, III(e).
                                             
 X. Prescribing controlled drugs pursuant to RSA 318-B:41.

**Source.** 1939, 213:1. RL 253:31. RSA 327:31. 1981, 355:10. 1985,
245:35. 1999, 197:18, eff. Jan. 1, 2000. 2014, 167:36, eff. July 1,
2014. 2016, 213:5, eff. June 7, 2016.

### Section 327:32

 **327:32 Report. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 197:21, XV, eff. Jan. 1,
2000.
                                             ]

### Section 327:33

 **327:33 Continuing Education Courses Required for
Non-Pharmaceutical Certification. –** All optometrists licensed in this
state shall be required to take annual courses of study in subjects
relating to the practice of the profession of optometry. The length of
study shall be prescribed by the board, with a minimum of 15 hours in a
calendar year. Attendance must be at a course approved by the board. The
board shall be allowed to waive in whole or in part this study
requirement in cases of certified illness or undue hardship.

**Source.** 1973, 333:2. 1999, 197:19, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 327:33-a

 **327:33-a Continuing Education Courses Required for Pharmaceutical
and Glaucoma Certification. –**
                                             
 I. An optometrist certified to use pharmaceutical agents in the
practice of optometry shall complete a minimum of 50 hours of continuing
education every year in order to maintain pharmaceutical certification.
A minimum of 20 hours shall be by participation in formal courses and
the remainder by independent study. Each optometrist shall report
continuing education hours to the board annually in accordance with
rules adopted by the board for the implementation of this section. Such
continuing education courses and activities shall satisfy the
requirements of RSA 327:33.
                                             
 II. An optometrist certified to treat glaucoma shall complete a
minimum of 10 of the required hours in glaucoma specific education. A
minimum of 7 hours shall be by participation in formal courses and 3
hours may be by independent study.

**Source.** 1993, 333:11. 1999, 197:19. 2002, 274:4, eff. July 17, 2002.

### Section 327:33-b

 **327:33-b Consumer Publication. –** The board of optometry shall
develop a consumer publication that contains the information necessary
to educate consumers regarding optical services and products, the
services available from the optometrist authorized to use therapeutics
to treat eye conditions, and the services available from other
optometrists. The board shall supply reasonable quantities of this
publication at no charge to all licensed practitioners.

**Source.** 1993, 333:11, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 327:34

 **327:34 Report to Division of Career Technology and Adult Learning.
–** All licensed optometrists in this state shall report, with the
permission of the patient or the patient's parent or guardian, all cases
of vision examination results of 20/200 or less in the better eye, after
correction, to the division of career technology and adult learning,
department of education. Such report shall contain the name and address
of the examined individual, date of birth, the amount of vision in both
eyes, and the cause of visual impairment. The information contained in
the report shall be treated as confidential by the division.

**Source.** 1979, 137:1. 1994, 379:18. 1999, 197:20, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.
