---
title: 'CHAPTER 328-I BOARD OF REGISTRATION OF MEDICAL TECHNICIANS'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 328-I
                                             
BOARD OF REGISTRATION OF MEDICAL TECHNICIANS
--------------------------------------------

### Section 328-I:1

 **328-I:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means the board of registration of medical technicians.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. "Health care facility'' means health care facilities licensed
under RSA 151.
                                             
 V. "Medical establishment'' means a setting where health care
services are provided to patients, including, but not limited to, the
office of a physician, dentist, naturopath, advanced practice registered
nurse, optometrist, podiatrist, or a clinic, laboratory, or place not
licensed under RSA 151.
                                             
 VI. "Medical technician'' means a health care worker who is not
licensed or registered by a New Hampshire regulatory board and who
assists licensed health care professionals in the diagnosis, treatment,
and prevention of disease. "Medical technician'' shall not include a
nurse licensed in another state who is working in New Hampshire under
the nurse licensure compact established in RSA 326-B:46. For the
purposes of this chapter, medical technicians shall be limited to health
care workers with access to controlled substances and with access to or
contact with patients in a health care facility or in a medical
establishment.

**Source.** 2014, 295:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2014. 2015, 276:108, XXXVI, eff.
July 1, 2015. 2016, 238:3, eff. June 10, 2016.

### Section 328-I:2

 **328-I:2 Board, Membership, Terms, Administrative Attachment. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a board of registration of medical technicians
consisting of 5 members. The members shall be appointed by the governor
with the consent of the council as follows:
                                             
 (a) Four licensed, registered, or certified health care
providers, only one of whom may be a medical technician required to be
registered under this chapter, one of whom shall have experience
supervising medical technicians, and one of whom shall be a licensed
physician.
                                             
 (b) One public member, who shall be a person who is not, and
never was, a member of a health care profession or the spouse of any
such person, and who does not have, and never has had, a material
financial interest in either the provision of medical services or an
activity directly related to health care.
                                             
 II. The members shall be appointed to a term of 5 years. No member
shall serve more than 2 consecutive terms.
                                             
 III. The members of the board shall receive 
                                             $50 for each day
actually engaged in the duties of the board and shall be reimbursed for
all actual travel necessarily incurred in carrying out the provisions of
this chapter.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 2014, 295:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2014. 2015, 88:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2016; 276:108, XXXVII, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 328-I:3

 **328-I:3 Powers and Duties of the Board. –** The board shall:
                                             
 I. Accept applications for certificates of registration under this
chapter, and approve or deny such applications.
                                             
 II. Renew certificates of registration.
                                             
 III. Suspend or revoke certificates of registration upon the grounds
listed in RSA 328-I:9, and conduct hearings regarding the denial,
suspension, revocation, and renewal of certificates as provided in RSA
328-I:11.
                                             
 IV. Accept written complaints against registrants, conduct necessary
investigations upon such written complaints, and resolve complaints.
                                             
 V. Publicize the complaint procedure.
                                             
 VI. Adopt rules pursuant to RSA 328-I:4.
                                             
 VII. Maintain a database of registered medical technicians and share
all information received with other licensing boards or advisory
committees within this state, and with appropriate boards out of state
and with the office of Inspector General, Department of Health and Human
Services and with any law enforcement entity, as allowed by RSA 91-A and
in accordance with RSA 328-I:11, I.
                                             
 VIII. Post a list of registrants and their status on its website.
                                             
 IX. Prepare reports on any matter within the scope of this chapter.
                                             
 X. Establish late fees and fees for transcribing and transferring
records and other services.

**Source.** 2014, 295:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2014. 2015, 88:3, eff. Jan. 1,
2016.

### Section 328-I:4

 **328-I:4 Rulemaking. –** The board shall adopt rules, pursuant to
RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The registration application form and content, and the
registration application procedures.
                                             
 II. The application form, content, and procedure for a renewal or
reinstatement of a registration to work as a medical technician.
                                             
 III. The establishment of fees required under RSA 328-I:3, X.
                                             
 IV. The conduct of investigations and hearings, in accordance with
RSA 328-I:11.
                                             
 V. Procedures for notice and hearing prior to denial, suspension, or
revocation of a registration, and the imposition of administrative
fines.
                                             
 VI. Procedures for the handling and resolving complaints.
                                             
 VII. Procedures for the approval or denial of an application.
                                             
 VIII. Procedures for suspension or revocation of a registration.
                                             
 IX. Procedures for appeal of decisions made pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter and rules adopted pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 X. Procedures for sharing information with other in-state boards,
the Office of Inspector General, Department of Health and Human
Services, out-of-state boards and law enforcement entities.

**Source.** 2014, 295:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2014. 2015, 88:4, eff. Jan. 1,
2016.

### Section 328-I:5

 **328-I:5 Registration of Medical Technicians Required. –**
                                             
 I. A person engaging in work as a medical technician, as defined in
RSA 328-I:1, VI, in New Hampshire shall be registered in accordance with
this chapter.
                                             
 II. Any medical technician, as defined in RSA 328-I:1, VI, who is
not registered under this chapter, and who advertises himself or herself
as being a medical technician, practices as a medical technician, or
engages in such acts after receiving notice that such person's
registration has been revoked shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                             
 III. The board, after hearing and upon making an affirmative finding
under paragraph II, that the person is engaged in unlawful practice, may
take action in any one or more of the following ways:
                                             
 (a) A cease and desist order in accordance with paragraph IV.
                                             
 (b) The imposition of an administrative fine not to exceed

                                             $50,000.
                                             
 (c) The imposition of an administrative fine for continuation of
unlawful practice in the amount of 
                                             $1,000 for each day the activity
continues after notice from the board that the activity shall cease.
                                             
 (d) The denial or conditional denial of a license application,
application for renewal, or application for reinstatement.
                                             
 IV. The board is authorized to issue a cease and desist order
against any person or entity engaged in unlawful practice. The cease and
desist order shall be enforceable in superior court.
                                             
 V. The attorney general, the board, or the prosecuting attorney of
any county or municipality where the act of unlawful practice takes
place may maintain an action to enjoin any person or entity from
continuing to do acts of unlawful practice. The action to enjoin shall
not replace any other civil, criminal, or regulatory remedy. An
injunction without bond is available to the board.
                                             
 VI. In addition, every health care facility and medical
establishment employing medical technicians, shall ensure that such
technicians are registered in compliance with this chapter. Any health
care facility violating this paragraph shall be subject to appropriate
fines and penalties pursuant to RSA 151.

**Source.** 2014, 295:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2014. 2015, 88:2, eff. Jan. 1,
2016.

### Section 328-I:6

 **328-I:6 Initial Registration; Application, Fees. –**
                                             
 I. The board may register any person who submits a completed
application. The fee for registration under this chapter shall be

                                             $110.
                                             
 II. Completed applications shall include:
                                             
 (a) Payment of the non-refundable registration fee;
                                             
 (b) Reports of any pending criminal charges, criminal
convictions, plea agreements in lieu of convictions, or complaints made
to or dispositions made by licensing, certification, or registration
boards.
                                             
 (c) A complete set of fingerprints and a notarized criminal
history record release form pursuant to RSA 328-I:7.
                                             
 (d) The applicant's work history over the last 10 years.
                                             
 III. All applications shall include at a minimum, the applicant's
name, social security number, place and date of birth, place of
employment in New Hampshire and the home address and shall be duly
signed and verified. Applications shall be available for public
inspection.
                                             
 IV. Upon approval of the application by the board, the applicant
shall be registered as a medical technician for 2 years. Such
registration shall take effect within 90 days after the filing of such
completed application.
                                             
 V. Any medical technician who changes his or her name, place or
status of employment in New Hampshire, or residence shall notify the
board in writing within 30 days. For failure to report such a change
within 30 days of such event, the board may suspend the medical
technician's registration.
                                             
 VI. Once an application has been approved by the board, a temporary
registration may be issued, pending receipt of the criminal records
check and fingerprint information.

**Source.** 2014, 295:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2014. 2015, 88:5, eff. Jan. 1,
2016.

### Section 328-I:7

 **328-I:7 Criminal History Record Checks. –**
                                             
 I. Every applicant for initial registration or reinstatement shall
submit to the board a notarized criminal history record release form, as
provided by the New Hampshire division of state police, which authorizes
the release of his or her criminal history record, if any, to the
board.
                                             
 II. The applicant shall submit with the release form a complete set
of fingerprints taken by a qualified law enforcement agency or an
authorized employee of the department of safety. In the event that the
first set of fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern, a
second set of fingerprints shall be necessary in order to complete the
criminal history records check. If, after 2 attempts, a set of
fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern, the board may, in
lieu of the criminal history records check, accept police clearances
from every city, town, or county where the person has lived during the
past 5 years.
                                             
 III. The board shall submit the criminal history records release
form and fingerprint form to the division of state police which shall
conduct a criminal history records check through its records and through
the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Upon completion of the records
check, the division of state police shall release copies of the criminal
history records to the board.
                                             
 IV. The board shall review the criminal record information prior to
making a registration decision and shall maintain the confidentiality of
all criminal history records received pursuant to this section.
                                             
 V. The applicant shall bear the cost of a criminal history record
check.

**Source.** 2014, 295:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2014.

### Section 328-I:8

 **328-I:8 Renewal of Registration. –** Certificates of registration
issued under this chapter shall be subject to renewal every 2 years and
shall expire unless renewed in the manner prescribed by the board. The
fee for renewal of certificates of registration shall be 
                                             $110.
Certificates of registration for medical technician shall be renewed
upon the payment of the renewal fee.

**Source.** 2014, 295:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2014.

### Section 328-I:9

 **328-I:9 Refusal to Issue or Renew Certificate; Return of
Certificate. –**
                                             
 I. The board may deny the application for registration or refuse to
issue a renewal thereof if it is determined after hearing that such
applicant or registrant:
                                             
 (a) Has made a material false statement or concealed or omitted a
material fact in connection with his or her application for
registration;
                                             
 (b) Had a registration issued under this chapter suspended
previously;
                                             
 (c) Has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United
States or any state or any offense involving moral turpitude;
                                             
 (d) Has willfully or repeatedly failed to comply with any other
provision of this chapter or any rules adopted by the board; or
                                             
 (e) Is a habitual user of drugs or intoxicants.
                                             
 II. Upon the suspension or revocation of a certificate of
registration by the board and the issuance of a notice thereof, the
registrant shall within 5 days, not including Sundays and holidays,
deliver to the board the certificate of registration. If surrendered by
mail, the certificate of registration shall be sent by registered or
certified mail, postmarked no later than 3 days, not including Sundays
and holidays, following notice of suspension or revocation. Failure to
return a certificate of registration which has been revoked or suspended
hereunder within the prescribed time shall constitute a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2014, 295:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2014.

### Section 328-I:10

 **328-I:10 Disciplinary Action; Remedial Proceedings. –**
                                             
 I. The board is authorized to undertake investigations and
disciplinary proceedings upon:
                                             
 (a) The board's initiative.
                                             
 (b) A written complaint made by any person complaining that a
registrant has committed an act of misconduct and specifying the nature
of the misconduct.
                                             
 (c) A written complaint made by any person that a person is
engaged in unauthorized practice.
                                             
 (d) Notification by a licensing or certifying agency of this
state that a registrant has been disciplined by that agency.
                                             
 (e) Notification by the regulatory authority of another domestic
or foreign jurisdiction that a registrant has been disciplined in that
jurisdiction.
                                             
 (f) A report made pursuant to the obligation to report imposed by
this chapter.
                                             
 II. The board may undertake non-disciplinary remedial proceedings
(a) upon its own initiative or (b) upon written complaint of any person
which charges that a person registered by the board is afflicted with a
condition as set forth in paragraph VI and which specifies the grounds
therefor.
                                             
 III. Every facility administrator, or designee, for any licensed
hospital, health clinic, ambulatory surgical center, or other health
care facility within the state shall report to the board any
disciplinary or action related to disruptive conduct, professional
incompetence or violation of an organizational rule or procedure
involving controlled substances, or any adverse action which results in
the termination of an employment relationship, within 30 days after such
action is taken, including situations in which allegations of misconduct
are settled by voluntary resignation without adverse action, against a
person registered by the board. Disciplinary or adverse action shall
include the requirement that a registrant undergo counseling or be
subject to any policy with regard to disruptive behavior.
                                             
 IV. In cases involving imminent danger to life or health, the board
may order suspension of a license pending hearing for a period of no
more than 120 days. In such cases, the basis for the board's finding of
imminent danger to life or health shall be reduced to writing and
combined with a hearing notice which complies with RSA 328-I:11. A
licensee may be allowed additional time to prepare for a hearing, but
any additional time for preparation shall result in an extension of
license suspension commensurate with the additional time extended.
                                             
 V. The board, after hearing, may take disciplinary action against
any person registered by it upon finding that the person:
                                             
 (a) Has knowingly provided false information during any
application for registration or employment, whether by making any
affirmative statement which was false at the time it was made or by
failing to disclose any fact material to the application.
                                             
 (b) Is a habitual user of drugs or intoxicants.
                                             
 (c) Has engaged in dishonest or unprofessional conduct, or has
negligently or intentionally injured a patient while practicing as a
medical technician or performing such ancillary activities.
                                             
 (d) Has willfully or repeatedly violated any provision of this
chapter or any substantive rule of the board.
                                             
 (e) Has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United
States or any state.
                                             
 VI. The board may take non-disciplinary remedial action against any
person registered by it upon finding that the person is afflicted with
physical or mental disability, disease, disorder, or condition deemed
dangerous to the public health. Upon making an affirmative finding, the
board, may take non-disciplinary remedial action:
                                             
 (a) By suspension, limitation, or restriction of a registration
for a period of time as determined reasonable by the board.
                                             
 (b) By revocation of registration.
                                             
 (c) By requiring the person to submit to the care, treatment, or
observation of a physician, counseling service, health care facility,
professional assistance program, or any combination thereof which is
acceptable to the board.
                                             
 (d) By requiring the person to practice under the direction of a
physician in a public institution, public or private health care
program, or private practice for a period of time specified by the
board.
                                             
 VII. The board, upon making an affirmative finding under paragraph
V, may take disciplinary action in any one or more of the following
ways:
                                             
 (a) By reprimand.
                                             
 (b) By suspension, limitation, or restriction of a registration
or probation for a period of time as determined reasonable by the
board.
                                             
 (c) By revocation of registration.
                                             
 (d) By requiring the person to submit to the care, treatment, or
observation of a physician, counseling service, health care facility,
professional assistance program, or any combination thereof which is
acceptable to the board.
                                             
 (e) By assessing administrative fines in amounts established by
the board which shall not exceed 
                                             $3,000 per offense, or, in the case of
continuing offenses, 
                                             $300 for each day that the violation continues,
whichever is greater.
                                             
 VIII. The board may issue a non-disciplinary confidential letter of
concern to a registrant advising that, the board believes the medical
technician should modify or eliminate certain practices, and that
continuation of the activities which led to the information being
submitted to the board may result in action against the registrant's
registration. This letter shall not be released to the public or any
other licensing authority, except that the letter may be used as
evidence in subsequent disciplinary proceedings by the board.
                                             
 IX. Disciplinary or non-disciplinary remedial action taken by the
board under this section may be appealed to the supreme court under RSA
541.
                                             
 X. No civil action shall be maintained against the board or any
member of the board or its agents or employees with regard to any action
or activity taken in the performance of any duty or authority
established by this chapter. No civil action shall be maintained against
any organization or its members or against any other person for or by
reason of any good faith statement, report, communication, or testimony
to the board or determination by the board in relation to proceedings
under this chapter.
                                             
 XI. The board shall send all notices of hearing, and notices of
suspension or revocation of registration to the department of health and
human services and the department of safety.
                                             
 XII. Allegations of professional misconduct or other violations of
this chapter enforceable by the board shall be brought within 6 years
from the time the board could reasonably have discovered the act,
omission, or failure complained of, except that conduct which resulted
in a criminal conviction or in a disciplinary action by a relevant
licensing authority in another jurisdiction may be considered by the
board without time limitation in making registration or disciplinary
decisions if the conduct would otherwise be a ground for discipline
under this chapter. The board may also consider registrant conduct
without time limitation when the ultimate issue before the board
involves a pattern of conduct or the cumulative effect of conduct which
becomes apparent as a result of conduct which has occurred within the
6-year limitation period prescribed by this paragraph.
                                             
 XIII. When an investigation of a complaint against a registrant is
determined to be unfounded, the board shall dismiss the complaint and
explain in writing to the complainant and the registrant its reason for
dismissing the complaint. The board shall destroy all information
collected during the course of the investigation after 6 years. The
board shall retain a record only noting that an investigation was
conducted and that the board determined the complaint to be unfounded.
For the purpose of this paragraph, a complaint shall be deemed to be
unfounded if it does not fall within the jurisdiction of the board, does
not relate to the actions of the registrant, or is determined by the
board to be frivolous.

**Source.** 2014, 295:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2014. 2015, 88:6, eff. Jan. 1,
2016.

### Section 328-I:11

 **328-I:11 Investigations; Procedure for Complaints; Hearings;
Judicial Review. –**
                                             
 I. The board may investigate possible misconduct by registrants and
applicants for registration, as well as the unauthorized practice under
this chapter and other matters within the scope of this chapter. Board
investigations and the information gathered in such investigations,
including information provided to the board under RSA 328-I:10, I and
III and paragraphs III and V, shall be exempt from the public disclosure
provisions of RSA 91-A, except to the extent such information may later
become the subject of a public disciplinary hearing. The board may
disclose information acquired in an investigation to law enforcement or
health licensing agencies in this state or any other jurisdiction, or in
response to specific statutory requirements or court orders.
                                             
 II. No certificate of registration shall be suspended or revoked
until after a hearing before the board, which shall be held in
accordance with RSA 541-A, and upon written notice mailed to the
registrant by certified or registered mail. If, when a notice of hearing
is mailed to a registrant at the address shown in the records of the
board, such a registrant fails to attend such hearing, then the board
may suspend his or her registration without a hearing pending his or her
attendance at such hearing.
                                             
 III. Upon the denial of an application for a certificate of
registration, the board shall grant a hearing to an applicant therefor
upon receipt of a request for a hearing made within 30 days after the
applicant is notified of denial. The board shall have the power to
require the attendance of witnesses and issue subpoenas duces tecum in
the conduct of such hearing.
                                             
 IV. If a certificate of registration is revoked or suspended or an
application is denied, no such certificate shall be issued to such
former registrant or applicant for at least 6 months, or thereafter,
except in the discretion of the board.
                                             
 V. The applicant or registrant may be heard in person or by counsel.
The board shall notify the applicant of the time and place of the
hearing. The board shall have the power to subpoena any person in this
state, or document, record or other relevant evidence, and administer an
oath to and take the testimony of any such person or cause his or her
deposition to be taken.

**Source.** 2014, 295:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2014.

### Section 328-I:12

 **328-I:12 Civil Claims. –** Any person injured by the actions of a
person engaged as a medical technician in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter may bring a civil action to recover damages
suffered by reason of the violation.

**Source.** 2014, 295:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2014.

### Section 328-I:13

 **328-I:13 Administrative Fines. –** The board after notice and
hearing, pursuant to rules adopted under RSA 541-A, may impose an
administrative fine in an amount which shall not exceed 
                                             $3,000 per
offense, or, in the case of continuing offenses, 
                                             $300 for each day that
the violation continues, whichever is greater, upon any person who
violates any provision of this chapter or rules adopted under this
chapter. Rehearings and appeals from a decision of the board shall be in
accordance with RSA 541. Any administrative fine imposed under this
section shall not preclude the imposition of further penalties or
administrative actions under this chapter.

**Source.** 2014, 295:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2014.

### Section 328-I:14

 **328-I:14 Investigative Costs. –** For any order issued in
resolution of a disciplinary proceeding by the board, where the board
has found misconduct sufficient to support disciplinary action,
including but not limited to a violation of this chapter or an
administrative rule adopted under this chapter, the board may require
the registrant who is the subject of such finding to pay the board a sum
not to exceed the reasonable cost of investigation and prosecution of
the proceeding. This sum shall not exceed 
                                             $5,000. This sum may be
imposed in addition to any otherwise authorized administrative fines
levied by the board as part of the penalty. The investigative and
prosecution costs shall be assessed by the board and any sums recovered
shall be credited to the board's fund and disbursed by the board for any
future investigations of complaints and activities that violate this
chapter or rules adopted under this chapter.

**Source.** 2014, 295:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2014.

### Section 328-I:15

 **328-I:15 Annual Report. –** The board shall make an annual report
commencing on November 1, 2016 relative to the conduct of activities
under this chapter to the speaker of the house of representatives, the
president of the senate, and the governor and council.

**Source.** 2014, 295:1, eff. Oct. 1, 2014.
