---
title: 'CHAPTER 328-J MEDICAL IMAGING AND RADIATION THERAPY'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 328-J
                                             
MEDICAL IMAGING AND RADIATION THERAPY
-------------------------------------

### Section 328-J:1

 **328-J:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means the board of medical imaging and radiation
therapy.
                                             
 II. "Certification organization'' means a national certification
organization that specializes in the certification and registration of
medical imaging and radiation therapy technical personnel that is
accredited by the National Commission for Certifying Agencies, American
National Standards Institute, the International Organization for
Standardization, or other accreditation organization recognized by the
board.
                                             
 III. "Computed tomography'' means the process of producing sectional
and three-dimensional images using external ionizing radiation.
                                             
 IV. "Fluoroscopy'' means the exposure of a patient to ionizing
radiation in a fluoroscopy mode, including the positions of the patient,
positioning of the fluoroscopy equipment, and the selection of exposure
factors.
                                             
 V. "Licensed practitioner'' means a person licensed to practice
medicine, dentistry, chiropractic, podiatry, or osteopathy in New
Hampshire.
                                             
 VI. "Limited x-ray machine operator'' means a person who is licensed
under this chapter to perform, under the supervision of a licensed
practitioner, limited diagnostic radiography procedures of specific
parts of human anatomy or bone density measurements using equipment that
emits external ionizing radiation.
                                             
 VII. "Magnetic resonance technologist'' means a person who is
licensed under this chapter to perform magnetic resonance procedures
using magnetic fields and radio frequency signals.
                                             
 VIII. "Medical imaging'' means any procedure intended for use in the
diagnosis or visualization of disease or other medical conditions in
human beings, including, but not limited to the following modalities,
radiography, nuclear medicine, fluoroscopy, magnetic resonance, and
other procedures using ionizing radiation, magnetic resonance, or
ultrasound.
                                             
 IX. "Medical imaging professional'' means any person who is a
magnetic resonance technologist, nuclear medicine technologist,
radiographer, radiologist assistant, or sonographer licensed under this
chapter.
                                             
 X. "Nuclear medicine technologist'' means a person who is licensed
under this chapter to perform a variety of nuclear medicine and
molecular imaging procedures using sealed and unsealed radiation
sources, ionizing and nonionizing radiation, and adjunctive medicine and
therapeutic procedures using unsealed radioactive sources.
                                             
 XI. "Radiation therapist'' means a person who is licensed under this
chapter to administer ionizing radiation to human beings for therapeutic
purposes.
                                             
 XII. "Radiographer'' means a person who is licensed under this
chapter to perform a comprehensive set of diagnostic radiographic
procedures using external ionizing radiation to produce radiographic,
fluoroscopic, or digital images.
                                             
 XIII. "Radiologist'' means a physician certified by or
board-eligible to be certified for the American Board of Radiology, the
American Osteopathic Board of Radiology, the British Royal College of
Radiology, or the Canadian College of Physicians and Surgeons in that
medical specialty.
                                             
 XIV. "Radiologist assistant'' means a radiographer who has met
additional qualifications and who is licensed under this chapter to
perform a variety of activities under the supervision of a radiologist
in the areas of patient care, patient management, radiologic imaging, or
interventional procedures guided by radiologic imaging.
                                             
 XV. "Sonographer'' means a person who is licensed under this chapter
to perform a comprehensive set of diagnostic sonography procedures using
ultrasound to create medical images.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:2

 **328-J:2 Purpose. –** This chapter is intended to safeguard the
life and health of the people of New Hampshire by ensuring the
standardized training of limited x-ray machine operators, medical
imaging professionals, and radiation therapists in anatomy, patient
positioning, examination and treatment techniques, equipment protocols,
radiation safety, radiation protection, and basic patient care.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:3

 **328-J:3 Board; Membership; Terms. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a board of medical imaging and radiation therapy
consisting of 7 members. The members shall be appointed by the governor
with the consent of the council as follows:
                                             
 (a) One member who is a licensed radiographer.
                                             
 (b) One member who is a licensed nuclear medicine technologist.
                                             
 (c) One member who is a licensed radiation therapist.
                                             
 (d) One member who is a licensed sonographer.
                                             
 (e) One member who is a radiologist.
                                             
 (f) Two public members, who are not and never were, members of a
health care profession or the spouse of any such person, and who do not
have, and never have had, a material financial interest in either the
provision of medical services or an activity directly related to health
care.
                                             
 II. (a) Each professional member of the board shall hold a valid
license issued by the board in the category of license for that member's
specialty, shall be a resident of this state, and shall remain in active
practice and in good standing with the board as a licensee during his or
her term.
                                             
 (b) Initial professional appointees to the board shall not be
required to hold a current and valid license issued by the board, but
shall have actively practiced for a minimum of 5 years as a means of his
or her livelihood prior to appointment.
                                             
 (c) The terms for the initial appointments under paragraph I
shall be as follows:
                                             
 (1) The member under subparagraph I(b) shall serve for an
initial 2-year term.
                                             
 (2) The member under subparagraph I(c) shall serve for an
initial one-year term.
                                             
 (3) The member under subparagraph I(e) shall serve for an
initial 2-year term.
                                             
 III. Except for initial appointments under subparagraph II(c), each
member shall be appointed to a term of 3 years. No member shall serve
more than 2 consecutive terms. Appointees to fill vacancies shall serve
the remainder of the unexpired term and until their successors have been
duly appointed and qualified.
                                             
 IV. Members of the board shall receive 
                                             $50 for each day actually
engaged in the duties of the board and shall be reimbursed for all
actual travel necessarily incurred in carrying out the provisions of
this chapter.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:4

 **328-J:4 Administrative and Business Processing Functions. –** All
administrative, clerical, and business processing functions of the board
shall be under the office of professional licensure and certification
established in RSA 310-A:1 through RSA 310-A:1-e.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:5

 **328-J:5 Removal of Members; Vacancies. –** The governor and
council may remove any member of the board for misconduct, incompetence,
neglect of duty, or other sufficient cause after the member has been
given a written statement of the charges and an opportunity to be heard
regarding such charges. Any vacancy in the membership of the board
occurring otherwise than by expiration of a member's term shall be
promptly filled for the unexpired term, after which the replacement
board member shall be eligible for one additional consecutive term if
reappointed. The replacement board member shall be of the same
qualification and appointed by the governor and council.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:6

 **328-J:6 Organization and Meetings. –** The board shall hold
meetings at least 2 times per year. Other meetings of the board shall be
held at such times and upon such notice as the rules of the board
provide. Four members shall constitute a quorum.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:7

 **328-J:7 Board Responsibilities; Rulemaking Authority. –** The
board shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The application procedure for any license issued under this
chapter.
                                             
 II. The qualifications of applicants in addition to those required
by statute.
                                             
 III. The design and content of all forms required under this
chapter.
                                             
 IV. The establishment of all fees required under this chapter.
                                             
 V. How an applicant shall be examined, including:
                                             
 (a) Time and place of examination.
                                             
 (b) The subjects to be tested.
                                             
 (c) Passing grade.
                                             
 (d) Disposition of examination papers.
                                             
 VI. How a license shall be renewed, reinstated, or placed on
inactive status.
                                             
 VII. Ethical standards, required to be met by each limited x-ray
machine operator, medical imaging professional, and radiation therapist
licensed under this chapter, and how a license may be revoked for
violation of these standards.
                                             
 VIII. Establishment of the scope of practice for limited x-ray
machine operators, medical imaging professionals, and radiation
therapists.
                                             
 IX. Procedures for assuring the continuing competence of limited
x-ray machine operators, medical imaging professionals, and radiation
therapists licensed under this chapter including, but not limited to,
continuing education requirements and the professional's health
program.
                                             
 X. How licensees shall provide evidence of good professional
character and reliability to satisfy the board that they shall
faithfully and conscientiously avoid professional misconduct and
otherwise adhere to the requirements of this chapter.
                                             
 XI. Procedures for accepting and responding to written complaints,
publicizing the complaint procedure, standards of and procedures for
conducting investigations, investigator training requirements, and
procedures for conducting disciplinary hearings and alternative dispute
resolution under this chapter.
                                             
 XII. Procedures relative to the disclosure to the public of final
disciplinary actions by the board, including those actions that occur
without holding a public hearing. Dismissed complaints shall not be made
public.
                                             
 XIII. Standards of care for the practice of telemedicine or
telehealth.
                                             
 XIV. Interstate licensure and temporary permits under RSA 328-J:20.
                                             
 XV. Procedures for an educational program review and approval to
follow in making application for approval by the board.
                                             
 XVI. A process for reviewing the accreditation status of an
educational program which is currently accredited by a recognized
national educational accreditation organization.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:8

 **328-J:8 Educational Qualifications. –** The board shall approve
medical imaging and radiation therapy educational programs that the
board determines meet the criteria and standards established by the
board. The curriculum for each course of study shall be no less
stringent than the standards approved by the Joint Review Committee on
Education in Radiologic Technology, Joint Review Committee on Education
in Nuclear Medicine Technology, Commission on Accreditation of Allied
Health Education Programs, or any other appropriate educational
accreditation agency approved by the board.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:9

 **328-J:9 Temporary Suspension Where Imminent Threat. –** In cases
involving imminent danger to life or health, the board may order
suspension of a license pending hearing for a period of no more than 120
days. In such cases, the basis for the board's finding of imminent
danger to life or health shall be reduced to writing and combined with a
hearing notice which complies with RSA 328-J:18, I. A licensee may be
allowed additional time to prepare for a hearing, but any additional
time for preparation shall result in an extension of the license
suspension commensurate with the additional time extended.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:10

 **328-J:10 License Required. –** Beginning July 1, 2017, no person
shall perform medical imaging or administer radiation therapy procedures
on humans for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes as defined in this
chapter or otherwise indicate or imply that the person is licensed to
perform medical imaging procedures or administer radiation therapy
unless that person is currently licensed under this chapter.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:11

 **328-J:11 Licensure; Medical Imaging Professionals and Radiation
Therapists. –** The board shall issue licenses to individuals who meet
the following qualifications:
                                             
 I. Limited x-ray machine operator license. To qualify for a license
as a limited x-ray machine operator, an applicant shall meet the
following requirements:
                                             
 (a) Be at least 18 years of age;
                                             
 (b) Have obtained a high school diploma or have passed an
approved equivalency test;
                                             
 (c) Successfully complete a course of study in limited x-ray
machine operation approved by the board; and
                                             
 (d) Pass an examination in limited x-ray machine operation
approved by the board. To assess an applicant's competence in limited
x-ray machine operation the board may use:
                                             
 (1) The American Registry of Radiologic Technologist limited
x-ray machine operator examination for limited bone density, chest,
extremities, podiatric, skull/sinus, and podiatric radiography;
                                             
 (2) The American Chiropractic Registry of Radiologic
Technologists examination in spine radiography;
                                             
 (3) The American Society of Podiatric Medical Assistants
examination in podiatric radiography;
                                             
 (4) The International Society for Clinical Densitometry
examination in clinical bone densitometry technology; or
                                             
 (5) A certification organization recognized by the board.
                                             
 II. Magnetic resonance technologist license. To qualify for a
license as a magnetic resonance technologist, an applicant shall meet
the following requirements:
                                             
 (a) Be at least 18 years of age;
                                             
 (b) Have obtained a high school diploma or have passed an
approved equivalency test;
                                             
 (c) Successfully complete a course of study in radiography and
additional educational requirements in magnetic resonance technology
approved by the board; and
                                             
 (d) Possess current certification and registration in radiography
from the American Registry of Radiologic Technologists or current
certification and registration in magnetic resonance from the American
Registry of Radiologic Technologists or a certification organization
approved by the board.
                                             
 (e) By January 1, 2020, all applicants for a magnetic resonance
technologist license shall be certified in magnetic resonance by the
American Registry of Radiologic Technologists or a certification
organization recognized by the board.
                                             
 III. Nuclear medicine technologist license. To qualify for a license
as a nuclear medicine technologist, an applicant shall meet the
following requirements:
                                             
 (a) Be at least 18 years of age;
                                             
 (b) Have obtained a high school diploma or have passed an
approved equivalency test;
                                             
 (c) Successfully complete a course of study in nuclear medicine
technology approved by the board; and
                                             
 (d) Possess current certification and registration in nuclear
medicine technology from the American Registry of Radiologic
Technologists, Nuclear Medicine Technology Certification Board, or a
certification organization recognized by the board.
                                             
 IV. Radiation therapist license. To qualify for a license as a
radiation therapist, an applicant shall meet the following
requirements:
                                             
 (a) Be at least 18 years of age;
                                             
 (b) Have obtained a high school diploma or have passed an
approved equivalency test;
                                             
 (c) Successfully complete a course of study in radiation therapy
approved by the board; and
                                             
 (d) Possess current certification and registration in radiation
therapy from the American Registry of Radiologic Technologists or a
certification organization recognized by the board.
                                             
 V. Radiographer license. To qualify for a license as a radiographer,
an applicant shall meet the following requirements:
                                             
 (a) Be at least 18 years of age;
                                             
 (b) Have obtained a high school diploma or have passed an
approved equivalency test;
                                             
 (c) Successfully complete a course of study in radiography
approved by the board; and
                                             
 (d) Possess current certification and registration in radiography
from the American Registry of Radiologic Technologists or a
certification organization approved by the board.
                                             
 VI. Radiologist assistant license. To qualify for a license as a
radiologist assistant, an applicant shall meet the following
requirements:
                                             
 (a) Possess a radiographer license and current certification and
registration in radiography from the American Registry of Radiologic
Technologists or a certification organization approved by the board;
                                             
 (b) Possess current certification and registration as a
radiologist assistant or radiology practitioner assistant from the
American Registry of Radiologic Technologists, Certification Board of
Radiology Physician Assistants or a certification organization approved
by the board; and
                                             
 (c) Submit to the board clinical protocols signed by the
supervising radiologist specifying procedures that are performed by the
radiologist assistant, levels of radiologist supervision, and locations
of practice designated by the supervising radiologist. Updated protocols
shall be submitted biannually consistent with license renewal. The
radiologist assistant scope of practice shall be consistent with the
most recent version of the Radiologist Assistant Practice Standards
published by the American Society of Radiologic Technologists.
                                             
 VII. Sonographer license. To qualify for a license as a sonographer,
an applicant shall meet the following requirements:
                                             
 (a) Be at least 18 years of age;
                                             
 (b) Have obtained a high school diploma or have passed an
approved equivalency test;
                                             
 (c) Successfully complete a course of study in sonography
approved by the board; and
                                             
 (d) Possess current certification and registration in sonography
from the American Registry of Radiologic Technologists, American
Registry of Diagnostic Medical Sonography, Cardiovascular Credentialing
International, or a certification organization approved by the board.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:12

 **328-J:12 Scope of Practice; Limitations. –**
                                             
 I. A person holding a license under this chapter may use radioactive
substances, equipment emitting ionizing radiation, magnetic resonance,
or ultrasound for medical imaging or radiation therapy procedures on
humans for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes only by prescription of an
individual authorized by the state to prescribe medical imaging or
radiation therapy procedures and under the supervision of a licensed
practitioner.
                                             
 II. A person holding a license under this chapter may use
radioactive substances or equipment emitting ionizing radiation,
magnetic resonance, or ultrasound for medical imaging and radiation
therapy procedures on humans for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes only
within the scope of that license as specified in this chapter and under
the rules adopted by the board.
                                             
 III. Persons licensed as limited x-ray machine operators shall
perform tasks only within the scope of the specific permit issued to
them by the board and under the direct supervision of a licensed
practitioner or licensed radiographer for a particular area of the human
anatomy as provided in the chapter and shall not perform computed
tomography, fluoroscopy, magnetic resonance imaging, mammography,
radiation therapy, sonography, mobile imaging procedures, or imaging
procedures using contrast media.
                                             
 IV. Individuals licensed as a radiologist assistant shall not
interpret images, make diagnoses, or prescribe medications or therapies.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:13

 **328-J:13 Applications; Temporary License. –**
                                             
 I. Applications for licensure or for a temporary license shall be on
forms prescribed and furnished by the board, shall contain statements
made under oath, showing the applicant's education and a detailed
summary of the applicant's technical work. The board shall establish
fees for application and any examination required under this chapter. If
the board denies the issuance of a license or a temporary permit to any
applicant, any initial fee deposited shall be retained as an application
fee.
                                             
 II. The board may issue a temporary license to any person whose
certification and registration is pending or when issuance is for the
purpose of providing medical imaging or radiation therapy services to
medically underserved areas as determined by the board. A temporary
license shall be issued only if the board finds that it will not violate
the purpose of this chapter or endanger the public health and safety. A
temporary license shall expire 90 days after the date of the next
examination if the applicant is required to take an examination. If the
applicant does not take the examination on the scheduled date, the
temporary license shall expire. In all other cases, a temporary license
shall expire when the determination is made either to issue or deny the
applicant a regular license. A temporary license shall not be issued for
a period longer than 180 days.
                                             
 III. New graduates awaiting national certification and registration
may be issued a temporary license for employment purposes for a period
not to exceed one year.
                                             
 IV. Any person issued a license under this chapter shall display the
official license document or a verified copy in each place of regular
employment.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:14

 **328-J:14 Educational Programs. –** All educational programs
approved by the board in radiography, radiation therapy, nuclear
medicine technology, magnetic resonance technology, sonography,
radiologist assistant or limited x-ray machine operation may be offered
by a medical facility or educational institution. The program shall be
affiliated with one or more hospitals or clinics approved by the board
to provide the requisite clinical education.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:15

 **328-J:15 License Renewal; Continuing Education. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall send, by mail or otherwise, notification of the
impending license expiration to each licensee at least 2 months prior to
the expiration of the license, along with a request for payment of a
renewal fee. Licensees in good standing may renew their licenses by
paying the renewal fee prior to the expiration date of the license, and
by presenting evidence satisfactory to the board of completion of the
continuing education requirements. If properly renewed, a license shall
remain in effect continuously from the date of issuance, unless
suspended or revoked by the board for just cause.
                                             
 II. All licenses issued by the board shall expire on the last day of
the licensee's month of birth in the second year following the year of
issuance, or upon such other biennial date as the board may adopt. If
the renewal fee is not submitted within 12 months after the expiration
date, the licensee's name shall be removed from current status, and
application for reinstatement shall be required to return to current
status. The board shall charge a 20 percent late fee for each month or
fraction of a month the renewal is late, up to 12 months, in addition to
the renewal fee. Any renewal application received 12 months after the
expiration date shall be rejected, unless accompanied by proof of
successful completion of the examination required by the board.
Licensees shall complete at least 24 hours of board-approved continuing
education during each license period in order to maintain his or her
license. If a licensee fails to renew such license within the 12 months
after the date of expiration, it shall become null and void and the
licensee shall be required to reapply and to be re-examined for
licensure.
                                             
 III. Licensees who have been activated by the military shall be
exempt from any penalties or fees for renewal or reinstatement due to
their absence, as approved by the board.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:16

 **328-J:16 Notification of Changes. –** Licensees shall notify the
board in writing within 30 days after a name or address change.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:17

 **328-J:17 Required Reporting. –** A licensee shall submit written
notification to the board of any legal or disciplinary action other than
minor traffic infractions or proceedings initiated against the licensee
by any other licensing jurisdiction whether United States or foreign,
any health care institution, any professional society or association,
any certification organization, any government agency, by any law
enforcement agency, or any court within 30 days for acts or conduct
substantially the same as acts or conduct which would constitute grounds
for suspension, denial, modification, limitation, revocation, or refusal
to renew a license.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:18

 **328-J:18 Hearings. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall take no disciplinary action without a hearing. At
least 14 days prior to hearing, both parties to a disciplinary
proceeding shall be served, either personally or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, with a written copy of the complaint filed and
notice of the time and place for hearing. All complaints shall be
objectively received and appropriately pursued by the board. Written
complaints received by the board shall be acknowledged within 3 months
of the date of notice to the board. Written notice of all disciplinary
decisions made by the board shall be given to both parties to the
proceeding upon their issuance.
                                             
 II. The board shall have the power to administer oaths or
affirmations, preserve testimony, subpoena witnesses, and to compel, by
subpoena duces tecum, the production of all books, records, files and
documents, whether originals, copies, or in electronic or other form,
and other materials, relevant to its investigation of any grievance,
complaint, or disciplinary proceeding before the board.
                                             
 (a) The board may issue subpoenas with the approval of the office
of the attorney general.
                                             
 (b) A minimum of 10 business days' notice shall be given for
compliance with a subpoena under this chapter.
                                             
 III. At any hearing, the named person or licensee shall have the
right to:
                                             
 (a) Appear in person, by counsel, or both.
                                             
 (b) Produce evidence and witnesses.
                                             
 (c) Cross-examine witnesses.
                                             
 IV. If the named person fails or refuses to appear, the board may
proceed to hear and determine the validity of the charges.
                                             
 V. Any disciplinary action by the board shall be published in the
report of the board and shall be a public record in accordance with RSA
91-A.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:19

 **328-J:19 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. The board may deny, suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew a license
or impose probationary conditions on a license if the licensee or
applicant for licensure has engaged in any of the following conduct:
                                             
 (a) Obtaining a license by means of fraud, misrepresentation, or
concealment of material facts.
                                             
 (b) Engaging in unprofessional conduct pursuant to rules adopted
by the board.
                                             
 (c) Having been convicted of or pleaded guilty or nolo contendere
to a crime involving moral turpitude or any crime which indicates that
the licensee or applicant is unfit or incompetent to administer medical
imaging or radiation therapy procedures or that the licensee or
applicant has deceived or defrauded the public.
                                             
 (d) Engaging in any act or practice in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or any rule adopted by the board or aiding,
abetting, or assisting any person in such a violation.
                                             
 (e) Committing an act or acts of malpractice, gross negligence,
or incompetence in administering medical imaging or radiation therapy
procedures.
                                             
 (f) Practicing as a person licensed to administer medical imaging
or radiation therapy procedures without a current license.
                                             
 (g) Engaging in conduct that could result in harm or injury to
the public.
                                             
 (h) Having a license issued under this chapter revoked or
suspended or other disciplinary action taken, whether in this state or
another jurisdiction.
                                             
 (i) Being unfit or incompetent to administer medical imaging or
radiation therapy services by reason of deliberate or negligent acts or
omissions, regardless of whether actual injury to a patient is
established.
                                             
 II. The board, upon making an affirmative finding under paragraph I,
may take disciplinary action in any one or more of the following ways:
                                             
 (a) By written reprimand.
                                             
 (b) By suspension, refusal to renew, limitation or restriction of
a license, or probation for a period of time determined to be reasonable
by the board.
                                             
 (c) By revocation of a license.
                                             
 (d) By requiring the person to participate in a program of
continuing education in the area or areas in which the person has been
found deficient.
                                             
 (e) By requiring the person to practice under the direct
supervision of a medical imaging professional or radiation therapist for
a period of time specified by the board.
                                             
 (f) By assessing civil penalties, after notification and due
process, in amounts established by the board which shall not exceed

                                             $2,500 per offense or, in the case of continuing offenses, 
                                             $250 for
each day the violation continues, whichever is greater.
                                             
 III. The denial, refusal to renew, suspension, revocation, or
imposition of probationary conditions upon a license may be ordered by
the board after a hearing held in accordance with RSA 328-J:18 and rules
adopted by the board. An application may be made to the board for
reinstatement of a revoked license if the revocation has been in effect
for at least 2 years after the date of the board's order revoking the
license.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:20

 **328-J:20 Violations. –** It shall be a class A misdemeanor for any
natural person or a felony for any business organization to:
                                             
 I. Present or attempt to use the license of another as one's own;
                                             
 II. Give any false or forged evidence of any kind to the board or to
any board member in obtaining a license;
                                             
 III. Falsely impersonate any other licensee of like or different
name;
                                             
 IV. Attempt to use an expired or revoked license; or
                                             
 V. Violate any of the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:21

 **328-J:21 Injunctive Relief. –** The board is hereby authorized to
apply in its own name for relief by injunction to the superior court, to
enforce the provisions of this chapter or to restrain any violation of
the provisions of this chapter. In such proceedings, it shall be
unnecessary to allege or to prove that either an adequate remedy at law
does not exist or that substantial or irreparable damage would result
from any continued violation. The members of the board shall not be
personally liable under these proceedings.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:22

 **328-J:22 Grandfather Provision. –** Persons who have been engaged
in the practice of medical imaging or radiation therapy, other than a
radiologist assistant, who do not hold a current certification and
registration from a certification organization approved by the board may
continue to practice in the modality of medical imaging or radiation
therapy in which they are currently employed provided that they:
                                             
 I. Register with the board on or before July 1, 2017.
                                             
 II. Do not change the scope of their current practice.
                                             
 III. Complete all continuing education requirements for their area
of practice biannually as prescribed by the board.
                                             
 IV. Practice only under the supervision of a licensed practitioner,
and
                                             
 V. Obtain a license from the board on or before January 1, 2020.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:23

 **328-J:23 Investigative Costs. –** For any order issued in
resolution of a disciplinary proceeding by the board, where the board
has found misconduct sufficient to support disciplinary action,
including but not limited to a violation of this chapter or an
administrative rule adopted under this chapter, the board may require
the registrant who is the subject of such finding to pay the board a sum
not to exceed the reasonable cost of investigation and prosecution of
the proceeding. This sum shall not exceed 
                                             $5,000. This sum may be
imposed in addition to any otherwise authorized administrative fines
levied by the board as part of the penalty. The investigative and
prosecution costs shall be assessed by the board and any sums recovered
shall be credited to the board's fund and disbursed by the board for any
future investigations of complaints and activities that violate this
chapter or rules adopted under this chapter.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:24

 **328-J:24 Reports. –** Biennially, as of December 31, the office of
professional licensure and certification shall submit to the governor a
report of the transactions of the preceding biennium, and a complete
statement of the receipts and expenditures of the board.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 328-J:25

 **328-J:25 Exemptions. –** Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to prevent or affect:
                                             
 I. A registered dental hygienist licensed under the laws of the
state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. A dental assistant licensed or holding a certificate under the
laws of the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 III. A physical therapist who performs medical imaging within the
scope of practice and maintains a current physical therapist license to
practice in New Hampshire.
                                             
 IV. A student enrolled in and attending a school or college of
medicine, dentistry, osteopathy, chiropractic, podiatry, limited x-ray
machine operator, medical imaging or radiation therapy who performs
medical imaging or radiation therapy procedures on humans while under
the supervision of a licensed practitioner, magnetic resonance
technologist, nuclear medicine technologist, radiation therapist,
radiographer, radiologist assistant, or sonographer holding a license
under this chapter.
                                             
 V. A person administering medical imaging or radiation procedures
who is employed by the United States government when performing duties
associated with that employment.
                                             
 VI. A person performing medical procedures or therapy on non-human
subjects or cadavers.

**Source.** 2016, 54:2, eff. July 1, 2016.
