---
title: 'CHAPTER 328-B MASSAGE THERAPISTS AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 328-B
                                             
MASSAGE THERAPISTS AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
---------------------------------------------

### Section 328-B:1

 **328-B:1 Regulation of Massage Therapists and Massage
Establishments. –** The general court, to protect the health, safety,
and welfare of the people of the state of New Hampshire, establishes a
regulatory program for massage therapists, including establishing basic
qualifications for licensure of massage therapists.

**Source.** 1990, 12:1. 1996, 47:11. 2009, 64:1, eff. Aug. 8, 2009.

### Section 328-B:2

 **328-B:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Applicant'' means a person who has submitted to the commissioner
an application for a license pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 II. "Advisory board'' means the advisory board of massage
therapists.
                                             
 III. "Compensation'' means the receipt of:
                                             
 (a) Money, goods, services, or other things of value; or
                                             
 (b) A promise to deliver money, goods, services, or other things
of value.
                                             
 IV. "Executive director'' means the executive director of the office
of professional licensure and certification.
                                             
 V. "Licensee'' means a person to whom a license has been issued
pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 VI. "Massage'' means the application of a system of structured touch
which includes holding, pressure, positioning, or causing movement, by
manual means, for the purpose of promoting, maintaining, and restoring
the health and well-being of the client. Massage is designed to promote
general relaxation, improve movement, relieve somatic and muscular pain
or dysfunction, stress and muscle tension, and provide for general
health enhancement, personal growth, and the organization, balance, and
integration of the body.
                                             
 VII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VIII. "Massage therapist'' means a licensed individual who performs
massage for compensation. Titles used may include: massage therapist,
massage practitioner, bodywork practitioner, bodyworker, muscle
therapist, massotherapist, or somatic therapist practitioner. A massage
therapist uses visual, kinesthetic, and palpatory skills to assess the
body, and may evaluate the client's condition to the extent of
determining whether massage is indicated or contraindicated.

**Source.** 1990, 12:1. 1995, 310:159, 183. 1996, 47:2-4, 12, I. 2009,
64:2, eff. Aug. 8, 2009. 2015, 276:102, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 328-B:2-a

 **328-B:2-a Scope of Practice. –** A massage therapist may do any of
the following when performing massage, including, but not limited to:
                                             
 I. Use of heat and cold, hydrotherapy, heliotherapy, and external
application of herbal or topical preparations not classified as
prescription drugs.
                                             
 II. Analysis of posture and movement.
                                             
 III. Provision of education in self-care and stress management.
                                             
 IV. Performance of techniques in which the massage therapist had
been trained intended to affect the systems of the body.

**Source.** 1996, 47:5. 2009, 64:3, eff. Aug. 8, 2009.

### Section 328-B:3

 **328-B:3 Prohibited Acts. –** No person shall:
                                             
 I. Act or advertise as a massage therapist for compensation without
holding a license issued pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. Fail to comply with an order of the commissioner issued
pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 IV. Fail to comply with a rule adopted by the commissioner pursuant
to this chapter.
                                             
 V. Violate any other provision of this chapter.
                                             
 VI. Hire as an employee massage therapist any person not holding a
license issued pursuant to this chapter.

**Source.** 1990, 12:1. 1995, 310:183. 1996, 47:10, 12, II. 2009, 64:4,
5, eff. Aug. 8, 2009.

### Section 328-B:4

 **328-B:4 Powers and Duties of the Executive Director; Rulemaking.
–** The executive director shall have the power and duty to:
                                             
 I. Issue, suspend, revoke, renew, and deny licenses in accordance
with rules adopted under RSA 541-A.
                                             
 II. Hold hearings, and conduct investigations, public or
confidential, and issue orders relating to such hearings and
investigations. The contested case provisions of RSA 541-A:31-36 shall
apply when a person is aggrieved by a decision of the executive director
under this chapter. Appeals shall be made in accordance with RSA 541.
                                             
 III. Require licensees to file special or periodic sworn reports, in
accordance with rules adopted under RSA 541-A.
                                             
 IV. Request the executive director of safety to provide a report of
state and federal criminal records of any applicant, if the executive
director believes such information would be useful in evaluating an
applicant's application. Upon such a request, the executive director of
safety shall provide the report.
                                             
 V. Delegate any authority or assign any duty, conferred or imposed
by this chapter upon the executive director, to one or more
subordinates.
                                             
 VI. Establish and appoint an advisory board of massage therapists,
as provided in RSA 328-B:5.
                                             
 VII. Pursuant to RSA 541-A, adopt rules relative to:
                                             
 (a) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (b) The contents of license application forms.
                                             
 (c) The qualifications required for a massage therapist which
shall include demonstration of passage of the National Certification
Examination for Therapeutic Massage Bodywork or any other nationally
recognized certifying examination.
                                             
 (d) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (e) License modifications and license renewal applications.
                                             
 (f) The form, content, time, and retention of special and
periodic reports required from licensees.
                                             
 (g) Exemptions from licensure under RSA 328-B:10.
                                             
 (h) Procedures for temporary licensure under RSA 328-B:5-a.
                                             
 (i) Procedures for suspension or revocation of a license.
                                             
 (j) The establishment of a program of continuing education for
licensees, as reviewed by the advisory board, which shall require 12
hours of study over a 2-year period for completion before license
renewal every 2 years.
                                             
 (k) A schedule of administrative fines which may be imposed under
RSA 328-B:11-a for violation of this chapter or the rules adopted
pursuant to it.
                                             
 (l) Procedures for notice and opportunity for hearing prior to
the imposition of an administrative fine imposed under RSA 328-B:11-a.

**Source.** 1990, 12:1. 1991, 355:49. 1994, 412:38. 1995, 310:183. 1996,
47:6, 7, 10, 11, 12, III. 2009, 64:6, 7, eff. Aug. 8, 2009. 2014,
167:21, 51, II, eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 276:103, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 328-B:5

 **328-B:5 Advisory Board of Massage Therapists. –** The executive
director shall establish the advisory board of massage therapists. The
board shall consist of 3 massage therapists who are licensees in the
state of New Hampshire. The members shall be appointed for 3 years,
staggered so that the term of one member expires each year, and they
shall hold office until successors are appointed, and shall serve on the
board without any compensation. In no event shall a member serve more
than 2 full consecutive terms. The board shall:
                                             
 I. Review the qualifications of applicants for licenses.
                                             
 II. Review the qualifications of individuals desiring to conduct
massage workshops or seminars who are not licensed in this state.
                                             
 III. Review the continuing education programs for licensees.
                                             
 IV. Advise the executive director regarding the implementation of
this chapter.

**Source.** 1990, 12:1. 1995, 310:183. 1996, 47:8, 11. 2009, 64:8, eff.
Aug. 8, 2009. 2015, 276:103, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 328-B:5-a

 **328-B:5-a Temporary License for Massage Therapists. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall issue a temporary license to any person
who has attended a massage therapy program in another state who does not
currently meet the requirements for licensure, provided that he or she:
                                             
 (a) Is at least 21 years of age on the date of the application;
                                             
 (b) Submits documentation of New Hampshire residency;
                                             
 (c) Has met the requirements of RSA 328-B:6, I(a) and (c);
                                             
 (d) Has completed a massage therapy program with a minimum of 500
educational hours; and
                                             
 (e) Provides documentation of practicing as a massage therapist
in another state for at least 3 of the preceding 5 years.
                                             
 II. The temporary license shall be valid for only one year in order
for the temporary licensee to complete any additional educational or
examination requirements for a massage therapy license in accordance
with RSA 328-B:4, VII(c) and the rules adopted under this chapter.
                                             
 III. A temporary license shall not be renewed.

**Source.** 2009, 64:9, eff. Aug. 8, 2009.

### Section 328-B:6

 **328-B:6 License Issuance; Reciprocity. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall issue a massage therapist's license to
each qualified applicant who:
                                             
 (a) Submits the required application form and 
                                             $110 licensing
fee.
                                             
 (b) Is at least 18 years of age on the date of the application.
                                             
 (c) Has not been convicted in New Hampshire or in any other state
of any crime involving violence inflicted on a person or threatened
against a person, or any sexually-related crime.
                                             
 (d) Submits written evidence of being in good mental and physical
health.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. Except for the requirements of subparagraphs I(b) and (c) of
this section, the commissioner may waive any requirements for licensure
for any applicant for a massage therapist's license who, on the date of
application hereunder, holds a valid license issued by any other state
or country, but only if the other licensing body's requirements are
substantially equivalent to or not less than the requirements under this
chapter.

**Source.** 1990, 12:1. 1995, 310:183. 1996, 47:10, 12, IV. 2009, 64:10,
eff. Aug. 8, 2009. 2014, 167:22, eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 328-B:7

 **328-B:7 License Renewal. –** All licenses issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be renewed biennially on or before June 30 upon approval
of the commissioner of the renewal application and submission of the
required 
                                             $110 renewal fee.

**Source.** 1990, 12:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995. 2014, 167:23,
eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 229:13, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 328-B:8

 **328-B:8 License Revocation or Suspension. –** After notice and
opportunity for hearing, as provided for under RSA 541-A, the
commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued pursuant to this
chapter if the licensee:
                                             
 I. Violates this chapter or any rule or order adopted or issued
under it;
                                             
 II. Knowingly makes any false statement regarding the application or
license or in any report the commissioner requires to be made;
                                             
 III. Fails to respond to any lawful inquiry of the commissioner; or
                                             
 IV. Is convicted of any crime involving violence inflicted on a
person or threatened against a person, or any sexually-related crime or
a crime involving moral turpitude.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1990, 12:1. 1995, 310:183. 1996, 47:12, V. 2009, 64:11, eff.
Aug. 8, 2009.

### Section 328-B:9

 **328-B:9 Inspections, Records, and Reports. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1996,
47:12, VI, eff. June, 23, 1996.
                                             ]

### Section 328-B:10

 **328-B:10 Exemptions; Application of Chapter. –**
                                             
 I. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a person licensed by this
state pursuant to any other provision of law, or any person employed by
such a licensee as an assistant, from performing the occupation for
which he or she is licensed.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or
restrict the practice of any person in this state who uses touch, words,
and directed movement to deepen awareness of existing patterns of
movement as well as to suggest new possibilities of movement, while
engaged within the scope of practice of a profession with established
standards and ethics, provided that their services are not designated as
or implied to be massage or massage therapy. Such practices include, but
are not limited to the Feldenkrais method of somatic education, the
Trager approach to movement education, the Alexander technique, and
body-mind centering.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or
restrict the practice of any person in this state who uses energy or
superficial touch to affect the energy systems of the human body while
engaged within the scope of practice of a profession with established
standards and ethics, provided that their services are not designated as
or implied to be massage or massage therapy. Such practices include, but
are not limited to, polarity therapy, therapeutic touch, Bowen therapy,
and reiki.

**Source.** 1990, 12:1. 1995, 310:183. 2009, 64:12, eff. Aug. 8, 2009.
2016, 137:1, eff. May 27, 2016.

### Section 328-B:11

 **328-B:11 Violations; Penalty. –** Any person practicing massage
within the meaning of this chapter, without first obtaining a license as
required by this chapter, or who violates any of the provisions of, or
rules adopted under this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation if a
natural person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other person, for the
first offense. For a subsequent offense, a person shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other
person. Each day such facility shall operate or person shall practice
this activity after a first conviction shall be considered a subsequent
offense.

**Source.** 1990, 12:1. 1996, 47:9, eff. June 23, 1996.

### Section 328-B:11-a

 **328-B:11-a Administrative Fines. –** The executive director of the
office of professional licensure and certification, after notice and
opportunity for hearing, pursuant to rules adopted under RSA 541-A, may
impose an administrative fine not to exceed 
                                             $2,000 for each offense
upon any person who violates any provision of this chapter or rules
adopted pursuant to it. Rehearings and appeals from a decision of the
executive director shall be in accordance with RSA 541. Any
administrative fine imposed under this section shall not preclude the
imposition of further penalties or administrative actions under this
chapter. The executive director shall adopt rules in accordance with RSA
541-A relative to administrative fines which shall be scaled to reflect
the scope and severity of the violation. The sums obtained from the
levying of administrative fines under this chapter shall be forwarded to
the state treasurer to be deposited into the general fund.

**Source.** 1991, 355:50. 1995, 310:182, 183. 2009, 64:13, eff. Aug. 8,
2009. 2015, 276:104, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 328-B:12

 **328-B:12 Injunctive Relief. –** The practice of massage by a
person without a license issued under this chapter or whose license has
been suspended or revoked, or has expired is declared to be a danger to
the public health and welfare. In addition to any other civil, criminal,
or disciplinary remedy, the attorney general, the commissioner, the
prosecuting attorney of any county or municipality where the person is
practicing or purporting to accordance with the laws of this state,
maintain an action to enjoin that person from practicing massage until
such person secures a valid license. An injunction without bond is
available to the commissioner for enforcement of this chapter.

**Source.** 1990, 12:1. 1995, 310:183. 1996, 47:9, eff. June 23, 1996.

### Section 328-B:13

 **328-B:13 Home Rule. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2009, 64:14, eff. Aug. 8,
2009.
                                             ]
