---
title: 'CHAPTER 328-C FAMILY MEDIATORS'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 328-C
                                             
FAMILY MEDIATORS
----------------

### Section 328-C:1

 **328-C:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to protect and
assist the public by providing standards for the practice of family
mediation, training and continuing education for certified family
mediators and certified family mediator training programs, and
disciplinary procedures for violating ethical rules and requirements.

**Source.** 1989, 268:1. 2005, 250:1. 2009, 21:4, 5, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 328-C:2

 **328-C:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means the board of family mediator certification
established by RSA 328-C:4.
                                             
 II. "Certified family mediator'' means a person certified under the
provisions of this chapter to act as a family mediator.
                                             
 III. "Certified family mediator training program'' means a program
that has been certified under this chapter to provide the instructional
training required for certified family mediators.
                                             
 IV. "Family mediation'' means a process by which an impartial third
person or persons, with the consent of the parties, assists and enables
the parties to a divorce to work together to reach a mutually
satisfactory settlement of the issues involved in such divorce.
                                             
 V. "Family mediator'' means an impartial third person who, with the
consent of the parties to a divorce, assists and enables the parties to
work together to reach a mutually satisfactory settlement of the issues
in a dispute.
                                             
 VI. "Certified family mediator training program'' means a program
that has been certified under this chapter which provides the training
required for certified family mediators.

**Source.** 1989, 268:1. 1992, 207:2. 2005, 250:2. 2009, 21:4, 5, eff.
Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 328-C:3

 **328-C:3 Misrepresentation. –** No person or entity shall use the
title of certified family mediator or certified family mediator training
program, or use or advertise any title or description which conveys the
impression that the person or entity is a certified family mediator or
certified family mediator training program, unless the person or program
has been certified under this chapter.

**Source.** 1989, 268:1. 2005, 250:3. 2009, 21:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 328-C:4

 **328-C:4 Board. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a board of family mediator certification
consisting of the following 11 members:
                                             
 (a) One judge who regularly sits in the judicial branch family
division, appointed by the chief justice of the supreme court.
                                             
 (b) One full-time marital master, appointed by the administrative
judge of the judicial branch family division.
                                             
 (c) One attorney licensed to practice law in this state,
appointed by the governor with the consent of the council.
                                             
 (d) Two members of the public, appointed by the governor with the
consent of the council.
                                             
 (e) One mental health professional, appointed by the governor
with the consent of the council.
                                             
 (f) Five certified family mediators, nominated by the New
Hampshire Conflict Resolution Association and appointed by the governor
with the consent of the council.
                                             
 II. (a) Appointments and reappointments to the board shall be for
3-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired
term.
                                             
 (b) Notwithstanding subparagraph (a), the first term of members
appointed after the effective date of this subparagraph shall be as
follows: 3 members shall be appointed to 3-year terms; 3 members shall
be appointed to 2-year terms; and 3 members shall be appointed to 1-year
terms.
                                             
 (c) Any member who is absent from at least 3 consecutive meetings
of the board may be replaced by such member's appointing authority.
                                             
 III. The board shall elect its own chairman every 2 years by a
majority vote.

**Source.** 1989, 268:1. 2005, 250:4, 5. 2009, 21:1, eff. May 8, 2009;
21:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 328-C:4-a

 **328-C:4-a Duties of the Board. –** The board shall:
                                             
 I. Compile and maintain a list of certified family mediators and
certified family mediator training programs and make such list available
to the general public online through the official Internet site for the
state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. Establish procedures and fees for the applications for
certification, reinstatement of certification, and renewal of
certification of family mediators and of family mediator training
programs.
                                             
 III. Establish eligibility requirements for the certification,
renewal certification, and reinstatement certification of family
mediators and family mediator training programs.
                                             
 IV. Establish family mediator training and continuing education
requirements.
                                             
 V. Adopt ethical standards and standards of practice for family
mediators.
                                             
 VI. Investigate complaints and take necessary disciplinary action as
authorized by this chapter.
                                             
 VII. Establish reporting requirements for certified training
programs.

**Source.** 2005, 250:6. 2009, 21:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 328-C:5

 **328-C:5 Qualifications. –**
                                             
 I. To be eligible for certification, conditional certification,
reinstatement of certification, renewal of certification and temporary
renewal of certification as a family mediator, an applicant shall be of
good character.
                                             
 II. To be eligible for certification or conditional certification as
a family mediator, an applicant shall meet the following requirements:
                                             
 (a) Satisfactory completion of a program of instruction approved
by the board and at least 48 hours in length, including at least 8 hours
in domestic violence, and components in family dynamics and relevant
law.
                                             
 (b) Completion of an internship approved by the board and at
least 20 hours in length with a certified family mediator or certified
family mediation program.
                                             
 (c) Submission of a completed application to the board.
                                             
 (d) Submission of at least 3 recommendations satisfactory to the
board from persons who have participated with the applicant in family
mediation work. These recommendations shall meet any additional
requirements established by rules adopted by the board pursuant to RSA
541-A.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding subparagraphs II(a) and (b), the board may
accept applicants found to have training and internship experience
equivalent to the programs of instruction and internship approved by the
board.
                                             
 IV. Certification of a mediator or a mediator training program shall
be valid for 3 years from the date of issuance, and shall expire 3 years
from the date of issuance, unless renewed pursuant to rules adopted by
the board pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 V. If timely and sufficient application has been made in accordance
with board rules for renewal of certification, the existing
certification shall not expire until the board has taken final action on
the application for renewal. If the application is either untimely or
insufficient, it shall lapse and be subject to reinstatement in
accordance with rules adopted by the board pursuant to RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1989, 268:1. 1992, 207:3. 2005, 250:7, 8. 2009, 21:4, 5,
eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 328-C:5-a

 **328-C:5-a Confidentiality of Information. –**
                                             
 I. Unless waived by the person to whom the information pertains, the
following information relative to certified family mediators, applicants
for certification, and formerly certified family mediators which may be
in the possession of the board shall be confidential and shall not be
subject to disclosure, except as provided in paragraph II, absent an
order of the court:
                                             
 (a) The person's date of birth, social security number, residence
address, and home telephone number.
                                             
 (b) The person's reason for leaving any past employment or the
facts giving rise to any reprimand, censure, license revocation or
suspension, disbarment, disqualification, or discipline given by any
professional organization or entity supervising or overseeing a
profession, other than the board.
                                             
 (c) Whether or not the person has been a defendant in any
criminal proceeding, information concerning such proceedings, any
executed criminal records release, and the results of any criminal
records check.
                                             
 (d) The addresses and telephone numbers of the individuals who
have submitted letters of reference in support of any application for
certification.
                                             
 (e) Any photograph identification card or other document issued
by a governmental agency submitted in support of an application that
includes an applicant's date of birth, social security number, residence
address, or home telephone number.
                                             
 (f) Any information deemed confidential under RSA 91-A or other
applicable law.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding paragraph I and RSA 91-A, the board may disclose
to any New Hampshire court with the authority to appoint a family
mediator, or which possesses oversight authority over the professional
activities of individuals who may serve as family mediators, any
records, documents, or information in the possession of the board
relating to a certified family mediator, an applicant for certification,
or a formerly certified family mediator, except for his or her social
security number.

**Source.** 2005, 250:9. 2009, 21:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 328-C:5-b

 **328-C:5-b Immunity From Civil Action. –** No civil action shall be
maintained against the board or any member of the board or its agents or
employees, against any organization or its members, or against any other
person for, or by reason of any statement, report, communication, or
testimony to the board or any determination, action, statement, report,
communication, disclosure or testimony by the board in relation to any
proceeding or communication under this chapter.

**Source.** 2005, 250:9, eff. Sept. 12, 2005.

### Section 328-C:6

 **328-C:6 Continuing Education. –** To renew a certification, each
family mediator shall provide evidence of attendance within the last 3
years of at least 24 hours of continuing education approved by the
board. A certified family mediator training program seeking renewal
shall provide evidence that it has met any reporting requirements
established under RSA 328-C:4-a and that each of the family mediators
associated with the program has met the annual continuing education
requirements.

**Source.** 1989, 268:1. 2005, 250:10. 2009, 21:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 328-C:7

 **328-C:7 Disciplinary Action. –**
                                             
 I. The board may undertake disciplinary proceedings:
                                             
 (a) Upon its own initiative: or
                                             
 (b) Upon written complaint of any person who charges that a
person or entity certified by the board has committed misconduct under
paragraph III and who specifies the grounds for misconduct.
                                             
 II. The board shall investigate and resolve complaints against
certified family mediators and certified family mediator training
programs. The board shall hold a hearing in compliance with rules
adopted under RSA 541-A prior to taking any disciplinary action
specified under this section. In the alternative, the board may
informally resolve complaints by agreement of the parties.
                                             
 III. Misconduct sufficient to support disciplinary proceedings under
this section shall include:
                                             
 (a) The practice of fraud or deceit in procuring or attempting to
procure or renew a certificate under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Conviction of any crime which demonstrates unfitness to
practice mediation.
                                             
 (c) Violation of the ethical standards or standards of practice
adopted under RSA 328-C:4-a.
                                             
 (d) Any unprofessional conduct or dishonorable conduct, unworthy
of and affecting the practice of mediation.
                                             
 (e) Unfitness or incompetency by reason of negligent habits or
other causes.
                                             
 (f) Demonstrable gross incompetence.
                                             
 (g) Addiction to the use of alcohol or other habit-forming drugs
to a degree which renders the person unfit to practice mediation.
                                             
 (h) A legal finding of incompetence.
                                             
 (i) Willful or repeated violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
                                             
 (j) As to a training program, failure to comply with the training
program content, trainer, and materials requirements under this chapter
or rules established under it.
                                             
 (k) As to a training program, failure to comply with reporting
requirements under this chapter or rules established under it.
                                             
 (l) Suspension or revocation without subsequent reinstatement of
a certificate, license, or registration, similar to one issued under
this chapter, in another jurisdiction.
                                             
 IV. The board shall establish disciplinary procedures, penalties,
and sanctions for certified family mediators which may include
revocation of certification, suspension of certification, written
warning, fine, written reprimand, imposition of supplemental training
requirements or supervised training requirements, supplemental
education, treatment and counseling, including treatment and counseling
for alcohol and substance abuse.
                                             
 V. The board shall establish disciplinary procedures, penalties, and
sanctions for certified family mediator training programs, which may
include revocation of certification, suspension of certification,
written warning, fine, written reprimand, and imposition of supplemental
reporting requirements.
                                             
 VI. The board may administer oaths or affirmations, preserve
testimony, and, on approval of the attorney general, issue subpoenas for
witnesses and for documents relative to formal investigations or
adjudicatory hearings held by the board.

**Source.** 1989, 268:1. 2005, 250:11. 2009, 21:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 328-C:7-a

 **328-C:7-a Appeals. –** Appeals from decisions of the board shall
be pursuant to RSA 541.

**Source.** 2005, 250:12, eff. Sept. 12, 2005.

### Section 328-C:8

 **328-C:8 Rulemaking Authority. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall adopt rules for family mediators and family
mediator training programs pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the
following:
                                             
 (a) The eligibility requirements and application procedures for
certification, renewal of certification, recertification, and
reinstatement of certification.
                                             
 (b) The content of all application forms, which forms may require
a notarized affidavit stating that the information provided in the
application is complete and accurate.
                                             
 (c) Content of training programs and training equivalents allowed
under RSA 328-C:5, III.
                                             
 (d) Content of internships and duration and content of internship
equivalents allowed under RSA 328-C:5, III.
                                             
 (e) The ethical standards and standards of practice for family
mediators certified in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (f) Procedures for the reporting of activities conducted by
certified family mediators and certified family mediator training
programs.
                                             
 (g) Procedures for processing complaints.
                                             
 (h) Disciplinary procedures, penalties, and sanctions for
certified family mediators and martial mediator training programs, as
provided under RSA 328-C:7
                                             
 (i) Fees for applications, certification, renewal of
certification, and reinstatement of certification.
                                             
 (j) Reporting requirements for certified training programs.
                                             
 II. The board may adopt rules for family mediators and family
mediator training programs, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the
following:
                                             
 (a) The application process, requirements, and criteria for
temporary renewal of certification and conditional certification.
                                             
 (b) Fees for temporary renewal of certification and conditional
certification and for the filing of requests for information not
governed by RSA 91-A, the filing of complaints and petitions, and the
processing of changes to information of record.
                                             
 (c) Procedures for informal resolution or referral of complaints.

**Source.** 1989, 268:1. 1992, 207:4, 5. 2005, 250:13. 2009, 21:4, eff.
Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 328-C:9

 **328-C:9 Privileged Communications. –**
                                             
 I. Family mediation proceedings shall be held in private, and all
communications, oral or written, made in the proceedings shall be
privileged and confidential and shall not be disclosed, except as
provided in paragraph III of this section.
                                             
 II. Nothing said by the parties during family mediation sessions
shall be admissible in further divorce proceedings.
                                             
 III. No certified family mediator shall be subpoenaed by any court
of competent jurisdiction in this state to disclose any information
received from any client unless:
                                             
 (a) The privilege is waived by all parties to the family
mediation case.
                                             
 (b) A party is alleged to have made during family mediation a
material misstatement of fact, which would have constituted perjury if
made under oath.
                                             
 (c) The family mediator has received material information
alleging abuse or sexual abuse or neglect as defined by RSA 169-C or RSA
173-B.
                                             
 (d) The family mediator has received information about a felony
or misdemeanor that has been or is about to be committed.

**Source.** 1989, 268:1. 1990, 91:1. 2009, 21:4, 5, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.
2014, 44:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 328-C:10

 **328-C:10 Limitations. –** Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to prevent the court from retaining jurisdiction to make
emergency orders as appropriate, nor to stop family mediation if one
party or the family mediator has indicated to the court that no
agreement can be reached through family mediation.

**Source.** 1989, 268:1. 2009, 21:4, 5, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.

### Section 328-C:11

 **328-C:11 Fees. –**
                                             
 I. The board may establish fees for:
                                             
 (a) Applications, certification, conditional certification,
renewal of certification, temporary renewal of certification, and
reinstatement of certification.
                                             
 (b) The filing of requests for information not governed by RSA
91-A.
                                             
 (c) The filing of complaints and petitions.
                                             
 (d) The processing of changes to information of record.
                                             
 II. The fees established by the board shall recover revenues equal
to 125 percent of the direct operating expenses of the board for the
previous year or the full cost of the board for the previous year,
including the cost of support and administrative services provided by
other agencies, whichever is greater. Fees collected under this chapter
shall be deposited in the general fund.

**Source.** 1992, 207:1. 2005, 250:14, eff. Sept. 12, 2005.

### Section 328-C:12

 **328-C:12 Expenses. –** Members of the board shall be reimbursed
for all actual travel, incidental, telephone and clerical expenses
necessarily incurred in carrying out the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1992, 207:1, eff. May 12, 1992.

### Section 328-C:13

 **328-C:13 Board of Family Mediator Certification Administrative
Functions. –** All administrative, clerical, and business processing
functions of the board shall be transferred to the office of
professional licensure and certification established in RSA 310-A:1
through RSA 310-A:1-e.

**Source.** 1992, 207:1. 2009, 21:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2010. 2015, 276:58,
eff. July 1, 2015.
