---
title: 'CHAPTER 328-F ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONALS'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 328-F
                                             
ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONALS
---------------------------

### Section 328-F:1

 **328-F:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to regulate
allied health professionals in the state to assure that the services
provided are effective and of a quality consistent with the standard of
care within each profession, and to safeguard the public against harm
which may be caused by unqualified, impaired, or unlicensed
practitioners.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 328-F:2

 **328-F:2 Definitions. –**
                                             
 I. "Board of directors'' means the chairpersons or their appointees
of all the governing boards which shall be responsible for the
administrative operation of the office of licensed allied health
professionals.
                                             
 II. "Governing boards'' means individual licensing boards of
athletic trainers, occupational therapy assistants, occupational
therapists, recreational therapists, physical therapists, physical
therapist assistants, respiratory care practitioners, speech-language
pathologists, and genetic counselors.
                                             
 III. "Occupational therapy'' means "occupational therapy'' as
defined in RSA 326-C:1, III.
                                             
 IV. "Office of licensed allied health professionals'' means an
agency of multiple governing boards in professions of the allied health
field.
                                             
 V. "Physical therapy'' or "physiotherapy'' means "physical therapy''
or "physiotherapy'' as defined in RSA 328-A:2, IX.
                                             
 VI. "Athletic training'' means "athletic training'' as defined in
RSA 326-G:1, III.
                                             
 VII. "Respiratory care'' means "respiratory care'' as defined in RSA
326-E:1, X.
                                             
 VIII. "Speech-language pathology'' means "speech-language
pathology'' as defined in RSA 326-F:1, IV.
                                             
 IX. "Recreational therapy'' means "recreational therapy'' as defined
in RSA 326-J:1, III.
                                             
 X. "Genetic counseling'' means genetic counseling as defined in RSA
326-K:1.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2002, 237:2; 275:3. 2003, 310:37. 2006, 220:2,
3, eff. July 1, 2007. 2013, 271:2, 3, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 328-F:3

 **328-F:3 Governing Boards Established; Board of Directors; Office
of Licensed Allied Health Professionals. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be established governing boards of athletic trainers,
occupational therapists, recreational therapists, respiratory care
practitioners, physical therapists, speech-language pathologists, and
genetic counselors.
                                             
 II. The governing boards' chairpersons or their appointees shall
make up the board of directors of the office of licensed allied health
professionals. The board of directors shall contract for the services of
investigators and legal counsel retained through the office of
professional licensure and certification. The board of directors shall
have the authority to delegate to the person in the supervisory position
matters of administrative and personnel management.
                                             
 III. There shall be an office of licensed allied health
professionals established in Concord within the office of professional
licensure and certification.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2001, 158:100. 2003, 310:38. 2006, 220:4. 2010,
118:12, eff. July 1, 2010. 2013, 271:4, eff. July 1, 2013. 2015, 276:66,
eff. July 1, 2015.

Governing Boards
----------------

### Section 328-F:4

 **328-F:4 Governing Boards; Memberships; Appointments. –**
                                             
 I. Each governing board shall be composed of 5 persons, each to be
appointed by the governor with the approval of the council, to a term of
3 years. Members shall serve until the expiration of the term for which
they have been appointed or until their successors have been appointed
and qualified. No board member shall be appointed to more than 2
consecutive terms. Any professional members of all governing boards
shall maintain current and unrestricted New Hampshire licenses.
                                             
 II. The initial appointees to the governing boards shall serve as
follows: one initial appointee who is a licensed professional shall
serve a term of one year, one initial appointee who is a licensed
professional shall serve a term of 2 years, one initial public member
shall serve a term of 2 years, and the remaining 2 initial appointees
shall serve terms of 3 years. An initial appointment of less than 3
years shall not be considered a full term.
                                             
 III. Each public member of a governing board shall be a person who
is not, and never was a member of the applicable allied health
profession or the spouse of any such person, and who does not have, and
never has had a material financial interest in either the provision of
that allied health service, a health insurance company, or health
maintenance organization, including representation of the board or
profession for a fee at any time during the 5 years preceding
appointment.
                                             
 IV. The athletic trainers governing board shall consist of 3
licensed athletic trainers, who have actively engaged in the practice of
athletic training in this state for at least 3 years, one physician
educated in the current practice of sports medicine, and one public
member.
                                             
 V. The occupational therapy governing board shall consist of 3
licensed occupational therapists and one occupational therapy assistant,
who have actively engaged in the practice of occupational therapy in
this state for at least 3 years, and one public member.
                                             
 VI. The physical therapy governing board shall consist of 2 licensed
physical therapists and one physical therapist assistant, who have
actively engaged in the practice of physical therapy in this state for
at least 3 years, and 2 public members.
                                             
 VII. The respiratory care practitioner governing board shall consist
of 3 licensed respiratory care practitioners, who have actively engaged
in the practice of respiratory care in this state for at least 3 years,
one physician knowledgeable in the practice of respiratory care, and one
public member.
                                             
 VIII. The speech-language pathology governing board shall consist of
4 licensed speech-language pathologists who have actively engaged in the
practice of speech-language pathology in this state for at least 3
years, and one public member. At least one speech-language pathologist
shall be employed in an educational setting and at least one employed in
a clinical setting.
                                             
 IX. The recreational therapy governing board shall consist of 3
licensed recreational therapists, who have actively engaged in the
practice of recreational therapy in this state for at least 3 years, and
2 public members. Notwithstanding the requirements for licensure of
professional members under this section, initial appointment of
professional members by the governor and council shall be qualified
persons practicing recreational therapy in this state. All subsequent
appointments or reappointments shall require licensure.
                                             
 X. The genetic counselors governing board shall consist of 3
licensed genetic counselors, who have actively engaged in the practice
of genetic counseling in this state for at least 2 years, one practicing
physician with experience in working with genetic counselors, and one
public member. Initial appointment of professional members by the
governor and council shall be qualified persons practicing genetic
counseling in this state. All subsequent appointments or reappointments
shall require licensure.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2006, 220:5, eff. July 1, 2007. 2013, 271:5,
eff. July 1, 2013. 2016, 76:1, eff. July 18, 2016.

### Section 328-F:5

 **328-F:5 Duties. –** Each governing board shall have the authority
to:
                                             
 I. Issue initial licenses, conditional initial licenses, license
renewals, conditional license renewals, reinstated licenses and
conditional reinstated licenses to persons who are eligible.
                                             
 II. Investigate licensees and take necessary disciplinary action
against them.
                                             
 III. Report final disciplinary actions to appropriate national
databases.
                                             
 IV. Take legal action against unauthorized practice in accordance
with this chapter.
                                             
 V. Investigate and prepare reports on any matter within its scope of
authority under this chapter and the board's practice act.
                                             
 VI. Adopt rules as authorized in this chapter and the board's
practice act.
                                             
 VII. Carry out the responsibilities set forth in the board's
practice act.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:39, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 328-F:6

 **328-F:6 Compensation; Expenses. –** Members of the governing
boards shall receive 
                                             $50 per day for meetings, and shall be reimbursed
for travel expenses incurred in connection with the work of the board.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 328-F:7

 **328-F:7 Removal of Members; Vacancies. –** The governor and
council may remove any member of the governing boards for misconduct,
incompetence, neglect of duty, or other sufficient cause after the
member has been given a written statement of the charges and an
opportunity to be heard regarding such charges. Any vacancy in the
membership of the board shall be promptly filled for the unexpired term.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 328-F:8

 **328-F:8 Organization and Meeting. –** Each governing board shall
meet monthly, or more often as its business requires. A majority of each
governing board shall constitute a quorum.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:40, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 328-F:9

 **328-F:9 Records of the Boards. –** A true record of all of each
board's official acts shall be made and preserved. The records shall be
public and shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times, except
for records compiled in connection with disciplinary investigations and
records otherwise exempt from disclosure under RSA 91-A or other
applicable statutes.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:41, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 328-F:10

 **328-F:10 Records of Licensees and Disciplinary History. –**
                                             
 I. Each governing board shall maintain a list of living or deceased
persons who have ever been licensed to practice. The list shall show the
licensee's last known place of employment, last known place of
residence, the number of the license, and the most recent date of
issuance, renewal, or reinstatement. No information on the list shall be
transferred to another entity for commercial use without the permission
of the person to whom the information applies.
                                             
 II. Each governing board shall maintain a list of persons against
whom the board has taken any disciplinary action. This list shall
include the name of the person, the reason for the disciplinary action,
the date of the disciplinary action, and the nature of the disciplinary
action.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:42, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 328-F:11

 **328-F:11 Rulemaking by the Governing Boards. –**
                                             
 I. The governing boards shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A
establishing:
                                             
 (a) The eligibility requirements for initial licensure.
                                             
 (b) The eligibility requirements for license renewal, including
any continuing competency requirements and any requirements for
education, clinical experience, and training.
                                             
 (c) If the governing boards issue conditional licenses, renewals,
or reinstatements after lapse of license or suspension, the
circumstances under which they are issued and the standards for the
imposition of the conditions.
                                             
 (d) The application procedures and eligibility requirements,
including any continuing competency requirements, for the reinstatement
of licenses suspended for disciplinary reasons.
                                             
 (e) The application procedures and eligibility requirements,
including any continuing competency requirements, for the reinstatement
of lapsed licenses.
                                             
 (f) The design and content of application forms, which forms may
require a notarized affidavit that the information provided in the
application is complete and accurate.
                                             
 (g) Application procedures.
                                             
 (h) The allocation of disciplinary sanctions in cases of
misconduct by licensees.
                                             
 II. The governing boards may adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A that
specify, for their respective professions:
                                             
 (a) The scope of practice.
                                             
 (b) The ethical standards.
                                             
 (c) The eligibility requirements and procedures for the issuance
of licenses to applicants currently licensed in foreign countries and
territories and in the territories of the United States.
                                             
 (d) What constitutes, for disciplinary purposes, sexual relations
with and sexual harassment of, a client or patient.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2002, 237:3; 275:4. 2003, 310:43, eff. July 1,
2003.

Board of Directors
------------------

### Section 328-F:12

 **328-F:12 Responsibilities of the Board of Directors. –**
                                             
 I. Annually, the office of professional licensure and certification
shall submit to the governor a report of the transactions of the
preceding year and a complete statement of the receipts and expenditures
of the boards.
                                             
 II. The board of directors shall meet at least quarterly and more
often if needed.
                                             
 III. The board of directors shall provide a forum for practice
issues arising in the allied health professions, but shall not set
policy for the governing boards.
                                             
 IV. The office of professional licensure and certification shall
receive and account for all moneys taken in by the governing boards
pursuant to their respective practice acts, and shall pay such moneys to
the state treasurer to be deposited into the general fund.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:44-46, eff. July 1, 2003. 2015,
276:67, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 328-F:13

 **328-F:13 Board of Directors; Rulemaking Authority. –** The board
of directors shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, establishing:
                                             
 I. Procedures for the voluntary surrender of licenses issued by the
governing boards.
                                             
 II. Procedures for the receipt of misconduct complaints and the
conduct of disciplinary proceedings.
                                             
 III. Fees authorized by this chapter.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:47, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 328-F:14

 **328-F:14 Receipts and Disbursements. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2003, 310:65,
VIII, eff. July 1, 2003.
                                             ]

### Section 328-F:15

 **328-F:15 Fees. –**
                                             
 I. The board of directors shall establish fees for:
                                             
 (a) The processing of applications for initial licensure.
                                             
 (b) Initial licenses.
                                             
 (c) Renewal of licenses.
                                             
 (d) Late filing of applications for license renewal.
                                             
 (e) Reinstatement of licenses after lapse.
                                             
 (f) Transcribing and transferring records.
                                             
 (g) The costs of a hearing by any governing board at which the
issue is denial of, or imposition of conditions on, an initial license,
including the per diem and mileage of board members attending the
hearing and the cost of a shorthand court reporter if one is used to
record the hearing.
                                             
 (h) Initial certification, certification renewal, and
certification reinstatement of speech-language assistants, as defined in
RSA 326-F:1, II-a.
                                             
 II. Such fees shall be sufficient to produce estimated revenues
equal to 125 percent of the direct operating expenses for the board of
directors and the governing boards for the previous fiscal year.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:48. 2006, 268:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

Licensing Provisions
--------------------

### Section 328-F:16

 **328-F:16 Interim License. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2003, 310:65, IX, eff.
July 1, 2003.
                                             ]

### Section 328-F:17

 **328-F:17 Applicants From Other States. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2003,
310:65, X, eff. July 1, 2003.
                                             ]

### Section 328-F:18

 **328-F:18 Allied Health Professionals; Issuance of Licenses;
Conditional Licenses. –**
                                             
 I. Each governing board shall issue initial licenses and license
renewals to applicants who have completed the required application
procedures and have met the eligibility requirements established by the
practice act and the rules of the governing board. If a governing board
is authorized by its practice act to issue provisional licenses, it
shall issue such licenses to applicants who have completed the required
application procedures and have met the eligibility requirements for
provisional licensure established by the practice act and the rules of
the governing board.
                                             
 II. The governing boards shall take no action on an application for
any type of license, or reinstate any lapsed or suspended license, until
the applicant has completed the application procedures required by the
practice acts and the rules of the governing boards.
                                             
 III. To insure the competency of licensees, the governing boards are
authorized to issue initial licenses, license renewals, and
reinstatements of licensure after lapse or suspension for disciplinary
reasons that are conditional in nature. Such conditional licenses may
include the following conditions on the licensee's authorization to
practice:
                                             
 (a) A limit on the duration of the license.
                                             
 (b) A requirement that specified education, clinical experience,
or training is completed by the licensee before removal of the
condition.
                                             
 (c) A requirement that the conditional licensee be supervised in
his or her practice.
                                             
 (d) A limitation on the scope of the practice of the conditional
licensee.
                                             
 IV. Initial licenses, including conditional licenses that are the
first license issued to the individual, and provisional licenses shall
be:
                                             
 (a) Signed and dated by the chairperson of the governing board
issuing them.
                                             
 (b) Numbered consecutively and recorded.
                                             
 V. Nothing in this chapter or in the practice acts of the governing
boards shall be construed to restrict persons licensed under any other
law of this state from engaging in a profession or practice for which
they are licensed.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:49, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 328-F:19

 **328-F:19 Renewal. –**
                                             
 I. Initial licenses and renewals shall be valid for 2 years, except
that timely and complete application for license renewal by eligible
applicants shall continue the validity of the licenses being renewed
until the governing board has acted on the renewal application. Licenses
issued pursuant to RSA 328-A, RSA 326-G, and RSA 326-J shall expire in
even-numbered years and licenses issued pursuant to RSA 326-C, RSA
326-E, RSA 326-F, and RSA 326-K shall expire in odd-numbered years.
                                             
 II. Each governing board shall renew the licenses of applicants who
meet the eligibility requirements and complete the application
procedure.
                                             
 III. Applicants shall submit completed applications for renewal on
or before December 1 of the renewal year. Completed renewal applications
submitted between December 2 and December 31 of the renewal year shall
be accompanied by a late filing fee. Licenses shall lapse when completed
renewal applications have not been filed by December 31 of the renewal
year, and their holders are not authorized to practice until the
licenses have been reinstated.
                                             
 IV. The governing boards shall provide licensees, on or before
November 1 of their renewal years, with materials needed to complete
their renewal applications, but failure of any licensees to receive
these materials shall not relieve them of the obligation to comply with
the rules of the governing boards and this section. Timeliness of
submission of renewal applications shall be evidenced by postmark or,
for applications delivered by hand, by date stamp or other record made
at the time of delivery.
                                             
 V. Upon the request of a licensee who is a member of any reserve
component of the armed forces of the United States or the national guard
and is called to active duty, the governing board shall place the
person's license on inactive status. The license may be reactivated
within one year of the licensee's release from active status by payment
of the renewal fee and with proof of completion of the most current
continuing education requirement unless still within the renewal period.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:50. 2006, 220:6. 2009, 192:1, eff.
Sept. 11, 2009. 2013, 271:6, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 328-F:20

 **328-F:20 Reinstatement of Lapsed Licenses. –** Each governing
board shall reinstate a license which has lapsed as a result of the
failure of the applicant to qualify for license renewal or to submit the
renewal application on time if the applicant:
                                             
 I. Meets eligibility requirements for renewal.
                                             
 II. Meets the reinstatement requirements and any continuing
competency requirements established by the governing board.
                                             
 III. Complies with any application procedure established by the
governing board.
                                             
 IV. Pays the reinstatement fee.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:51, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 328-F:21

 **328-F:21 Administrative Obligations of Licensees. –**
                                             
 I. Licensees shall maintain their current business and home
addresses on file with their governing boards. Any changes in address
shall be provided to the office no later than 30 days from the date of
the change.
                                             
 II. Licensees shall notify their governing boards if licenses or
other proof of licensure are lost or stolen.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:52, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 328-F:22

 **328-F:22 Reinstatement. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2003, 310:65, XI, eff. July
1, 2003.
                                             ]

Disciplinary Action; Hearings
-----------------------------

### Section 328-F:23

 **328-F:23 Disciplinary Action. –**
                                             
 I. Each governing board is authorized to undertake investigations
and disciplinary proceedings upon:
                                             
 (a) The board's initiative.
                                             
 (b) A written complaint made by any person complaining that a
licensee has committed an act of misconduct and specifying the nature of
the misconduct.
                                             
 (c) A written complaint made by any person that a licensee or any
other person is engaged in unauthorized practice.
                                             
 (d) Notification by a licensing or certifying agency of this
state that a licensee has been disciplined by that agency.
                                             
 (e) Notification by the regulatory authority of another domestic
or foreign jurisdiction that a licensee has been disciplined in that
jurisdiction.
                                             
 (f) A report made pursuant to the obligation to report imposed by
this chapter.
                                             
 II. Misconduct sufficient to support disciplinary proceedings shall
include:
                                             
 (a) Knowingly or negligently providing inaccurate material
information to the board or failing to provide complete and truthful
material information upon inquiry by the board, including during the
process of applying for a license, license renewal, and license
reinstatement.
                                             
 (b) Any criminal conviction in any jurisdiction, excluding
traffic violations, or failure to report such conviction within 30
days.
                                             
 (c) Violation of the ethical standards adopted by the governing
board.
                                             
 (d) Sexual relations with, or sexual harassment of, a client or
patient.
                                             
 (e) Failure to provide care with reasonable skill, safety and
regard for client or patient rights, whether or not the client or
patient has suffered injury.
                                             
 (f) Actual or potential inability to render care with reasonable
skill and safety by reason of illness, by reason of use of alcohol or
drugs or any other material, or by reason of mental or physical
condition.
                                             
 (g) Disciplinary action by a regulatory authority in another
domestic or foreign jurisdiction.
                                             
 (h) Failure to take appropriate action to safeguard individuals
from incompetent counselors and health care practitioners, whether or
not they are licensed in this state.
                                             
 (i) Practice without a currently valid license.
                                             
 (j) Violation of any provision of this chapter, of any governing
board's practice act or rule adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A, or of any
state or federal law reasonably related to the licensee's authority to
practice or ability to practice safely.
                                             
 III. Each governing board is authorized to impose sanctions upon a
finding of misconduct resulting from disciplinary proceedings or the
agreement of the licensee that he or she has engaged in specified
misconduct.
                                             
 IV. Sanctions may include:
                                             
 (a) License revocation.
                                             
 (b) License suspension for a specified period of time.
                                             
 (c) License suspension conditioned on the achievement of
specified continuing competency requirements or continuing education,
clinical experience or training.
                                             
 (d) License suspension conditioned on successful participation in
specified mental or physical health treatment, a rehabilitative program,
counseling, a professional assistance program or in any other program
designed to overcome the deficiency or condition in the licensee which
appears to have caused the misconduct.
                                             
 (e) A requirement that the licensee's practice be supervised for
a specified period of time by a licensee practicing the same allied
health profession.
                                             
 (f) The imposition of an administrative fine not to exceed

                                             $1,000 for:
                                             
 (1) An act of misconduct by a licensee.
                                             
 (2) The practice of an allied health profession by a person
who was once licensed to practice such profession but does not currently
hold a valid license or who is practicing in violation of the conditions
upon which he or she is licensed.
                                             
 (g) The imposition of an administrative fine for continuation of
an activity specified in subparagraph (f) in the amount of 
                                             $100 for
each day the activity continues after notice from the board that the
activity shall cease.
                                             
 V. Each governing board is authorized to deny an application for
license renewal or reinstatement as an additional sanction.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:53, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 328-F:24

 **328-F:24 Investigations and Disciplinary Proceedings. –**
                                             
 I. Governing boards may investigate allegations of misconduct by
licensees, whether the allegations appear in a written complaint or come
to the attention of the board in another way. The form taken by an
investigation is a matter within the discretion of the board, which may
conduct an investigation on an ex parte basis.
                                             
 II. Unless used in disciplinary proceedings or disclosed to law
enforcement or health licensing agencies in this state or any other
jurisdiction or in accordance with specific statutory requirements or
court orders, the following information obtained during investigations
shall be held confidential and shall be exempt from the disclosure
requirements of RSA 91-A:
                                             
 (a) Complaints received by the board.
                                             
 (b) Information and records acquired by the board during its
investigation.
                                             
 (c) Reports and records made by the board as a result of its
investigation.
                                             
 (d) Patient or client records, including clinical records, files,
oral and written reports relating to diagnostic findings or treatment of
licensees' patients or clients and oral and written information from
which the identity of licensees' patients or clients or their families
can be derived.
                                             
 III. Governing boards are authorized to conduct disciplinary
proceedings in accordance with procedural rules adopted by the board of
directors.
                                             
 IV. For the purpose of carrying out investigations and disciplinary
proceedings, each governing board is authorized to:
                                             
 (a) Retain qualified experts who are not members of the governing
board through the office of professional licensure and certification.
                                             
 (b) Retain legal counsel when authorized to do so by the attorney
general through the office of professional licensure and certification.
                                             
 (c) Issue subpoenas for persons, relevant documents and relevant
things in accordance with the following conditions:
                                             
 (1) Subpoenas for persons shall not require compliance in less
than 48 hours after receipt of service.
                                             
 (2) Subpoenas for documents and things shall not require
compliance in fewer than 15 days after receipt of service.
                                             
 (3) Service shall be made on licensees by certified mail to
the address on file with the board or by hand and shall not entitle them
to witness or mileage fees.
                                             
 (4) Service shall be made on persons who are not licensees in
accordance with the procedures and fee schedules of the superior court,
and the subpoenas served on them shall be annotated "Fees Guaranteed by
the New Hampshire Office of Allied Health Professionals.''
                                             
 V. The governing board may dismiss allegations of misconduct if the
investigation shows the allegations to be without basis in fact or law.
                                             
 VI. At any time before or during disciplinary proceedings,
complaints and issues may be disposed of by written settlement agreement
signed by the board and the licensees involved, provided that any
complainant shall have the opportunity, before the settlement agreement
has been executed, to comment on the terms of the proposed settlement.
                                             
 VII. Disciplinary proceedings shall be open to the public. Final
board actions having the effect of terminating disciplinary proceedings,
whether taken before, during or after the completion of the proceedings,
shall be set forth in a written record which shall be available to the
public after service upon the licensees involved.
                                             
 VIII. In carrying out disciplinary proceedings, each governing board
shall have the authority to:
                                             
 (a) Hold pre-hearing conferences exempt from the provisions of
RSA 91-A.
                                             
 (b) Appoint a board member or other qualified person as presiding
officer.
                                             
 (c) Administer, and authorize an appointed presiding officer to
administer, oaths and affirmations.
                                             
 (d) Dismiss the proceedings in a written order of dismissal on
the basis of:
                                             
 (1) A finding that there are no significant allegations of
misconduct or unauthorized practice.
                                             
 (2) A finding based on undisputed material facts that the
licensees involved did not engage in misconduct or unauthorized
practice.
                                             
 (3) A written settlement agreement signed by the board and the
licensees involved.
                                             
 IX. The governing boards shall have no obligation or authority to
appoint or pay the fees of attorneys representing licensees during
investigations or disciplinary proceedings.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1; 287:63. 2003, 310:54, eff. July 1, 2003. 2012,
33:2, eff. July 1, 2012. 2015, 276:68, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 328-F:25

 **328-F:25 Obligation to Report; Immunities. –**
                                             
 I. Persons and entities regulated by the state, including but not
limited to, licensees, insurance companies, health care organizations,
and health care facilities shall report to the board of directors and
the appropriate governing board any criminal conviction of a licensee or
any determination by a regulatory agency indicating that a licensee has
violated this chapter or the practice act of the licensee's governing
board. Persons and entities so reporting shall be immune from civil
liability if the report is made in good faith.
                                             
 II. Every individual, agency, facility, institution or organization
regulated by the state and employing licensed allied health
professionals within the state shall report to the appropriate governing
board within 30 days any act by a licensee that appears to constitute
misconduct. Persons and entities so reporting shall be immune from civil
liability if the report is made in good faith.
                                             
 III. An administrative fine of 
                                             $500 shall be imposed on any person
or entity failing to make a report required by this section.
                                             
 IV. Persons submitting to any governing board a complaint of
misconduct by its licensee shall be immune from civil liability if the
complaint is made in good faith.
                                             
 V. Persons or entities testifying or providing information or
documents to a governing board in connection with an investigation or
disciplinary proceeding carried out by the board shall be immune from
civil liability if their testimony or actions are made in good faith.
                                             
 VI. The governing boards shall not disclose the identity of persons
or entities that provide information pursuant to this section unless
their identities are revealed in the course of disciplinary proceedings
or are required to be disclosed by a court of law.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:55, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 328-F:26

 **328-F:26 Temporary Suspension Where Imminent Threat. –** In cases
involving imminent danger to life or health, the governing boards may
order suspension of a license pending hearing for a period of no more
than 10 working days, unless the licensee agrees in writing to a longer
period. In such cases, the board shall comply with RSA 541-A:30.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:56, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 328-F:27

 **328-F:27 Unauthorized Practice. –**
                                             
 I. Nothing in this chapter or the practice acts of the governing
boards shall be construed to restrict persons licensed under any other
laws of this state from engaging in the practice or profession for which
they are licensed.
                                             
 II. Practice of an allied health profession by any person who is
not, and was never, licensed to practice such profession shall
constitute unauthorized practice. A business which holds itself out,
through advertising or in any other way, as providing an allied health
service but does not have available to supervise its services an allied
health professional licensed to provide the services which the business
purports to offer, is engaged in unauthorized practice.
                                             
 III. Unauthorized practice is punishable as a class A misdemeanor by
an individual, and as a felony by an entity.
                                             
 IV. Each governing board is authorized to issue a cease and desist
order against any person or entity engaged in unauthorized practice. The
cease and desist order shall be enforceable in superior court.
                                             
 V. The attorney general, the governing board of the allied health
practice affected or the prosecuting attorney of any county or
municipality where the act of unauthorized practice takes place may
maintain an action to enjoin any person or entity from continuing to do
acts of unauthorized practice. The action to enjoin shall not replace
any other civil, criminal or regulatory remedy. An injunction without
bond is available to the governing board of the allied health practice
affected.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:57. 2006, 76:16, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 328-F:28

 **328-F:28 Privileged Communications. –** The confidential
communications between allied health licensees and their clients or
patients are placed on the same legal basis as those between physician
and patient, and, except as otherwise provided by law, no allied health
licensee shall be required to disclose such privileged communications.
Confidential communications between a patient or client and any person
working under the supervision of such licensee that are customary and
necessary for diagnosis and treatment are privileged to the same extent
as though those communications were with the supervising licensee. This
section shall not apply to investigations and hearings conducted by the
governing boards or by any other agency regulating health professions in
the state.

**Source.** 1997, 287:1. 2003, 310:58, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 328-F:29

 **328-F:29 Revocation and Voluntary Surrender of Licenses. –**
                                             
 I. No license, conditional license, provisional license, renewed
license, or reinstated license that has been revoked by the governing
board of issuance shall be reinstated or reissued at any time.
                                             
 II. The practice of an allied health profession by a person whose
license, conditional license, provisional license, renewed license, or
reinstated license has been revoked constitutes unauthorized practice.
                                             
 III. No license, conditional license, provisional license, renewed
license, or reinstated license shall be surrendered by the licensee
unless the governing board issuing the license accepts its surrender in
writing. The governing board may refuse to accept its surrender while
the board is investigating possible misconduct by the licensee or
disciplinary proceedings involving the licensee are pending.

**Source.** 2003, 310:59, eff. July 1, 2003.
