---
title: 'CHAPTER 328-G ACUPUNCTURE'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 328-G
                                             
ACUPUNCTURE
--------------

### Section 328-G:1

 **328-G:1 Findings and Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. The general court finds that a significant number of New
Hampshire residents choose acupuncture and oriental medicine to be part
of their health care needs and declares that acupuncture and oriental
medicine form a distinct health care profession that affects the public
health, safety, and welfare and provides freedom of choice in health
care.
                                             
 II. The purpose of this chapter is:
                                             
 (a) To provide standards for the licensing and regulation of
acupuncturists in order to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare.
                                             
 (b) To ensure that acupuncture and oriental medical therapies
practiced by qualified persons are available to the people of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 (c) To provide a means of identifying qualified acupuncturists.

**Source.** 1997, 251:1, eff. July 1, 1997.

### Section 328-G:2

 **328-G:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Acupuncture'' means primarily the insertion of needles through
the skin at certain points on the body, with or without the application
of electric current and/or heat, for the purpose of promoting health and
balance as defined by the principles of oriental medicine.
                                             
 II. "Acupuncturist'' means a person licensed to practice acupuncture
as defined in this chapter, and whose license is in good standing.
                                             
 III. "Board'' means the board of acupuncture licensing established
under RSA 328-G:3.
                                             
 IV. "Cupping'' means a therapeutic method of oriental medicine that
utilizes a partial vacuum created in a glass dome or cup that is then
applied to a particular area of the body.
                                             
 V. "Moxibustion'' means the thermal stimulation of acupuncture
points or specific body areas by utilizing the burning of the dried form
of the herb, Artemisia Vulgaris; the heat may be applied on or above
specific points or areas or on the acupuncture needle itself.
                                             
 VI. "ACAOM'' means the Accreditation Commission for Acupuncture and
Oriental Medicine.
                                             
 VII. "NCCAOM'' means the National Certification Commission for
Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine.
                                             
 VIII. "Oriental medicine'' means the distinct system of health care
that diagnoses and treats illness, injury, pain, or other conditions by
controlling and regulating the flow and balance of energy to restore and
maintain health.

**Source.** 1997, 251:1. 2000, 181:1, eff. July 25, 2000.

### Section 328-G:3

 **328-G:3 Board Established. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a board of acupuncture licensing consisting of the
following members:
                                             
 (a) Four acupuncturists, appointed by the governor with the
advice and consent of the council, who shall:
                                             
 (1) Be NCCAOM certified and hold a current, valid license to
practice acupuncture in another state in which licensure requirements
are substantially equivalent to, or higher than, those of this state, in
the case of the initial board appointees, and a current, valid license
to practice under this chapter, in the case of subsequent board
appointees.
                                             
 (2) Have been residents of this state for at least one year
immediately preceding such appointment.
                                             
 (b) One public member, appointed by the governor with the advice
and consent of the council, who shall:
                                             
 (1) Be of legal age of majority.
                                             
 (2) Be a resident of this state for 3 years immediately
preceding such appointment.
                                             
 (3) Not be, nor ever have been, a member of the acupuncture
profession nor have or have had a material, financial interest in either
the provision of acupuncture services or an activity directly related to
acupuncture, including the representation of the board or profession for
a fee at any time during the 5 years preceding appointment.
                                             
 II. The initial board members shall be appointed within 6 months of
July 1, 1997. The initial chairperson shall be elected from among the
board members no later than the second meeting of the board.
                                             
 III. The terms of office shall be 3 years for all board members. The
initial board appointees shall consist of one acupuncturist for a term
of 3 years, one acupuncturist for a term of 2 years, 2 acupuncturists
for a term of one year each, and one public member for a term of 3
years. A member may be removed from office by the governor and council
for malfeasance, misfeasance, or dishonorable conduct.
                                             
 IV. There shall be no monetary liability on the part of, and no
cause of action shall arise against, the members of the board, or
personnel of the board, for any act done or proceeding undertaken or
performed in good faith and in furtherance of the purposes of this
chapter.

**Source.** 1997, 251:1. 1998, 145:1-4. 2000, 181:2, eff. July 25, 2000.

### Section 328-G:4

 **328-G:4 Administrative Attachment. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2015, 276:108,
XXVI, eff. July 1, 2015.
                                             ]

### Section 328-G:5

 **328-G:5 Reimbursement; Travel. –** The board shall serve without
pay except that each member of the board shall be reimbursed for mileage
at the state employee rate for travel to and from meetings of the board
and for other travel necessary to fulfill duties of the board.

**Source.** 1997, 251:1. 1998, 145:5, eff. Aug. 7, 1998.

### Section 328-G:6

 **328-G:6 Organization and Meetings. –** The board shall hold
regular meetings at least semi-annually and shall give notice to its
members of the time and place for holding all regular and special
meetings. A quorum of the board shall consist of not less than 3
members. The board shall biennially elect a chairperson, a
vice-chairperson, and a secretary from among its members.

**Source.** 1997, 251:1, eff. July 1, 1997.

### Section 328-G:7

 **328-G:7 Rulemaking Authority. –** The board shall adopt rules,
under RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Procedures and forms for application for an acupuncture license.
                                             
 II. Scope of practice and fees for applications.
                                             
 III. Procedures for license renewal, including continuing education
requirements, testing, peer review, or other appropriate procedures, and
methods to ensure compliance with such requirements.
                                             
 IV. Maintaining a register of licensed acupuncturists practicing in
the state.
                                             
 V. Establishing and enforcing ethical and professional standards to
be met by each licensee including, as necessary, requirements for
proficiency in specialty practice.
                                             
 VI. Maintaining a register of approved acupuncture schools.
                                             
 VII. Procedures for hearings for disciplinary action under RSA
328-G:12.
                                             
 VIII. The definition of acupuncture consistent with RSA 328-G:2, I.
                                             
 IX. Methods for ensuring appropriate display of licenses, including,
but not limited to, signs and other forms of advertising.
                                             
 X. A student practicing acupuncture under the direct supervision of
a licensed acupuncturist as part of a course of study approved by the
board.
                                             
 XI. Temporary licensure of a visiting acupuncture teacher.
                                             
 XII. Establishing a schedule of administrative fines.
                                             
 XIII. Requirements relative to student observers and office
assistants.

**Source.** 1997, 251:1. 2000, 181:3, eff. July 25, 2000. 2012, 171:19,
eff. Aug. 10, 2012. 2014, 167:1, eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 328-G:8

 **328-G:8 Disposition of Receipts. –** All moneys received by the
board under this chapter shall be deposited with the state treasurer
through the office of professional licensure and certification.

**Source.** 1997, 251:1. 2000, 181:4, eff. July 25, 2000. 2015, 276:99,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 328-G:9

 **328-G:9 Licensure Required; Renewal; Reissuance; Continuing
Education. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall practice acupuncture within this state without
first obtaining a license from the board except physicians licensed
under RSA 329 and doctors of naturopathic medicine certified under RSA
328-E:12.
                                             
 II. The board shall issue a license to any applicant who satisfies
all of the following requirements:
                                             
 (a) Is 21 years of age or older.
                                             
 (b) Has current, active NCCAOM certification through examination
or Credentials Documentation Review.
                                             
 (c) Has successfully completed an NCCAOM approved Clean Needle
Technique Course.
                                             
 (d) Has paid the 
                                             $110 license fee and filed the application
established by the board.
                                             
 (e) Is of good moral character.
                                             
 (f) Has earned a baccalaureate, registered nurse, or physician's
assistant degree from an accredited institution. An applicant who
possesses a current, valid license to practice acupuncture from another
state who meets all other requirements of licensure may have this
requirement waived at the discretion of the board.
                                             
 (g) Has successfully completed a post-secondary acupuncture
college program which is ACAOM or board approved. For one year from the
date on which the first license is issued this requirement will be
waived for an applicant who possesses a current, valid license to
practice acupuncture in another state, provided that the applicant meets
the other requirements of this chapter. After one year from the date on
which the first license is issued, this requirement may only be waived
at the discretion of the board. The board of acupuncture licensing will
review on a case by case basis valid apprenticeship programs that
demonstrate a balanced approach of clinical training and fundamental
sciences and that conform to NCCAOM standards. In addition, all
applicants who have not graduated from an accredited acupuncture school
must show proof of successful completion of a college level course in
anatomy and physiology.
                                             
 III. Only a person licensed under this chapter or a physician
licensed under RSA 329 or a doctor of naturopathic medicine certified
under RSA 328-E:12, shall hold out to members of the public that such
person is practicing acupuncture, or use a title or description which
suggests such, including any of the following:
                                             
 (a) C.A. or Certified Acupuncturist.
                                             
 (b) Acupuncturist.
                                             
 (c) M.D., C.A. or M.D., Certified Acupuncturist.
                                             
 (d) Any other letters or words denoting that the person practices
acupuncture.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding paragraph III, the title, "Licensed
Acupuncturist'', and its abbreviations, "L.Ac.'' or "Lic. Ac.'', shall
be used only by persons licensed under this chapter.
                                             
 V. Whoever, not being licensed or exempted as provided in this
chapter, shall advertise oneself or in any way hold oneself out as
qualified to practice acupuncture, or shall practice acupuncture, or
whoever does so after receiving notice that one's license has been
revoked, and whoever, being licensed as provided in this chapter, shall
advertise or call oneself or allow oneself to be advertised or called a
physician or a doctor in such a way as to imply that such credential
relates to the provision of acupuncture services, or use any physician's
or doctor's insignia for such purposes shall be in violation of this
chapter.
                                             
 VI. Persons licensed pursuant to this chapter who engage in the
practice of acupuncture without complying with this chapter shall be
subject to refused renewal, limitation, revocation, or suspension of
their license.
                                             
 VII. Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit, interfere with,
or prevent any other licensed health care professionals from practicing
within the scope of their licenses as defined by each profession's New
Hampshire licensing statutes, but they shall not hold themselves out to
the public or any private group of business by any title or description
of services that includes any of the terms in paragraphs III or IV
unless they are licensed under this chapter, RSA 329, or RSA 328-E:12.
                                             
 VIII. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary,
those health care professionals licensed under RSA 316-A who are
practicing acupuncture as of July 1, 1997 may petition the board for an
exemption to the licensure requirements of this chapter. The board shall
consider the educational qualifications and the clinical experience of
those individuals licensed under RSA 316-A seeking exemption to the
licensure requirements of this chapter.
                                             
 IX. All licenses issued by the board shall be renewed biennially on
or before June 30 or reissued pursuant to rules adopted, and upon
payment of a 
                                             $110 renewal fee.
                                             
 X. As a condition of renewal of license, the board shall require
each licensee to show proof of having completed for each biennial period
30 continuing education units at approved institutions or as approved by
the board. Maintaining continuous NCCAOM certification shall fulfill the
continuing education requirement as long as NCCAOM certification
continues to require at least 30 Professional Development Activity
points for each biennium.

**Source.** 1997, 251:1. 2000, 181:5, 6, 7, eff. July 25, 2000. 2014,
167:2, 3, eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 229:15, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 328-G:10

 **328-G:10 Scope of Practice. –**
                                             
 I. Under this chapter the scope of practice of acupuncture shall
include the allied techniques and modalities of oriental medicine, both
traditional and modern. The scope of practice shall include: diagnostic
procedures; electrical and magnetic stimulation; moxibustion and other
forms of heat therapy; cupping and scraping techniques; dietary,
nutritional, and herbal therapies; lifestyle counseling; accupressure;
and massage.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding paragraph I, the scope of practice may be
further defined by the board in accordance with RSA 541-A.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this section is intended to limit, interfere with,
or prevent any other health care professionals from practicing within
their defined scopes of practice, including professionals licensed under
RSA 316-A using limited adjunctive procedures.
                                             
 IV. Needles used in acupuncture practice shall be sterile,
disposable, one-use needles.

**Source.** 1997, 251:1, eff. July 1, 1997.

### Section 328-G:11

 **328-G:11 Powers and Duties of the Board. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall:
                                             
 (a) Insure that licensed acupuncturists serving the public meet
minimum standards of proficiency and competency to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the public.
                                             
 (b) Administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter, which
pertain to licensees and applicants, and all rules adopted by the board
under the authority granted in this chapter.
                                             
 (c) Maintain an accurate account of all receipts, expenditures,
and refunds granted under this chapter through the office of licensure
and certification.
                                             
 (d) Maintain a record of its acts and proceedings, including the
issuance, refusal, suspension, or revocation of licenses.
                                             
 (e) Maintain a roster of all acupuncturists licensed under this
chapter which indicates:
                                             
 (1) The name of the licensee.
                                             
 (2) Current professional office address.
                                             
 (3) The date of issuance and the number of the licensee's
license.
                                             
 (4) Whether the licensee is in good standing.
                                             
 (f) Keep all applications for licensure as a permanent record.
                                             
 (g) Maintain a permanent record of the results of all
examinations it gives.
                                             
 (h) Keep all examination records including written examination
records and tape recordings of the questions and answers in oral
examinations.
                                             
 (i) Keep the records of the board open to public inspection at
all reasonable times.
                                             
 (j) Adopt and use a seal, the imprint of which, together with the
signatures of the chairperson or vice-chairperson and the
secretary-treasurer of the board, shall evidence its official acts.
                                             
 (k) Annually compile and publish a directory.
                                             
 II. The board may appoint qualified personnel to administer any part
or all of any examinations provided for under this chapter.
                                             
 III. The board shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and
administer oaths in any hearing or disciplinary proceedings, and to
compel, by subpoena duces tecum, the production of papers and records.
                                             
 IV. Witnesses summoned before the board shall be paid the same fees
as witnesses summoned to appear before the superior court, and such
summons shall have the same effect as though issued for appearance
before such court.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1997, 251:1, eff. July 1, 1997. 2015, 276:100, 108, XXVII,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 328-G:12

 **328-G:12 Disciplinary Actions. –**
                                             
 I. The board may undertake disciplinary proceedings:
                                             
 (a) Upon its own initiative; or
                                             
 (b) Upon written complaint of any person which charges that a
person licensed by the board has committed misconduct under paragraph II
and which specifies the grounds for the misconduct.
                                             
 II. Misconduct sufficient to support disciplinary proceedings under
this section shall include:
                                             
 (a) The practice of fraud or deceit in procuring or attempting to
procure a license to practice under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Conviction of any crime which demonstrates unfitness to
practice acupuncture.
                                             
 (c) Violation of the standards adopted under RSA 328-G:7, V.
                                             
 (d) Demonstrable gross incompetence of the licensee.
                                             
 (e) Addiction to the use of alcohol or other habit-forming drugs
to a degree which renders the licensee unfit to practice under this
chapter.
                                             
 (f) A legal finding of mental incompetence.
                                             
 (g) Willful or repeated violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
                                             
 (h) Suspension or revocation without subsequent reinstatement of
a license, similar to one issued under this chapter, in another
jurisdiction.
                                             
 III. (a) The board may take disciplinary action in any one or more
of the following ways:
                                             
 (1) By public or private reprimand.
                                             
 (2) By suspension, limitation, or restriction of license.
                                             
 (3) By revocation of license.
                                             
 (4) By assessing administrative fines in amounts established
by the board which shall not exceed 
                                             $2000 per offense, or in the case
of a continuing offense, 
                                             $250 for each day the violation continues.
                                             
 (b) Disciplinary action taken under this paragraph may be ordered
by the board in a decision made after a hearing in the manner provided
by the rules adopted by the board and reviewed in accordance with RSA
541.
                                             
 (c) No person licensed under this chapter shall continue to
practice acupuncture while the person's license is suspended or revoked.

**Source.** 1997, 251:1, eff. July 1, 1997.

### Section 328-G:13

 **328-G:13 Hearings. –** The board shall take no disciplinary action
without a hearing. At least 14 days prior to hearing, both parties to a
disciplinary proceeding shall be served, either personally or by
registered mail, with a written copy of the complaint filed and notice
of the time and place for hearing. All complaints shall be objectively
received and fairly heard by the board, but no complaint shall be acted
upon unless in writing. A hearing shall be held on all written
complaints received by the board within one year of the date notice of a
complaint was received by the accused, unless otherwise agreed to by the
parties. Written notice of all disciplinary decisions made by the board
shall be given to both parties to the proceeding upon their issuance.

**Source.** 1997, 251:1, eff. July 1, 1997. 2014, 34:14, eff. Jan. 1,
2015.

### Section 328-G:14

 **328-G:14 Penalties. –** It shall be a class A misdemeanor for any
natural person, and a felony if any other person, to violate RSA
328-G:9.

**Source.** 1997, 251:1. 2006, 76:17, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 328-G:15

 **328-G:15 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or
applications, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.

**Source.** 1997, 251:1, eff. July 1, 1997.
