---
title: 'CHAPTER 328-D PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 328-D
                                             
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
--------------------

### Section 328-D:1

 **328-D:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Applicant'' means a physician assistant who has submitted an
application for licensure.
                                             
 II. "Board'' means the board of medicine.
                                             
 III. "Physician assistant'' or "P.A.'' means a person qualified both
by academic and practical training in a program approved by the board to
provide patient services under the supervision and direction of a
licensed physician in a variety of medical care settings.

**Source.** 1989, 290:1. 1995, 286:26, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 328-D:2

 **328-D:2 License Required. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall practice as or hold himself out to be a physician
assistant or use any letters designating himself as a physician
assistant unless he is licensed in accordance with this chapter.
                                             
 II. This section shall not be construed to prohibit students
enrolled in physician assistant training programs approved by the board,
from performing work incidental to their respective courses of study or
supervised clinical work while under the supervision of a physician.
                                             
 III. The board shall license each applicant who satisfies the
requirements under RSA 328-D:3. Upon payment of a license fee, the board
shall issue to such person a license, which shall be prima facie
evidence of the right to practice as a physician assistant. A licensed
physician assistant may use the letters "P.A.'' in connection with his
name to denote his licensure under this chapter.

**Source.** 1989, 290:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 328-D:3

 **328-D:3 Conditions for Licensure. –**
                                             
 I. To apply for licensure by the board as a physician assistant, an
applicant shall file a written application on forms provided by the
board and pay an application fee. The applicant to be licensed shall:
                                             
 (a) Have graduated from a physician assistant training program
approved by the Committee on Allied Health Education and Accreditation
or other board-approved accrediting agency.
                                             
 (b) Have passed a national proficiency examination, as designated
by the board.
                                             
 (c) Maintain current national certification if required by a
national certifying body.
                                             
 (d) Demonstrate that the applicant has good character.
                                             
 (e) Submit a complete set of fingerprints and a notarized
criminal history record release form pursuant to RSA 328-D:3-a.
                                             
 II. The application shall include a statement of good standing from
the licensing authority of all states in which the applicant currently
holds a license.
                                             
 III. Circumstances that exist which would be grounds for
disciplinary action under RSA 328-D:6 may be grounds for denial of a
license.

**Source.** 1989, 290:1. 2004, 198:1, 2. 2007, 303:5, eff. Sept. 11,
2007.

### Section 328-D:3-a

 **328-D:3-a Criminal History Record Checks. –**
                                             
 I. Every applicant for initial permanent licensure or reinstatement
shall submit to the board a notarized criminal history record release
form, as provided by the New Hampshire division of state police, which
authorizes the release of his or her criminal history record, if any, to
the board.
                                             
 II. The applicant shall submit with the release form a complete set
of fingerprints taken by a qualified law enforcement agency or an
authorized employee of the department of safety. In the event that the
first set of fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern, a
second set of fingerprints shall be necessary in order to complete the
criminal history records check. If, after 2 attempts, a set of
fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern, the board may, in
lieu of the criminal history records check, accept police clearances
from every city, town, or county where the person has lived during the
past 5 years.
                                             
 III. The board shall submit the criminal history records release
form and fingerprint form to the division of state police which shall
conduct a criminal history records check through its records and through
the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Upon completion of the records
check, the division of state police shall release copies of the criminal
history records to the board.
                                             
 IV. The board shall review the criminal record information prior to
making a licensing decision and shall maintain the confidentiality of
all criminal history records received pursuant to this section.
                                             
 V. The applicant shall bear the cost of a criminal history record
check.

**Source.** 2007, 303:4, eff. Sept. 11, 2007.

### Section 328-D:4

 **328-D:4 Temporary Licensure. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2004, 198:11, I, eff.
Dec. 31, 2004.
                                             ]

### Section 328-D:5

 **328-D:5 Renewal of Licenses. –** Every person licensed to practice
under this chapter shall apply to the board for annual renewal of
license on forms provided by the board and shall pay a renewal fee as
established by the board. Applications for renewal shall be filed no
later than December 31 of each year and shall include a photocopy of the
applicant's current national certification card. A license issued under
this chapter shall not expire until the board has taken final action
upon the application for renewal.

**Source.** 1989, 290:1. 2004, 198:3, eff. Dec. 31, 2004.

### Section 328-D:5-a

 **328-D:5-a Failure to Renew; Lapse. –**
                                             
 I. Any licensee who fails to apply for renewal under RSA 328-D:5
shall pay double the renewal fee, provided the licensee applies and pays
the renewal fee no later than 90 days after the expiration date. Any
licensee who fails to apply for renewal of his or her license within the
90-day period after expiration, shall have his or her license lapse. A
lapsed license shall be reinstated only upon payment of a reinstatement
fee as established by the board, and upon showing evidence of
professional competence as the board may reasonably require.
                                             
 II. If a license expires or lapses as a result of a licensee being
ordered to active duty with the armed services, the licensee shall have
90 days from the date of discharge or release from the armed service to
apply for renewal and all late fees shall be waived.

**Source.** 2004, 198:4, eff. Dec. 31, 2004.

### Section 328-D:6

 **328-D:6 Grounds for Discipline. –** The board, after hearing, may
take action against any person licensed under this chapter upon finding
that the licensee:
                                             
 I. Has knowingly provided false information on any application for
professional licensure, whether by making any affirmative statement
which was false at the time it was made or by failing to disclose any
fact material to the application.
                                             
 II. Is a habitual user of drugs or intoxicants or is afflicted with
a physical disability, insanity, psychiatric disorders, or other disease
deemed dangerous to the public health.
                                             
 III. Has displayed a pattern of behavior which is incompatible with
the basic knowledge and competence expected of persons in the practice
of his or her profession.
                                             
 IV. Has engaged in dishonest or unprofessional conduct or has been
grossly or repeatedly negligent in practicing his or her profession or
in performing activities ancillary to the practice of his or her
profession or any particular aspect or specialty thereof, or has
intentionally injured a patient while practicing his or her profession
or performing such ancillary activities.
                                             
 V. Has undertaken to practice independent of the referral or
prescription, direction, or supervision of a physician licensed under
RSA 329.
                                             
 VI. Has failed to provide adequate safeguards with regard to aseptic
techniques or radiation techniques.
                                             
 VII. Has included in advertising any statement of a character
tending to deceive or mislead the public or any statement claiming
professional superiority.
                                             
 VIII. Has advertised the use of any drug or medicine of an unknown
formula or any system of anesthetic that is unnamed, misnamed,
misrepresented, or not in reality used.
                                             
 IX. Has willfully or repeatedly violated any provision of this
chapter or any substantive rule of the board.
                                             
 X. Has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United
States or any state.
                                             
 XI. Has failed to maintain adequate medical record documentation on
diagnostic and therapeutic treatment provided or has unreasonably
delayed medical record transfer, or violated RSA 332-I.

**Source.** 1989, 290:1. 2004, 198:5, eff. Dec. 31, 2004.

### Section 328-D:7

 **328-D:7 Disciplinary Action. –** The board, upon making an
affirmative finding under RSA 328-D:6, may take disciplinary action in
any one or more of the following ways:
                                             
 I. Administer a public or private reprimand.
                                             
 II. Revoke, suspend, limit, or otherwise restrict a license.
                                             
 III. Require the physician assistant to submit to the care,
counseling or treatment of a physician, counseling service, health care
facility, professional assistance program, or any combination thereof
which is acceptable to the board.
                                             
 IV. Place the physician assistant on probation.
                                             
 V. Require the physician assistant to participate in a program of
continuing education in the area or areas in which he or she has been
found deficient.
                                             
 VI. Assess administrative fines in amounts established by the board
which shall not exceed 
                                             $3,000 per offense, or, in the case of
continuing offenses, 
                                             $300 for each day that the violation continues,
whichever is greater.

**Source.** 1989, 290:1. 2004, 198:6, eff. Dec. 31, 2004.

### Section 328-D:8

 **328-D:8 Appeals. –** Disciplinary action taken by the board under
RSA 328-D:7 may be appealed to the supreme court under RSA 541.

**Source.** 1989, 290:1. 2004, 198:7, eff. Dec. 31, 2004.

### Section 328-D:9

 **328-D:9 Advisory Committee. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008, 21:6, II, eff.
July 11, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 328-D:10

 **328-D:10 Rulemaking. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 (a) The scope of practice for a licensed physician assistant.
                                             
 (b) Form and content of the application for licensure.
                                             
 (c) Application procedures.
                                             
 (d) Conduct of hearings under RSA 328-D:6.
                                             
 (e) Standards for physician assistant education and training.
                                             
 (f) Supervision of physician assistants.
                                             
 (g) Notification of changes in employment.
                                             
 (h) Definition of supervision.
                                             
 (i) Manner of recordkeeping under RSA 328-D:11.
                                             
 (j) Except as provided in paragraph II, any other matter which is
consistent with the legislative intent of this chapter and which is
necessary to the administration of this chapter.
                                             
 II. The board, in collaboration with the New Hampshire pharmacy
board, shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A relative to the prescriptions
to be issued by a physician assistant.

**Source.** 1989, 290:1. 2008, 21:1, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 328-D:11

 **328-D:11 Recordkeeping. –** The board shall keep a record of its
proceedings under this chapter and a register of all persons licensed
under it. The register shall list the name, last known business address,
and last known residence address of each living licensee, and the date
and number of the license of each licensed physician assistant. The
board shall maintain and publish a list of licensed physician assistants
once a year.

**Source.** 1989, 290:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 328-D:12

 **328-D:12 Physician Liability. –** This chapter shall not be
construed to relieve the responsible physician of professional or legal
responsibility for the care and treatment of his patients.

**Source.** 1989, 290:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 328-D:13

 **328-D:13 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who, not being licensed or otherwise authorized
according to the law of this state, shall advertise oneself or hold
oneself out as a physician assistant, or any person who does such act
after receiving notice that such person's license has been revoked,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. Any person who shall practice or attempt to practice as a
physician assistant in this state without a license shall be guilty of a
class A misdemeanor if a natural person or guilty of a felony if any
other person.

**Source.** 1989, 290:1. 2004, 198:9. 2006, 76:14, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 328-D:14

 **328-D:14 Limitation on Action. –** A person, licensed or
authorized to practice as a physician assistant under this chapter or
under the laws of any other state, who, in good faith, renders emergency
care at the scene of an emergency, shall not be liable for any civil
damages as a result of acts or omissions by such person in rendering
such emergency care, or as a result of any act or failure to act to
provide or arrange for further medical treatment or care, as long as
such person receives no direct compensation for the care from or on
behalf of the person cared for.

**Source.** 2004, 198:10, eff. Dec. 31, 2004.
