---
title: 'CHAPTER 329-C INTERSTATE MEDICAL LICENSURE COMPACT'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 329-C
                                             
INTERSTATE MEDICAL LICENSURE COMPACT
------------------------------------

### Section 329-C:1

 **329-C:1 Purpose. –** In order to strengthen access to health care,
and in recognition of the advances in the delivery of health care, the
member states of the interstate medical licensure compact have allied in
common purpose to develop a comprehensive process that complements the
existing licensing and regulatory authority of state medical boards and
provides a streamlined process that allows physicians to become licensed
in multiple states, thereby enhancing the portability of a medical
license and ensuring the safety of patients. The compact creates another
pathway for licensure and does not otherwise change a state's existing
medical practice act. The compact also adopts the prevailing standard
for licensure and affirms that the practice of medicine occurs where the
patient is located at the time of the physician-patient encounter, and
therefore requires the physician to be under the jurisdiction of the
state medical board where the patient is located. State medical boards
that participate in the compact retain the jurisdiction to impose an
adverse action against a license to practice medicine in that state
issued to a physician through the procedures in the compact.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:2

 **329-C:2 Definitions. –** In this compact:
                                             
 I. "Bylaws'' means those bylaws established by the interstate
commission pursuant to RSA 329-C:11 for its governance, or for directing
and controlling its actions and conduct.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the voting representative appointed by
each member board pursuant to RSA 329-C:11.
                                             
 III. "Conviction'' means a finding by a court that an individual is
guilty of a criminal offense through adjudication or entry of a plea of
guilt or no contest to the charge by the offender. Evidence of an entry
of a conviction of a criminal offense by the court shall be considered
final for purposes of disciplinary action by a member board.
                                             
 IV. "Expedited license'' means a full and unrestricted medical
license granted by a member state to an eligible physician through the
process set forth in the compact.
                                             
 V. "Interstate commission'' means the interstate commission created
pursuant to RSA 329-C:11.
                                             
 VI. "License'' means authorization by a state for a physician to
engage in the practice of medicine, which would be unlawful without the
authorization.
                                             
 VII. "Medical practice act'' means laws and regulations governing
the practice of allopathic and osteopathic medicine within a member
state.
                                             
 VIII. "Member board'' means a state agency in a member state that
acts in the sovereign interests of the state by protecting the public
through licensure, regulation, and education of physicians as directed
by the state government.
                                             
 IX. "Member state'' means a state that has enacted the compact.
                                             
 X. "Practice of medicine'' means the clinical prevention, diagnosis,
or treatment of human disease, injury, or condition requiring a
physician to obtain and maintain a license in compliance with the
medical practice act of a member state.
                                             
 XI. "Physician'' means any person who:
                                             
 (a) Is a graduate of a medical school accredited by the Liaison
Committee on Medical Education, the Commission on Osteopathic College
Accreditation, or a medical school listed in the International Medical
Education Directory or its equivalent;
                                             
 (b) Passed each component of the United States Medical Licensing
Examination (USMLE) or the Comprehensive Osteopathic Medical Licensing
Examination (COMLEX-USA) within 3 attempts, or any of its predecessor
examinations accepted by a state medical board as an equivalent
examination for licensure purposes;
                                             
 (c) Successfully completed graduate medical education approved by
the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education or the American
Osteopathic Association;
                                             
 (d) Holds specialty certification or a time-unlimited specialty
certificate recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties or
the American Osteopathic Association's Bureau of Osteopathic
Specialists;
                                             
 (e) Possesses a full and unrestricted license to engage in the
practice of medicine issued by a member board;
                                             
 (f) Has never been convicted, received adjudication, deferred
adjudication, community supervision, or deferred disposition for any
offense by a court of appropriate jurisdiction;
                                             
 (g) Has never held a license authorizing the practice of medicine
subjected to discipline by a licensing agency in any state, federal, or
foreign jurisdiction, excluding any action related to nonpayment of fees
related to a license;
                                             
 (h) Has never had a controlled substance license or permit
suspended or revoked by a state or the United States Drug Enforcement
Administration; and
                                             
 (i) Is not under active investigation by a licensing agency or
law enforcement authority in any state, federal, or foreign
jurisdiction.
                                             
 XII. "Offense'' means a felony, misdemeanor, or crime of moral
turpitude.
                                             
 XIII. "Rule'' means a written statement by the interstate commission
promulgated pursuant to RSA 329-C:12 of the compact that is of general
applicability, implements, interprets, or prescribes a policy or
provision of the compact, or an organizational, procedural, or practice
requirement of the interstate commission, and has the force and effect
of statutory law in a member state, and includes the amendment, repeal,
or suspension of an existing rule.
                                             
 XIV. "State'' means any state, commonwealth, district, or territory
of the United States.
                                             
 XV. "State of principal license'' means a member state where a
physician holds a license to practice medicine and which has been
designated as such by the physician for purposes of registration and
participation in the compact.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:3

 **329-C:3 Eligibility. –**
                                             
 I. A physician shall meet the eligibility requirements as defined in
RSA 329-C:2, XI to receive an expedited license under the terms and
provisions of the compact.
                                             
 II. A physician who does not meet the requirements of RSA 329-C:2,
XI may obtain a license to practice medicine in a member state if the
individual complies with all laws and requirements, other than the
compact, relating to the issuance of a license to practice medicine in
that state.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:4

 **329-C:4 Designation of State of Principal License. –**
                                             
 I. A physician shall designate a member state as the state of
principal license for purposes of registration for expedited licensure
through the compact if the physician possesses a full and unrestricted
license to practice medicine in that state, and the state is:
                                             
 (a) The state of primary residence for the physician; or
                                             
 (b) The state where at least 25 percent of the practice of
medicine occurs; or
                                             
 (c) The location of the physician's employer; or
                                             
 (d) If no state qualifies under subparagraph I(a), (b), or (c),
the state designated as state of residence for the purpose of federal
income tax.
                                             
 II. A physician may redesignate a member state as state of principal
license at any time, as long as the state meets the requirements in
paragraph I.
                                             
 III. The interstate commission is authorized to develop rules to
facilitate redesignation of another member state as the state of
principal license.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:5

 **329-C:5 Application and Issuance of Expedited Licensure. –**
                                             
 I. A physician seeking licensure through the compact shall file an
application for an expedited license with the member board of the state
selected by the physician as the state of principal license.
                                             
 II. Upon receipt of an application for an expedited license, the
member board within the state selected as the state of principal license
shall evaluate whether the physician is eligible for expedited licensure
and issue a letter of qualification, verifying or denying the
physician's eligibility, to the interstate commission.
                                             
 (a) Static qualifications, which include verification of medical
education, graduate medical education, results of any medical or
licensing examination, and other qualifications as determined by the
interstate commission through rule, shall not be subject to additional
primary source verification where already primary source verified by the
state of principal license.
                                             
 (b) The member board within the state selected as the state of
principal license shall, in the course of verifying eligibility, perform
a criminal background check of an applicant, including the use of the
results of fingerprint or other biometric data checks compliant with the
requirements of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, with the exception
of federal employees who have suitability determination in accordance
with 5 C.F.R. section 731.202.
                                             
 (c) Appeal of the determination of eligibility shall be made to
the member state where the application was filed and shall be subject to
the law of that state.
                                             
 III. Upon verification in paragraph II, physicians eligible for an
expedited license shall complete the registration process established by
the interstate commission to receive a license in a member state
selected pursuant to paragraph I, including the payment of any
applicable fees.
                                             
 IV. After receiving verification of eligibility under paragraph II
and any fees under paragraph III, a member board shall issue an
expedited license to the physician. This license shall authorize the
physician to practice medicine in the issuing state consistent with the
medical practice act and all applicable laws and regulations of the
issuing member board and member state.
                                             
 V. An expedited license shall be valid for a period consistent with
the licensure period in the member state and in the same manner as
required for other physicians holding a full and unrestricted license
within the member state.
                                             
 VI. An expedited license obtained though the compact shall be
terminated if a physician fails to maintain a license in the state of
principal licensure for a nondisciplinary reason, without redesignation
of a new state of principal licensure.
                                             
 VII. The interstate commission is authorized to develop rules
regarding the application process, including payment of any applicable
fees, and the issuance of an expedited license.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:6

 **329-C:6 Fees For Expedited Licensure. –**
                                             
 I. A member state issuing an expedited license authorizing the
practice of medicine in that state may impose a fee for a license issued
or renewed through the compact.
                                             
 II. The interstate commission is authorized to develop rules
regarding fees for expedited licenses.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:7

 **329-C:7 Renewal and Continued Participation. –**
                                             
 I. A physician seeking to renew an expedited license granted in a
member state shall complete a renewal process with the interstate
commission if the physician:
                                             
 (a) Maintains a full and unrestricted license in a state of
principal license;
                                             
 (b) Has not been convicted, received adjudication, deferred
adjudication, community supervision, or deferred disposition for any
offense by a court of appropriate jurisdiction;
                                             
 (c) Has not had a license authorizing the practice of medicine
subject to discipline by a licensing agency in any state, federal, or
foreign jurisdiction, excluding any action related to nonpayment of fees
related to a license; and
                                             
 (d) Has not had a controlled substance license or permit
suspended or revoked by a state or the United States Drug Enforcement
Administration.
                                             
 II. Physicians shall comply with all continuing professional
development or continuing medical education requirements for renewal of
a license issued by a member state.
                                             
 III. The interstate commission shall collect any renewal fees
charged for the renewal of a license and distribute the fees to the
applicable member board.
                                             
 IV. Upon receipt of any renewal fees collected in paragraph III, a
member board shall renew the physician's license.
                                             
 V. Physician information collected by the interstate commission
during the renewal process shall be distributed to all member boards.
                                             
 VI. The interstate commission is authorized to develop rules to
address renewal of licenses obtained through the compact.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:8

 **329-C:8 Coordinated Information System. –**
                                             
 I. The interstate commission shall establish a database of all
physicians licensed, or who have applied for licensure, under RSA
329-C:5.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, member boards shall
report to the interstate commission any public action or complaints
against a licensed physician who has applied or received an expedited
license through the compact.
                                             
 III. Member boards shall report disciplinary or investigatory
information determined as necessary and proper by rule of the interstate
commission.
                                             
 IV. Member boards may report any nonpublic complaint or disciplinary
or investigatory information not required by paragraph III to the
interstate commission.
                                             
 V. Member boards shall share complaint or disciplinary information
about a physician upon request of another member board.
                                             
 VI. All information provided to the interstate commission or
distributed by member boards shall be confidential, filed under seal,
and used only for investigatory or disciplinary matters.
                                             
 VII. The interstate commission is authorized to develop rules for
mandated or discretionary sharing of information by member boards.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:9

 **329-C:9 Joint Investigations. –**
                                             
 I. Licensure and disciplinary records of physicians are deemed
investigative.
                                             
 II. In addition to the authority granted to a member board by its
respective medical practice act or other applicable state law, a member
board may participate with other member boards in joint investigations
of physicians licensed by the member boards.
                                             
 III. A subpoena issued by a member state shall be enforceable in
other member states.
                                             
 IV. Member boards may share any investigative, litigation, or
compliance materials in furtherance of any joint or individual
investigation initiated under the compact.
                                             
 V. Any member state may investigate actual or alleged violations of
the statutes authorizing the practice of medicine in any other member
state in which a physician holds a license to practice medicine.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:10

 **329-C:10 Disciplinary Actions. –**
                                             
 I. Any disciplinary action taken by any member board against a
physician licensed through the compact shall be deemed unprofessional
conduct which may be subject to discipline by other member boards, in
addition to any violation of the medical practice act or regulations in
that state.
                                             
 II. If a license granted to a physician by the member board in the
state of principal license is revoked, surrendered, or relinquished in
lieu of discipline, or suspended, then all licenses issued to the
physician by member boards shall automatically be placed, without
further action necessary by any member board, on the same status. If the
member board in the state of principal license subsequently reinstates
the physician's license, a license issued to the physician by any other
member board shall remain encumbered until that respective member board
takes action to reinstate the license in a manner consistent with the
medical practice act of that state.
                                             
 III. If disciplinary action is taken against a physician by a member
board not in the state of principal license, any other member board may
deem the action conclusive as to matter of law and fact decided, and:
                                             
 (a) Impose the same or lesser sanctions against the physician so
long as such sanctions are consistent with the medical practice act of
that state; or
                                             
 (b) Pursue separate disciplinary action against the physician
under its respective medical practice act, regardless of the action
taken in other member states.
                                             
 IV. If a license granted to a physician by a member board is
revoked, surrendered, or relinquished in lieu of discipline, or
suspended, then any license issued to the physician by any other member
board shall be suspended, automatically and immediately without further
action necessary by the other member board, for 90 days upon entry of
the order by the disciplining board, to permit the member board to
investigate the basis for the action under the medical practice act of
that state. A member board may terminate the automatic suspension of the
license it issued prior to the completion of the 90-day suspension
period in a manner consistent with the medical practice act of that
state.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:11

 **329-C:11 Interstate Medical Licensure Compact Commission. –**
                                             
 I. The member states hereby create the interstate medical licensure
compact commission.
                                             
 II. The purpose of the interstate commission is the administration
of the interstate medical licensure compact, which is a discretionary
state function.
                                             
 III. The interstate commission shall be a body corporate and joint
agency of the member states and shall have all the responsibilities,
powers, and duties set forth in the compact, and such additional powers
as may be conferred upon it by a subsequent concurrent action of the
respective legislatures of the member states in accordance with the
terms of the compact.
                                             
 IV. The interstate commission shall consist of 2 voting
representatives appointed by each member state who shall serve as
commissioners. In states where allopathic and osteopathic physicians are
regulated by separate member boards, or if the licensing and
disciplinary authority is split between multiple member boards within a
member state, the member state shall appoint one representative from
each member board. A commissioner shall be:
                                             
 (a) An allopathic or osteopathic physician appointed to a member
board;
                                             
 (b) An executive director, executive secretary, or similar
executive of a member board; or
                                             
 (c) A member of the public appointed to a member board.
                                             
 V. The interstate commission shall meet at least once each calendar
year. A portion of this meeting shall be a business meeting to address
such matters as may properly come before the commission, including the
election of officers. The chairperson may call additional meetings and
shall call for a meeting upon the request of a majority of the member
states.
                                             
 VI. The bylaws may provide for meetings of the interstate commission
to be conducted by telecommunication or electronic communication.
                                             
 VII. Each commissioner participating at a meeting of the interstate
commission is entitled to one vote. A majority of commissioners shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, unless a larger
quorum is required by the bylaws of the interstate commission. A
commissioner shall not delegate a vote to another commissioner. In the
absence of its commissioner, a member state may delegate voting
authority for a specified meeting to another person from that state who
shall meet the requirements of paragraph IV.
                                             
 VIII. The interstate commission shall provide public notice of all
meetings and all meetings shall be open to the public. The interstate
commission may close a meeting, in full or in portion, where it
determines by a 2/3 vote of the commissioners present that an open
meeting would be likely to:
                                             
 (a) Relate solely to the internal personnel practices and
procedures of the interstate commission;
                                             
 (b) Discuss matters specifically exempted from disclosure by
federal statute;
                                             
 (c) Discuss trade secrets or commercial or financial information
that is privileged or confidential;
                                             
 (d) Involve accusing a person of a crime or formally censuring a
person;
                                             
 (e) Discuss information of a personal nature where disclosure
would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy;
                                             
 (f) Discuss investigative records compiled for law enforcement
purposes; or
                                             
 (g) Specifically relate to the participation in a civil action or
other legal proceeding.
                                             
 IX. The interstate commission shall keep minutes which shall fully
describe all matters discussed in a meeting and shall provide a full and
accurate summary of actions taken, including record of any roll call
votes.
                                             
 X. The interstate commission shall make its information and official
records, to the extent not otherwise designated in the compact or by its
rules, available to the public for inspection.
                                             
 XI. The interstate commission shall establish an executive
committee, which shall include officers, members, and others as
determined by the bylaws. The executive committee shall have the power
to act on behalf of the interstate commission, with the exception of
rulemaking, during periods when the interstate commission is not in
session. When acting on behalf of the interstate commission, the
executive committee shall oversee the administration of the compact
including enforcement and compliance with the provisions of the compact,
its bylaws and rules, and other such duties as necessary.
                                             
 XII. The interstate commission may establish other committees for
governance and administration of the compact.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:12

 **329-C:12 Powers and Duties of The Interstate Commission. –** The
interstate commission shall have the duty and power to:
                                             
 I. Oversee and maintain the administration of the compact.
                                             
 II. Promulgate rules which shall be binding to the extent and in the
manner provided for in the compact.
                                             
 III. Issue, upon the request of a member state or member board,
advisory opinions concerning the meaning or interpretation of the
compact, its bylaws, rules, and actions.
                                             
 IV. Enforce compliance with compact provisions, the rules
promulgated by the interstate commission, and the bylaws, using all
necessary and proper means, including but not limited to the use of
judicial process.
                                             
 V. Establish and appoint committees including, but not limited to,
an executive committee as required by RSA 329-C:11, which shall have the
power to act on behalf of the interstate commission in carrying out its
powers and duties.
                                             
 VI. Pay or provide for the payment of the expenses related to the
establishment, organization, and ongoing activities of the interstate
commission.
                                             
 VII. Establish and maintain one or more offices.
                                             
 VIII. Borrow, accept, hire, or contract for services of personnel.
                                             
 IX. Purchase and maintain insurance and bonds.
                                             
 X. Employ an executive director who shall have such powers to
employ, select, or appoint employees, agents, or consultants, and to
determine their qualifications, define their duties, and fix their
compensation.
                                             
 XI. Establish personnel policies and programs relating to conflicts
of interest, rates of compensation, and qualifications of personnel.
                                             
 XII. Accept donations and grants of money, equipment, supplies,
materials, and services, and to receive, utilize, and dispose of it in a
manner consistent with the conflict of interest policies established by
the interstate commission.
                                             
 XIII. Lease, purchase, accept contributions or donations of, or
otherwise to own, hold, improve, or use, any property, real, personal,
or mixed.
                                             
 XIV. Sell, convey, mortgage, pledge, lease, exchange, abandon, or
otherwise dispose of any property, real, personal, or mixed.
                                             
 XV. Establish a budget and make expenditures.
                                             
 XVI. Adopt a seal and bylaws governing the management and operation
of the interstate commission.
                                             
 XVII. Report annually to the legislatures and governors of the
member states concerning the activities of the interstate commission
during the preceding year. Such reports shall also include reports of
financial audits and any recommendations that may have been adopted by
the interstate commission.
                                             
 XVIII. Coordinate education, training, and public awareness
regarding the compact, its implementation, and its operation.
                                             
 XIX. Maintain records in accordance with the bylaws.
                                             
 XX. Seek and obtain trademarks, copyrights, and patents.
                                             
 XXI. Perform such functions as may be necessary or appropriate to
achieve the purposes of the compact.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:13

 **329-C:13 Finance Powers. –**
                                             
 I. The interstate commission may levy on and collect an annual
assessment from each member state to cover the cost of the operations
and activities of the interstate commission and its staff. The total
assessment must be sufficient to cover the annual budget approved each
year for which revenue is not provided by other sources. The aggregate
annual assessment amount shall be allocated upon a formula to be
determined by the interstate commission, which shall promulgate a rule
binding upon all member states.
                                             
 II. The interstate commission shall not incur obligations of any
kind prior to securing the funds adequate to meet the same.
                                             
 III. The interstate commission shall not pledge the credit of any of
the member states, except by, and with the authority of, the member
state.
                                             
 IV. The interstate commission shall be subject to a yearly financial
audit conducted by a certified or licensed public accountant and the
report of the audit shall be included in the annual report of the
interstate commission.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:14

 **329-C:14 Organization and Operation of the Interstate Commission.
–**
                                             
 I. The interstate commission shall, by a majority of commissioners
present and voting, adopt bylaws to govern its conduct as may be
necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of the compact within
12 months of the first interstate commission meeting.
                                             
 II. The interstate commission shall elect or appoint annually from
among its commissioners a chairperson, a vice-chairperson, and a
treasurer, each of whom shall have such authority and duties as may be
specified in the bylaws. The chairperson, or in the chairperson's
absence or disability, the vice-chairperson, shall preside at all
meetings of the interstate commission.
                                             
 III. Officers selected in paragraph II shall serve without
remuneration from the interstate commission.
                                             
 IV. The interstate commission shall defend the executive director,
its employees, and subject to the approval of the attorney general or
other appropriate legal counsel of the member state represented by an
interstate commission representative, shall defend such interstate
commission representative in any civil action seeking to impose
liability arising out of an actual or alleged act, error, or omission
that occurred within the scope of interstate commission employment,
duties, or responsibilities, or that the defendant had a reasonable
basis for believing occurred within the scope of interstate commission
employment, duties, or responsibilities, provided that the actual or
alleged act, error, or omission did not result from intentional or
willful and wanton misconduct on the part of such person.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:15

 **329-C:15 Rulemaking Functions of the Interstate Commission. –**
                                             
 I. The interstate commission shall promulgate reasonable rules in
order to effectively and efficiently achieve the purposes of the
compact. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the interstate
commission exercises its rulemaking authority in a manner that is beyond
the scope of the purposes of the compact, or the powers granted
hereunder, then such an action by the interstate commission shall be
invalid and have no force or effect.
                                             
 II. Rules deemed appropriate for the operations of the interstate
commission shall be made pursuant to a rulemaking process that
substantially conforms to the "Model State Administrative Procedure
Act'' of 2010, and subsequent amendments thereto.
                                             
 III. Not later than 30 days after a rule is promulgated, any person
may file a petition for judicial review of the rule in the United States
District Court for the District of Columbia or the federal district
where the interstate commission has its principal offices, provided that
the filing of such a petition shall not stay or otherwise prevent the
rule from becoming effective unless the court finds that the petitioner
has a substantial likelihood of success. The court shall give deference
to the actions of the interstate commission consistent with applicable
law and shall not find the rule to be unlawful if the rule represents a
reasonable exercise of the authority granted to the interstate
commission.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:16

 **329-C:16 Oversight of Interstate Compact. –**
                                             
 I. The executive, legislative, and judicial branches of state
government in each member state shall enforce the compact and shall take
all actions necessary and appropriate to effectuate the compact's
purposes and intent. The provisions of the compact and the rules
promulgated hereunder shall have standing as statutory law but shall not
override existing state authority to regulate the practice of medicine.
                                             
 II. All courts shall take judicial notice of the compact and the
rules in any judicial or administrative proceeding in a member state
pertaining to the subject matter of the compact which may affect the
powers, responsibilities, or actions of the interstate commission.
                                             
 III. The interstate commission shall be entitled to receive all
service of process in any such proceeding, and shall have standing to
intervene in the proceeding for all purposes. Failure to provide service
of process to the interstate commission shall render a judgment or order
void as to the interstate commission, the compact, or promulgated rules.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:17

 **329-C:17 Enforcement of Interstate Compact. –**
                                             
 I. The interstate commission, in the reasonable exercise of its
discretion, shall enforce the provisions and rules of the compact.
                                             
 II. The interstate commission may, by majority vote of the
commissioners, initiate legal action in the United States District Court
for the District of Columbia, or, at the discretion of the interstate
commission, in the federal district where the interstate commission has
its principal offices, to enforce compliance with the provisions of the
compact, and its promulgated rules and bylaws, against a member state in
default. The relief sought may include both injunctive relief and
damages. In the event judicial enforcement is necessary, the prevailing
party shall be awarded all costs of such litigation including reasonable
attorney's fees.
                                             
 III. The remedies herein shall not be the exclusive remedies of the
interstate commission. The interstate commission may avail itself of any
other remedies available under state law or the regulation of a
profession.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:18

 **329-C:18 Default Procedures. –**
                                             
 I. The grounds for default include, but are not limited to, failure
of a member state to perform such obligations or responsibilities
imposed upon it by the compact, or the rules and bylaws of the
interstate commission promulgated under the compact.
                                             
 II. If the interstate commission determines that a member state has
defaulted in the performance of its obligations or responsibilities
under the compact, or the bylaws or promulgated rules, the interstate
commission shall:
                                             
 (a) Provide written notice to the defaulting state and other
member states of the nature of the default, the means of curing the
default, and any action taken by the interstate commission. The
interstate commission shall specify the conditions by which the
defaulting state must cure its default; and
                                             
 (b) Provide remedial training and specific technical assistance
regarding the default.
                                             
 III. If the defaulting state fails to cure the default, the
defaulting state shall be terminated from the compact upon an
affirmative vote of a majority of the commissioners and all rights,
privileges, and benefits conferred by the compact shall terminate on the
effective date of termination. A cure of the default does not relieve
the offending state of obligations or liabilities incurred during the
period of the default.
                                             
 IV. Termination of membership in the compact shall be imposed only
after all other means of securing compliance have been exhausted. Notice
of intent to terminate shall be given by the interstate commission to
the governor, the majority and minority leaders of the defaulting
state's legislature, and each of the member states.
                                             
 V. The interstate commission shall establish rules and procedures to
address licenses and physicians that are materially impacted by the
termination of a member state or the withdrawal of a member state.
                                             
 VI. The member state which has been terminated is responsible for
all dues, obligations, and liabilities incurred through the effective
date of termination including obligations, the performance of which
extends beyond the effective date of termination.
                                             
 VII. The interstate commission shall not bear any costs relating to
any state that has been found to be in default or which has been
terminated from the compact, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon in
writing between the interstate commission and the defaulting state.
                                             
 VIII. The defaulting state may appeal the action of the interstate
commission by petitioning the United States District Court for the
District of Columbia or the federal district where the interstate
commission has its principal offices. The prevailing party shall be
awarded all costs of such litigation including reasonable attorney's
fees.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:19

 **329-C:19 Dispute Resolution. –**
                                             
 I. The interstate commission shall attempt, upon the request of a
member state, to resolve disputes which are subject to the compact and
which may arise among member states or member boards.
                                             
 II. The interstate commission shall promulgate rules providing for
both mediation and binding dispute resolution as appropriate.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:20

 **329-C:20 Member States, Effective Date, and Amendment. –**
                                             
 I. Any state is eligible to become a member state of the compact.
                                             
 II. The compact shall become effective and binding upon legislative
enactment of the compact into law by no less than 7 states. Thereafter,
it shall become effective and binding on a state upon enactment of the
compact into law by that state.
                                             
 III. The governors of nonmember states, or their designees, shall be
invited to participate in the activities of the interstate commission on
a nonvoting basis prior to adoption of the compact by all states.
                                             
 IV. The interstate commission may propose amendments to the compact
for enactment by the member states. No amendment shall become effective
and binding upon the interstate commission and the member states unless
and until it is enacted into law by unanimous consent of the member
states.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:21

 **329-C:21 Withdrawal. –**
                                             
 I. Once effective, the compact shall continue in force and remain
binding upon each and every member state; provided that a member state
may withdraw from the compact by specifically repealing the statute
which enacted the compact into law.
                                             
 II. Withdrawal from the compact shall be by the enactment of a
statute repealing the same, but shall not take effect until one year
after the effective date of such statute and until written notice of the
withdrawal has been given by the withdrawing state to the governor of
each other member state.
                                             
 III. The withdrawing state shall immediately notify the chairperson
of the interstate commission in writing upon the introduction of
legislation repealing the compact in the withdrawing state.
                                             
 IV. The interstate commission shall notify the other member states
of the withdrawing state's intent to withdraw within 60 days of its
receipt of notice provided under paragraph III.
                                             
 V. The withdrawing state is responsible for all dues, obligations,
and liabilities incurred through the effective date of withdrawal,
including obligations the performance of which extend beyond the
effective date of withdrawal.
                                             
 VI. Reinstatement following withdrawal of a member state shall occur
upon the withdrawing state reenacting the compact or upon such later
date as determined by the interstate commission.
                                             
 VII. The interstate commission is authorized to develop rules to
address the impact of the withdrawal of a member state on licenses
granted in other member states to physicians who designated the
withdrawing member state as the state of principal license.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:22

 **329-C:22 Dissolution. –**
                                             
 I. The compact shall dissolve effective upon the date of the
withdrawal or default of the member state which reduces the membership
in the compact to one member state.
                                             
 II. Upon the dissolution of the compact, the compact becomes null
and void and shall be of no further force or effect, and the business
and affairs of the interstate commission shall be concluded and surplus
funds shall be distributed in accordance with the bylaws.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:23

 **329-C:23 Severability and Construction. –**
                                             
 I. The provisions of the compact shall be severable, and if any
phrase, clause, sentence, or provision is deemed unenforceable, the
remaining provisions of the compact shall be enforceable.
                                             
 II. The provisions of the compact shall be liberally construed to
effectuate its purposes.
                                             
 III. Nothing in the compact shall be construed to prohibit the
applicability of other interstate compacts to which the states are
members.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 329-C:24

 **329-C:24 Binding Effect of Compact and Other Laws. –**
                                             
 I. Nothing herein prevents the enforcement of any other law of a
member state that is not inconsistent with the compact.
                                             
 II. All laws in a member state in conflict with the compact are
superseded to the extent of the conflict.
                                             
 III. All lawful actions of the interstate commission, including all
rules and bylaws promulgated by the commission, are binding upon the
member states.
                                             
 IV. All agreements between the interstate commission and the member
states are binding in accordance with their terms.
                                             
 V. In the event any provision of the compact exceeds the
constitutional limits imposed on the legislature of any member state,
such provision shall be ineffective to the extent of the conflict with
the constitutional provision in question in that member state.

**Source.** 2016, 70:1, eff. July 4, 2016.
