---
title: 'CHAPTER 330-C ALCOHOL AND OTHER DRUG USE PROFESSIONALS'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 330-C
                                             
ALCOHOL AND OTHER DRUG USE PROFESSIONALS
----------------------------------------

### Section 330-C:1

 **330-C:1 Purpose. –** In New Hampshire, alcohol and drug use
counselors have been the primary providers of addiction services. The
purpose of this chapter is to protect and benefit the public by setting
standards of qualifications, education, training, and experience for
those who seek to obtain a certificate as a certified recovery support
worker or a license as a licensed alcohol and drug counselor or a master
licensed alcohol and drug counselor and to promote competency in alcohol
and other drug use prevention, intervention, and treatment services and
in co-occurring disorder treatment services.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:1, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.

### Section 330-C:2

 **330-C:2 Definitions. –**
                                             
 I. "Advertise'' means, but is not limited to, the attempt by a
visual, oral, or written publication, dissemination, solicitation, or
circulation to induce any person to do business with a licensed alcohol
and drug counselor or a master licensed alcohol and drug counselor.
                                             
 II. "Alcohol and drug use'' means the use of alcohol or other drugs,
or both, to the extent or frequency that it impairs or endangers one's
health, social or economic function, or the health and welfare of
others, and can be used interchangeably with "substance use.''
                                             
 III. "Board'' means the board of licensing for alcohol and other
drug use professionals.
                                             
 IV. "Certified recovery support worker,''or CRSW, means an
individual certified by the board to provide recovery support to persons
with substance use disorders, who meets the qualifications in this
chapter.
                                             
 V. "Clergy'' means any minister, priest, rabbi, Christian Science
practitioner, or any other similar religious counselor.
                                             
 VI. "Clinical supervision'' means an ongoing, regularly occurring
process of examination, critique, and improvement of a counselor's
skills, directed by the counselor's designated clinical supervisor, and
is typically one-to-one or small group in structure, and utilizes the
methods of intensive case review and discussion, and direct and indirect
observation of clinical practice.
                                             
 VII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VIII. "Continuing education'' means research and training programs,
college and university courses, in-service training programs, or
seminars and conferences designed to maintain and enhance the skills of
counselors licensed under this chapter and which are recognized by the
board.
                                             
 IX. "Continuum of care network'' means public and private substance
use care agencies such as detoxification centers, emergency rooms,
hospitals, treatment centers, outpatient and day treatment clinics, and
community residences for substance users.
                                             
 X. "Co-occurring disorders'' means a diagnosis that includes both a
mental illness and substance use disorder.
                                             
 XI. "Core functions and practice dimensions of addiction
counseling'' means the following 12 activities an alcohol and drug
counselor performs in the role of counselor: screening, intake,
orientation, assessment, treatment planning, counseling (individual,
group, and significant others), case management, crisis intervention,
client education, referral, reports and record keeping, and consultation
with other professionals in regard to client treatment and services.
                                             
 XII. "Facility'' means an alcohol and other drug use prevention,
intervention, or treatment agency which is publicly or privately owned,
for-profit or not-for-profit, and which is licensed or certified, or
required to be licensed or certified by the state, or is under contract
to a state agency.
                                             
 XIII. "Licensed alcohol and drug counselor,'' or LADC, means an
individual licensed by the board to practice substance use counseling
who meets the qualifications set forth in this chapter.
                                             
 XIV. "Licensed clinical supervisor,'' or LCS, means an individual
licensed by the board to practice and supervise substance use
counseling, who meets the qualifications set forth in this chapter.
                                             
 XV. "Master licensed alcohol and drug counselor,'' or MLADC, means
an individual licensed by the board to practice substance use and
co-occurring disorder counseling who meets the qualifications set forth
in this chapter.
                                             
 XVI. "Mental health disorder'' or "mental illness'' means any mental
disorder, including a disorder of thought, mood, or behavior that causes
distress and results in a reduced ability to function psychologically,
socially, occupationally, or interpersonally, as set forth in the
current version of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders of the American Psychiatric Association.
                                             
 XVII. "Peer collaboration'' means ongoing regularly occurring
clinical consultation with, or small group meetings among, MLADCs, LADCs
or licensees of the board of nursing, the board of mental health
practice, or the board of medicine, with expertise in substance use and
co-occurring disorder counseling, at which clinical issues and/or cases
are discussed.
                                             
 XVIII. "Practice of substance use counseling'' means the rendering
or offering to render professional service for any documented fee or
other consideration to individuals, families, or groups. Those
professional services include the application of the specific knowledge,
skills, counseling theory, and application of techniques to assess,
diagnose, define goals, and develop a treatment plan of action aimed
toward prevention, education, or treatment in the recovery process of
substance use disorders within the continuum of care network. The
practice further includes, but is not limited to, networking and making
referrals to medical, social services, mental health services,
psychiatric, or legal resources when so indicated.
                                             
 XIX. "Substance use disorder'' means a disorder related to the
taking of a drug, including alcohol.
                                             
 XX. "Supervised practical training'' means experiential activities
monitored by one or more clinical supervisors who provide timely
feedback to assist the counselor in the learning process, and which are
designed to provide training of specific knowledge and skills necessary
to competently perform the tasks inherent in the performance domains of
substance use counseling.
                                             
 XXI. "Work experience'' means paid or voluntary experience under
clinical supervision with a primary focus on utilizing alcohol and other
drug use treatment or intervention theories, techniques, or
methodologies.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:2-7, 25, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.

### Section 330-C:3

 **330-C:3 Board Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a board of licensing for alcohol and other
drug use professionals. The board shall comprise 7 members to be
appointed by the governor with the consent of the council. The members
of the board shall be citizens of the United States and shall include 4
master licensed alcohol and drug counselors, one licensed alcohol and
drug counselor, and 2 members of the general public.
                                             
 II. Each MLADC member of the board shall be a resident of this
state, licensed in good standing under the provisions of this chapter,
and currently engaged in the practice of the profession, and shall have
no fewer than 5 years of experience as a MLADC, at least 3 of which
shall have immediately preceded appointment.
                                             
 III. The LADC member shall be a resident of this state, licensed in
good standing under the provisions of this chapter, and currently
engaged in the practice of the profession, and shall have no fewer than
5 years of experience as a LADC, at least 3 of which shall have
immediately preceded appointment.
                                             
 IV. The public members shall have been residents of this state for
at least one year who are not, and never have been, licensed under the
provisions of this chapter or the spouse of a licensee under this
chapter. The public members shall not have, and shall never have had, a
material financial interest in either the provision of alcohol and other
drug use professional services or an activity directly related to the
provisions of such services, including the representation of the board
or its predecessor or the profession for a fee at any time during the 5
years preceding the date of appointment.
                                             
 V. No more than one board member shall be associated with, employed
by, or in a contractual relationship with a particular agency,
corporation, or other enterprise or subsidiary at one time.
                                             
 VI. No board member shall participate in clinical supervision or any
other professional relationship with another board member in which one
board member has a subordinate role to the other. In addition, no 2
board members shall be family members. For the purposes of this
paragraph, persons are "family members'' if they are related, live in
the same domicile, and share a common economic interest in the expenses
of daily living and shall include, but not be limited to, a spouse,
child, parents, or parties that have entered into a civil union.
                                             
 VII. No board member shall participate in any matter before the
board in which the member has a pecuniary or personal interest or other
conflict of interest.
                                             
 VIII. The board shall elect a chairperson annually from among its
membership. Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 IX. The board shall hold no fewer than 6 meetings per year. Board
meetings shall be open to the public. In accordance with RSA 91-A:3, the
board may conduct part of a meeting in nonpublic session.
                                             
 X. Board members shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary
expenses incurred in the discharge of official duties, including travel
at the state employee mileage rate.
                                             
 XI. The term of office shall be 3 years. Any person appointed to
fill a vacancy shall fill the unexpired term of office. Upon expiration
of the term of office, a member shall continue to serve until a
successor has been appointed and qualified. No person shall be appointed
for more than 2 consecutive 3-year terms.
                                             
 XII. The governor may remove any member from the board for neglect
of any duty under RSA 330-C:5 or for incompetence, or unprofessional or
dishonorable conduct. Any person may file a complaint against a board
member or board members with the executive director of the office of
professional licensure and certification. Upon receipt of a complaint,
the commissioner shall conduct an investigation and take any appropriate
action and report his or her findings to the complainant. The provisions
of RSA 4:1 controlling the removal of public officials from office shall
be followed in dismissing board members.
                                             
 XIII. In accordance with RSA 20-B:1, the chairman shall ensure that
every new member of the board receives orientation information which may
include the business procedures of the board, the mailing address and
phone number of the office, a list of the members and staff, the
customary meeting schedule, and any other pertinent information.
                                             
 XIV. The board shall designate one of its members who will serve as
a liaison with the board of mental health practice to collaborate on
issues of mutual interest.
                                             
 XV. All members of the board and its agents or employees shall enjoy
immunity from individual civil liability while acting within the scope
of their duties as board members, agents, or employees, as long as they
are not acting in a wanton or reckless manner.

**Source.** **Source.** 2008, 189:1, eff. July 1, 2008. 2015, 276:101,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 330-C:4

 **330-C:4 Administrative Attachment. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2015, 276:108,
XXX, eff. July 1, 2015.
                                             ]

### Section 330-C:5

 **330-C:5 Powers and Duties of the Board. –** The board shall:
                                             
 I. Examine applicants for licensure, license, and renew licenses of
duly qualified individuals, and issue and renew certifications for
individuals duly qualified to be recovery support workers.
                                             
 II. Have the authority to establish advisory committees in the areas
identified in RSA 330-C:6.
                                             
 III. Gather and report to the public statistical information
regarding, but not limited to, the education and licensure of alcohol
and other drug use professionals.
                                             
 IV. Conduct investigations, hearings, and proceedings concerning
alleged violations of this chapter or of rules adopted under this
chapter.
                                             
 V. Subpoena witnesses, records, and documents, as needed, and
administer oaths to those testifying at hearings.
                                             
 VI. Determine and enforce appropriate disciplinary action against
licensees and certificate holders found guilty of violating this chapter
or the rules adopted under this chapter.
                                             
 VII. Approve or deny or withdraw approval of providers of continuing
education programs and individual continuing education programs.
                                             
 VIII. Maintain records of proceedings as required by the laws of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 IX. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 X. Establish and collect fees required in this chapter.
                                             
 XI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XII. Select nationally recognized examinations that meet the
requirements of this chapter.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:8, eff. Sept. 4, 2010. 2015, 276:108,
XXXI, XXXII, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 330-C:6

 **330-C:6 Advisory Committees. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall have the authority to create advisory committees.
Each committee shall be composed of at least 3 but not more than 5
persons licensed by the board. Advisory committee members shall be
appointed by the board and shall serve at the pleasure of the board for
no more than 3 consecutive 2-year terms.
                                             
 II. The advisory committees may be assigned the following duties:
                                             
 (a) Application advisory committee, if established, shall review
applications for licensure, reinstatement, and certification and make
recommendations to the board concerning such applications;
                                             
 (b) Testing and examination advisory committee, if established,
shall carry out the testing requirements of this chapter and review and
evaluate the appropriate standards to be used for selecting
examinations;
                                             
 (c) Continuing education and collaboration advisory committee, if
established, shall advise the board on continuing education requirements
and procedures to be adopted for documenting peer collaboration hours.
                                             
 III. Members of any advisory committee may serve as investigators,
upon the request of the board. No committee member may act as an
investigator without completing appropriate training provided by the
department of justice.
                                             
 IV. The board may appoint additional committees to advise the board
on issues relevant to this chapter.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 330-C:7

 **330-C:7 Records; Meetings; List of Licensees. –**
                                             
 I. A true record of all of the board's official acts shall be made
and preserved by the board. The records shall be public and shall be
open to inspection at all reasonable times, except for records compiled
in connection with disciplinary investigations and records otherwise
exempt from disclosure under RSA 91-A or other applicable statutes.
                                             
 II. The board shall maintain a current list of the names and
business addresses of all persons licensed or certified under this
chapter. In addition, the board shall make available to the public a
list of all persons whose licenses or certification have been revoked or
suspended for a violation of RSA 330-C:27, III by the board within the
preceding 12 months. The list shall identify any revocation or
suspension that is under appeal.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 330-C:8

 **330-C:8 Fees; Charges. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall charge licensed alcohol and drug counselors,
licensed clinical supervisors, and certified recovery support workers a

                                             $110 fee for the issuance of an initial license or certificate, and

                                             $110 for the renewal of a license or certificate under this chapter.
The fee for a master licensed alcohol and drug counselor shall be 
                                             $240
and the renewal fee shall be 
                                             $240. All licenses shall be renewed
biennially on or before June 30 upon payment of the license renewal fee.
In addition the board shall establish by rule fees for license and
certificate applications, late renewal, and reinstatement of all
licenses and certifications authorized by this chapter.
                                             
 II. The board may provide the following services and make
administrative charges for:
                                             
 (a) The administration of examinations required by this chapter.
                                             
 (b) The transcription and copying of records.
                                             
 (c) The actual costs of a criminal conviction record check
required pursuant to RSA 330-C:20.
                                             
 (d) The sale of a list of licensees and certification holders who
have given their written authorization to have their names included on
such list. Such list shall be updated at least monthly.
                                             
 (e) The approval of continuing education programs and program
providers.
                                             
 (f) The verification of license status or educational
credentials.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:9, eff. Sept. 4, 2010. 2014, 167:4,
eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 229:17, eff. July 1, 2015. 2016, 248:2, eff.
June 10, 2016.

### Section 330-C:9

 **330-C:9 Rulemaking Authority. –** The board shall adopt rules, in
accordance with RSA 541-A, relative to the following:
                                             
 I. Application procedures and eligibility requirements for the
issuance of all initial and renewal licenses issued by the board,
including without limitation:
                                             
 (a) The issuance of LADC licenses to applicants holding a
currently valid license or other authorization to practice substance use
counseling in another jurisdiction;
                                             
 (b) The issuance of MLADC licenses to applicants holding a
currently valid license or other authorization to practice substance use
counseling and co-occurring disorder counseling in another
jurisdiction;
                                             
 (c) The issuance of such licenses to applicants holding a current
license issued by the board of nursing or the board of medicine; and
                                             
 (d) The issuance of a MLADC license under RSA 330-C:16.
                                             
 II. Application procedures and eligibility requirements for the
reinstatement of licenses after lapse and after disciplinary action.
                                             
 III. Application procedures, training requirements, and other
criteria for the issuance of certification, renewal of certification,
and reinstatement of certification for certified recovery support
workers.
                                             
 IV. The establishment of license and certificate application, late
renewal, and reinstatement fees required under this chapter.
                                             
 V. The process for approval of education programs for the continuing
education requirements of this chapter and providers of such programs,
and the process for approval of providers engaged in clinical
supervision.
                                             
 V-a. The process for approval of individuals engaged in clinical
supervision.
                                             
 V-b. The requirements for clinical supervision and the documentation
of clinical supervision hours.
                                             
 VI. The administration of examinations authorized by this chapter,
and, if rules on the topic are determined by the board to be necessary,
the manner in which information regarding the contents of any licensing
examinations may be disclosed, solicited, or compiled.
                                             
 VII. Ethical standards for the practice of substance use counseling
and co-occurring disorder counseling and clinical supervision that are
generally in keeping with standards established by NAADAC: The
Association for Addiction Professionals, or its successor organization.
                                             
 VIII. Continuing education requirements for license renewal and
continuing education requirements for renewal of certification.
                                             
 IX. Procedures for the conduct of hearings consistent with the
requirements of due process.
                                             
 X. The determination of disciplinary sanctions authorized by this
chapter, including the assessment of administrative fines.
                                             
 XI. The examinations approved by the board.
                                             
 XII. If rules on the topic are determined by the board to be
necessary, testing procedures to be used by the board.
                                             
 XIII. The requirements for peer collaboration and the documentation
of peer collaboration hours, and the requirements for participation as a
peer collaborator.
                                             
 XIV. Standards for the waiver of a felony conviction by the board
under 330-C:27, III(f), and for determinations of whether an applicant
has made sufficient restitution or been rehabilitated under RSA
330-C:15, I(e).
                                             
 XV. If rules on the topic are determined by the board to be
necessary, determinations of equivalent academic fields for initial
MLADC licensure or initial LADC licensure.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:10, eff. Sept. 4, 2010. 2014, 167:5,
eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 330-C:10

 **330-C:10 Master Licensed Alcohol and Drug Counselor; Scope of
Practice. –**
                                             
 I. The scope of practice of the MLADC is the screening, assessment,
diagnosis, treatment planning, and treatment of substance use disorders
and co-occurring disorders only within the context of addressing
substance use disorders. The practice of alcohol and drug counseling and
co-occurring disorder counseling includes the following performance
areas which encompass the 12 core functions and practice dimensions of
addiction counseling:
                                             
 (a) The performance of clinical evaluations including the
screening, assessment, and diagnosis of substance use disorders and
mental health disorders when they are co-occurring with a substance use
disorder, and the performance of differential diagnoses;
                                             
 (b) The performance of treatment planning, case management,
consultation, education, documentation, and client advocacy;
                                             
 (c) The performance of counseling including:
                                             
 (1) Individual, group, family, and significant other
counseling;
                                             
 (2) Crisis prevention and intervention;
                                             
 (3) Co-occurring disorder counseling with the use of
integrated models of assessment, intervention, and counseling techniques
within the context or treatment of a substance use disorder;
                                             
 (d) Adherence to professional and ethical standards as determined
by the board.
                                             
 II. A MLADC may engage in independent practice within the scope of
practice in this section only with clinical supervision or peer
collaboration.
                                             
 III. A MLADC shall provide services only within the boundaries of
his or her competence, based upon education, training, clinically
supervised work experience, consultation, study, or professional
experience.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:11, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.

### Section 330-C:11

 **330-C:11 Licensed Alcohol and Drug Counselor; Scope of Practice.
–**
                                             
 I. The scope of practice of the LADC is the screening, assessment,
diagnosis, treatment planning, and treatment of substance use disorders
and the screening and referral of mental health disorders under clinical
supervision as defined in this chapter. The scope does not include the
treatment of co-occurring disorders, unless the LADC is in an academic
internship as part of a master's program in a mental health field or
employed as a LADC and working toward mental health licensure under RSA
330-A, RSA 329, or RSA 326-B. The practice of alcohol and drug
counseling includes the following performance areas which encompass the
12 core functions and practice dimensions of addiction counseling:
                                             
 (a) The performance of clinical evaluation including the
screening, assessment, and diagnosis of alcohol and other drug use
disorders, the assessment and identification of symptoms of co-occurring
mental health disorders and differential diagnosis indicators and the
development of preliminary mental health disorder diagnoses for further
assessment and confirmation by an appropriate professional. This
includes severity assessment and assessment of dangerousness to self or
others;
                                             
 (b) The performance of treatment planning; referrals including
co-occurring mental health and medical conditions; case management and
service coordination including implementation of treatment plans,
consultation, coordination of care with mental health and other
community providers, ongoing assessment of progress and needs, and
client advocacy; education; and documentation;
                                             
 (c) The performance of counseling, including:
                                             
 (1) Individual, group, family, and significant other
counseling; and
                                             
 (2) Crisis prevention and intervention to include enlisting
the support of trained personnel to manage risk of harm to self or
others;
                                             
 (d) Adherence to professional and ethical responsibilities as
determined by the board.
                                             
 II. An LADC may engage in practice only under clinical supervision
of an MLADC, LCS, LADC, psychiatric APRN, or licensed mental health
provider approved by the board.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2009, 54:4, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 330-C:12

 **330-C:12 Licensed Clinical Supervisor; Scope of Practice. –**
                                             
 I. The scope of practice of a licensed clinical supervisor is based
on knowledge in the core functions and performance domains to supervise
alcohol and drug counselors. This includes administrative, evaluative,
clinical, and supportive oversight of the practice of alcohol and drug
counselors licensed under this chapter and persons seeking licensure.
                                             
 II. The licensed clinical supervisor shall:
                                             
 (a) Exercise responsibility over alcohol and drug counselors
concerning all activities, including but not limited to, alcohol and
drug counselor development, skill assessment and performance evaluation,
staff management and administration, and professional responsibility.
                                             
 (b) Not permit a supervisee to engage in any practice that the
supervisee is not competent to perform.
                                             
 (c) Be legally and ethically responsible for the supervised
activities of the counselors he or she supervises.
                                             
 (d) Be available or make appropriate provision for emergency
consultation and intervention.
                                             
 (e) Interrupt or stop the supervisee from practicing in given
cases, or recommend to the supervisee's employer that the employer
interrupt or stop the supervisee from practicing in given cases, and to
terminate the supervised relationship, if necessary.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 330-C:13

 **330-C:13 Certified Recovery Support Worker; Scope of Practice. –**
The scope of practice of a certified recovery support worker includes:
                                             
 I. The provision of basic screening of persons with substance use
and co-occurring mental health disorders to determine whether referral
for further assessment and formal diagnosis is needed and the making of
appropriate referrals.
                                             
 II. The provision of monitoring of clients' health and safety
including basic recognition of signs and symptoms of addiction,
intoxication, and withdrawal, and the implementation of structured
interventions to ensure the immediate safety of clients demonstrating
such symptoms.
                                             
 III. The provision of recovery support including practical support,
mentoring, and education about addiction, community peer support, role
of medication and co-occurring disorders in addiction.
                                             
 IV. Adherence to the ethical standards of the substance use
treatment profession as determined by the board.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 330-C:14

 **330-C:14 Title; Display of License or Certification. –**
                                             
 I. Only persons licensed under this chapter may use the title
"master licensed alcohol and drug counselor'' and the abbreviation
"MLADC,'' the title "licensed alcohol and drug counselor'' and the
abbreviation "LADC,'' or the title "licensed clinical supervisor'' and
the abbreviation "LCS,'' provided that the title and abbreviation
correspond to the license held pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 II. Only persons certified under this chapter may use the title
"certified recovery support worker'' and the abbreviation "CRSW.''
                                             
 III. Any person who has been issued a license under this chapter
shall conspicuously display such license in the principal place of
business for which the license is issued.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:12, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.

### Section 330-C:15

 **330-C:15 Licensure and Certification; Applicants. –**
                                             
 I. All applicants for licensure and certification shall:
                                             
 (a) Submit a completed application and pay fees established by
the board;
                                             
 (b) Have the ability to read and write in the English language;
                                             
 (c) Report any pending criminal charges, criminal convictions,
plea agreements in lieu of convictions, or complaints made to or
dispositions made by licensing or certification boards;
                                             
 (d) Submit a complete set of fingerprints and a notarized
criminal history record release form pursuant to RSA 330-C:20;
                                             
 (e) Have committed none of the following, unless the board finds
that the applicant has made sufficient restitution or been
rehabilitated:
                                             
 (1) Fraud or deceit in procuring or attempting to procure a
license, certification, or other authorization to practice substance use
counseling or treatment in this or another state or territory of the
United States;
                                             
 (2) Sexual relations with, solicitation of sexual relations
with, or sexual abuse of, a client or past client;
                                             
 (3) Failure to remain free from the use of a controlled
substance or alcohol to the extent that use impairs the ability to
conduct with safety to the public the practices authorized by this
chapter;
                                             
 (4) Conviction of a felony not waived by the board;
                                             
 (5) An act or omission causing another state or territory of
the United States to revoke or suspend a license, certification, or
other authorization to practice substance use counseling or treatment or
to discipline the person authorized to practice by placing him or her on
probation;
                                             
 (6) Failure to maintain confidentiality as described in RSA
330-C:26; and
                                             
 (7) False or misleading advertising;
                                             
 (f) Have no mental disability that affects professional ability
or judgment to the extent that it impairs the ability to conduct with
safety to the public the practices authorized by this chapter, unless
the board finds that measures have been taken to control the effects of
the disability;
                                             
 (g) Meet education requirements for new applicants and continuing
education requirements for renewals and reinstatements, as established
by the board; and
                                             
 (h) Meet other criteria as established by the board.
                                             
 II. The board shall make no final decision concerning the
qualifications of a new or reinstatement applicant until it has received
the results of all required examinations, criminal history record
checks, and all third-party certifications required to be submitted with
the application, and the time periods specified by RSA 541-A:29 shall be
calculated from the date the last of the required documents is received
by the board.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:13, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.

### Section 330-C:16

 **330-C:16 Master Licensed Alcohol and Drug Counselor; Initial
License. –** An applicant for initial MLADC licensure shall:
                                             
 I. (a) Have graduated with a minimum graduate degree of a 60-hour
masters degree in clinical mental health, clinical psychology, substance
use treatment, social work, or human services or equivalent, with
clinical course work and internship requirements, from an accredited
college or university, 270 hours of alcohol and drug use education,
which may be included in the coursework of the master's program, and 300
hours of supervised practical training.
                                             
 (b) Have graduated with a masters degree of less than 60 hours in
a discipline described in subparagraph (a) and has completed the
necessary additional hours of masters level course work as determined by
the board pursuant to RSA 330-C:9, I(d).
                                             
 II. Either hold a current LADC license or pass the testing
procedures required under RSA 330-C:17, II.
                                             
 II-a. Either hold a current license issued by the board of mental
health practice or pass the examination approved by the board of
licensing for alcohol and other drug use professionals to demonstrate
competence to provide co-occurring disorder counseling within the
context of substance use counseling.
                                             
 III. Complete 3,000 hours of clinically supervised post-masters
degree work experience in the treatment of substance use and
co-occurring disorders. Up to 1,500 hours of clinically supervised work
experience accumulated by the applicant during his or her practice as an
LADC may be counted toward the required 3,000 hours. A current license
issued by the board of mental health practice may be substituted for
1,500 hours of the required 3,000 hours of clinically supervised work
experience.
                                             
 IV. Meet other criteria as established by the board.
                                             
 V. If the applicant does not meet the requirements of paragraphs
I-IV, the board shall not issue a MLADC license but shall, if the
individual meets all requirements for licensure as a LADC, issue a LADC
license to the individual.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:14, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.

### Section 330-C:17

 **330-C:17 Licensed Alcohol and Drug Counselor; Initial License. –**
An applicant for initial LADC licensure shall:
                                             
 I. (a) Have graduated with an associate's degree in substance use
counseling, addiction studies, or equivalent program, obtained 270 hours
of alcohol and drug use education within the degree-granting program or
separately, completed 6,000 hours of supervised work experience, and
completed 300 hours of supervised practical training within the
degree-granting program, as part of the supervised work experience or
separately; or
                                             
 (b) Have graduated with a bachelor's degree in a clinical mental
health, social work, psychology, substance use counseling, addiction
studies, human services discipline, or equivalent program from an
accredited college or university, obtained 270 hours of alcohol and drug
use education within the degree-granting program or separately,
completed 4,000 hours of supervised work experience, and completed 300
hours of supervised practical training within the degree-granting
program, as part of the supervised work experience or separately.
                                             
 II. Pass testing procedures of a nationally recognized credentialing
entity specified by the board. Such procedures shall be based on the
core functions and practice dimensions of addiction counseling.
                                             
 III. Meet other criteria as established by the board.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:15, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.

### Section 330-C:18

 **330-C:18 Licensed Clinical Supervisor; Initial License. –** An
applicant for initial LCS licensure shall:
                                             
 I. Hold a current license as a MLADC or LADC;
                                             
 II. Have 10,000 hours of experience as an alcohol and drug
counselor;
                                             
 III. Have 4,000 hours of experience as a clinical supervisor
supervising professionals providing alcohol and drug counseling, which
hours may be accumulated by the applicant as part of the experience
requirements in paragraph II;
                                             
 IV. Have received 200 hours of face-to-face clinical supervision;
                                             
 V. Have completed 30 hours of training in clinical supervision
covering assessment, evaluation, counselor development, management,
administration, and professional responsibility;
                                             
 VI. Pass testing procedures of a nationally recognized credentialing
entity specified by the board; and
                                             
 VII. Meet other criteria as established by the board.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:16, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.

### Section 330-C:19

 **330-C:19 Certified Recovery Support Worker; Initial Certification.
–** An applicant for initial certification as a CRSW shall:
                                             
 I. Submit a completed application and fees established by the
board;
                                             
 II. Have the ability to read and write in the English language;
                                             
 III. Have a high school diploma or its equivalent;
                                             
 IV. Have completed training requirements established by the board;
and
                                             
 V. Meet other criteria as established by the board.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 330-C:20

 **330-C:20 Criminal Record Checks. –**
                                             
 I. Every applicant for initial licensure or certification or
reinstatement shall submit to the board a notarized criminal history
record release form, as provided by the New Hampshire division of state
police, which authorizes the release of his or her criminal history
record, if any, to the board.
                                             
 II. The applicant shall submit with the release form a complete set
of fingerprints taken by a qualified law enforcement agency or an
authorized employee of the department of safety. If the first set of
fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern, a second set of
fingerprints shall be necessary in order to complete the criminal
history records check. If, after 2 attempts, a set of fingerprints is
invalid due to insufficient pattern, the board may, in lieu of the
criminal history record check, accept police clearances from every city,
town, or county where the person has lived during the past 5 years.
                                             
 III. The board shall submit the criminal history record release form
and fingerprint form to the division of state police which shall conduct
a criminal history record check through its records and through the
Federal Bureau of Investigation. Upon completion of the record check,
the division of state police shall release copies of the criminal
history record to the board.
                                             
 IV. The board shall review the criminal history record information
prior to making a decision and shall maintain the confidentiality of all
criminal history records received pursuant to this section.
                                             
 V. The applicant shall bear the cost of a criminal history record
check.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 330-C:21

 **330-C:21 Applicants From Other States. –**
                                             
 I. The board may license or issue a certification to any applicant
who is licensed or certified in any other state, provided the other
state's requirements are substantially equivalent to or more stringent
than those of this state.
                                             
 II. The board may license or issue a certification to any applicant
who is licensed or certified in any other state if the other state's
requirements are not substantially equivalent to those of this state
solely because the applicant has obtained a master's degree in a
discipline described in RSA 330-C:16, I(a) which is less than a 60-hour
degree. An individual licensed under this paragraph shall:
                                             
 (a) Complete the necessary additional hours of course work in
co-occurring disorders pursuant to standards established by the board
within 5 years from the effective date of licensure or certification;
                                             
 (b) Have completed 3,000 hours of clinically supervised work
experience in the treatment of substance use and co-occurring disorders.
These hours may be completed after the applicant has been issued the
master's degree. Up to 1,500 hours of clinically supervised work
experience accumulated by the applicant during his or her practice as a
LADC may be counted toward the required 3,000 hours. In addition, a
current license issued by the board of mental health practice may be
substituted for 1,500 hours of the required 3,000 hours of clinically
supervised work experience;
                                             
 (c) Conduct his or her practice as an MLADC in full compliance
with RSA 330-C:10; and
                                             
 (d) Notify the board in writing that he or she has completed the
requirements in subparagraph (a).
                                             
 III. If an individual licensed under paragraph II does not satisfy
the requirements of subparagraph II(a) within 5 years of initial
licensure or certification, the board shall not renew the individual's
MLADC license but shall, if the individual meets all the requirements
for licensure as a LADC, issue a LADC license to the individual.
                                             
 IV. The board may waive provisions of this chapter requiring
supervised work experience and practical training and grant a license as
a licensed alcohol and drug counselor or master licensed alcohol and
drug counselor to any applicant who presents proof of active licensed
practice in another jurisdiction of the United States for a period of 10
years or more.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:17, eff. Sept. 4, 2010. 2016, 248:1,
eff. June 10, 2016.

### Section 330-C:22

 **330-C:22 Renewals. –**
                                             
 I. Licenses and certifications shall be renewed every 24 months
after initial licensure or certification upon payment of a fee and
presentation of satisfactory proof of completion of continuing education
requirements pursuant to RSA 330-C:24.
                                             
 II. Licensees and certification holders shall have a grace period of
30 days after expiration in which to renew retroactively if they
otherwise are entitled to have their licenses or certifications renewed
and pay to the board the renewal fee and any late fee set by the board
under rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 III. A suspended license or certification shall be subject to
expiration and may be renewed as provided in this chapter, but such
renewal shall not entitle the person, while the license or certification
remains suspended and until it is reinstated, to engage in the activity,
or in any other conduct or activity in violation of the order under
which the license or certification was suspended. If a suspended license
or certification is reinstated after its expiration, the person, as a
condition of reinstatement, shall pay a reinstatement fee that shall
equal the renewal fee in effect on the last regular renewal date
immediately preceding the date of reinstatement, plus any late fee set
by the board.
                                             
 IV. A license or certification revoked on disciplinary grounds may
not be renewed.
                                             
 V. Upon the request of a licensee or certificate holder who is a
member of the armed forces of the United States, a member of any reserve
component of the armed forces, or a member of the national guard, the
board is authorized to place the person's license or certification on
inactive status whenever such person is called to active military duty.
The board is authorized to return to active status any license or
certification placed on inactive status at any time within the 2 years
following the release from active military duty of the licensee or
certificate holder, upon a written request accompanied by the payment of
renewal fee if the license or certificate has expired, and accompanied
by proof of completion of the current continuing education requirements.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:18, 19, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.

### Section 330-C:23

 **330-C:23 Reinstatement. –**
                                             
 I. An individual whose license or certification has lapsed by
failure to renew under RSA 330-C:22 by the end of the 30-day grace
period, may apply for reinstatement by meeting all requirements for
renewal, or satisfying the following conditions:
                                             
 (a) An individual who applies for reinstatement who does not meet
the continuing education requirements shall demonstrate current alcohol
and other drug use professional knowledge and skill, as defined in rules
adopted by the board under RSA 541-A.
                                             
 (b) For those persons applying for reinstatement following
disciplinary action, compliance with all board requirements as well as
any specific requirements set forth in the board's discipline order.
                                             
 II. Application for reinstatement of a license or certification
which has lapsed shall include payment of a reinstatement fee and be
made, and granted or denied, in accordance with rules adopted by the
board pursuant to RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 330-C:24

 **330-C:24 Continuing Education. –**
                                             
 I. As a prerequisite to renewal of licensure or certification, a
licensee or certificate holder shall present satisfactory evidence to
the board of having met the continuing education requirements of this
chapter.
                                             
 II. The continuing education requirements for renewal shall be:
                                             
 (a) For master licensed alcohol and drug counselors and licensed
alcohol and drug counselors, 48 hours of approved continuing education
in the 24 months subsequent to the date of licensure or re-licensure.
                                             
 (b) For licensed clinical supervisors, 6 hours of training in
clinical supervision which may be incorporated into the hours needed for
LADC re-licensure in the 24 months subsequent to the date of licensure
or re-licensure.
                                             
 (c) For certified recovery support workers, 12 hours of approved
continuing education in the 24 months subsequent to the date of
certification or re-certification.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:20, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.

### Section 330-C:25

 **330-C:25 Duty to Warn of Violent Acts of Client; Civil Liability.
–**
                                             
 I. Any person licensed or certified under this chapter has a duty to
warn of, or to take reasonable precautions to provide protection from, a
client's violent behavior when the client has communicated to such
person a serious threat of physical violence against a clearly
identified or reasonably identifiable victim or victims, or a serious
threat of substantial damage to real property.
                                             
 II. The duty may be discharged by, and no monetary liability or
cause of action shall arise against, any person licensed or certified
under this chapter if the person makes reasonable efforts to communicate
the threat to the victim or victims, notifies the police department
closest to the client's or potential victim's residence, or obtains
civil commitment of the client to the state mental health system.
                                             
 III. No monetary liability and no cause of action may arise
concerning client privacy or confidentiality against any person licensed
or certified under this chapter for information disclosed to third
parties in an effort to discharge a duty under paragraph II.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 330-C:26

 **330-C:26 Privileged Communications Between Licensees and
Certificate Holders and Their Clients. –** A person licensed or
certified under this chapter or an employee of such person, shall not
disclose any confidential information that the licensee, certificate
holder, or employee may have acquired while performing substance use
counseling services for a patient unless in accordance with the federal
regulation regarding the Confidentiality of Alcohol and Drug Abuse
Patient Records pursuant to 42 C.F.R. section 2.1 et seq.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 330-C:27

 **330-C:27 Disciplinary Action; Misconduct. –**
                                             
 I. The board may undertake investigations and disciplinary
proceedings:
                                             
 (a) Upon its own initiative.
                                             
 (b) Upon written complaint of any person which charges that a
person has committed any acts of misconduct under this section and which
specifies the grounds for such complaint.
                                             
 II. All written complaints received by the board shall be recorded
and contain the following information:
                                             
 (a) Licensee's or certificate holder's name.
                                             
 (b) Name of the complaining party.
                                             
 (c) Date of complaint.
                                             
 (d) Brief statement of complaint.
                                             
 III. Misconduct sufficient to support disciplinary proceedings under
this section includes:
                                             
 (a) Violating any provision of this chapter or any substantive
rule adopted under this chapter or order issued by the board.
                                             
 (b) Engaging in the practice of substance use counseling,
co-occurring disorders counseling, or supervision in a manner harmful or
dangerous to the client or public.
                                             
 (c) Fraud or deceit in procuring or attempting to procure a
license, certification, or other authorization to practice substance use
counseling or co-occurring disorders counseling in this or another state
or territory of the United States.
                                             
 (d) Engaging in sexual relations, soliciting sexual relations, or
committing an act of sexual abuse or sexual misconduct with a current
client or with a person who was a client.
                                             
 (e) Failing to remain free from the use of any controlled
substance or any alcoholic beverage to the extent that the use impairs
the ability of the licensee or certificate holder to conduct with safety
to the public the practices authorized by this chapter.
                                             
 (f) Conviction of a felony which has not been waived by the
board.
                                             
 (g) An act or omission causing another state or territory of the
United States to revoke or suspend a license, certification, or other
authorization to practice substance use counseling or co-occurring
disorders counseling or to discipline the person authorized to practice
by placing him or her on probation.
                                             
 (h) Failing to maintain confidentiality pursuant to RSA
330-C:26.
                                             
 (i) Engaging in false or misleading advertising.
                                             
 (j) Having a mental disability which significantly impairs
professional ability or judgment to the extent that it impairs the
ability to conduct with safety to the public the practices authorized by
this chapter, unless the board finds that measures have been taken to
control the effects of the disability.
                                             
 IV. The board, after notice and a public hearing, or as part of a
settlement, may take disciplinary action against a licensee or
certificate holder in any one or more of the following ways:
                                             
 (a) Revocation of license or certificate.
                                             
 (b) Suspension of license or certificate for a period of time
determined as reasonable by the board.
                                             
 (c) Censure.
                                             
 (d) Issuance of a letter of reprimand.
                                             
 (e) Placement on probationary status. The board may require the
person to submit to any of the following:
                                             
 (1) Regular reporting to the board concerning the matters
which are the basis of the probation.
                                             
 (2) Continuing professional education until a satisfactory
degree of skill has been achieved in those areas which are the basis of
probation.
                                             
 (3) Submitting to the care, counseling, or treatment of a
physician, counseling service, health care facility, professional
assistance program, or any comparable person or facility approved by the
board.
                                             
 (4) Practicing under the direct supervision of another
licensee for a period of time specified by the board.
                                             
 (f) Refusal to renew a license or certification.
                                             
 (g) Revocation of probation which has been granted by the board
and imposition of any other discipline provided in this section if the
requirements of probation have not been fulfilled or have been
violated.
                                             
 (h) Assessing administrative fines in amounts established by the
board which shall not exceed 
                                             $2,000 per offense, or in the case of a
continuing offense, 
                                             $250 for each day the violation continues.
                                             
 V. The board may reinstate any person to good standing under this
chapter if, after hearing, the board is satisfied that reinstatement is
in the public interest.
                                             
 VI. Upon the suspension or revocation of a license or certification
issued under this chapter, a licensee or certificate holder shall
surrender the license or certificate to the board.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:21, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.

### Section 330-C:28

 **330-C:28 Investigations and Hearings. –**
                                             
 I. The board may investigate possible misconduct by licensees and
certificate holders and other matters within the scope of this chapter.
Investigations may be conducted formally, after issuance of a board
order setting forth the general scope of the investigation, or
informally, without such an order. In either case, board investigations
and the information gathered in such investigations shall be exempt from
the public disclosure provisions of RSA 91-A, except to the extent such
information may later become the subject of a public disciplinary
hearing. The board may disclose information acquired in an investigation
to law enforcement or health licensing agencies in this state or any
other jurisdiction, or in response to specific statutory requirements or
court orders.
                                             
 II. The board may retain legal counsel, expert witnesses, special
advisors, or other qualified persons to assist with any investigation or
adjudicative proceeding.
                                             
 III. The form taken by an investigation is a matter reserved to the
discretion of the board. The board may conduct investigations on an ex
parte basis.
                                             
 IV. (a) The board may administer oaths or affirmations, preserve
testimony, and, after consultation with an attorney employed by the
state of New Hampshire, issue subpoenas for witnesses and for documents
and things only in a formal investigation or an adjudicative hearing,
except that subpoenas for medical records and pharmacy records, as
provided in paragraph V, may be issued at any time.
                                             
 (b) The board may serve a subpoena on any licensee or certificate
holder of the board by certified mail, but shall serve a subpoena on any
other person in accordance with the procedures and fee schedules
required in 42 C.F.R. Part 2.
                                             
 (c) Persons licensed or certified by the board shall not be
entitled to a witness fee or mileage expenses for travel within the
state, which are necessary to respond to a subpoena issued by the
board.
                                             
 (d) Any board-issued subpoena related to a board hearing or
investigation shall be valid if annotated "Fees Guaranteed by the New
Hampshire Board of Licensing for Alcohol and Other Drug Use
Professionals.''
                                             
 (e) A minimum of 48 hours' notice shall be given for compliance
with a subpoena issued under this chapter.
                                             
 V. The board may at any time subpoena client records from its
licensees or certificate holders, or other health care providers, or
health care facilities licensed or certified in this state to the extent
that the records sought are relevant to matters within the board's
regulatory authority. Such subpoenas shall be served by certified mail
or by personal delivery to the address shown on the respondent's current
license or certificate, and shall require no witness or other fee. A
minimum of 15 days' advance notice shall be allowed for complying with a
subpoena duces tecum issued under this paragraph.
                                             
 VI. Complaints of misconduct shall be in writing and shall be
treated as petitions for the commencement of a disciplinary hearing. The
board shall determine whether a complaint alleges misconduct sufficient
to support disciplinary proceedings. If the board determines that it
does, the board shall forward a copy of the complaint to the person
complained against within 5 business days of its determination. If the
board determines that it does not, the board shall send the complainant
a written notice of dismissal of the complaint. Some or all of the
allegations in a complaint may be consolidated with another complaint or
with issues the board wishes to investigate or hear on its own motion.
If an investigation of a complaint results in an offer of settlement,
the board may settle the allegations against the licensee or certificate
holder without the consent of a complainant, provided that material
facts are not in dispute.
                                             
 VII. At any time during an investigation of a complaint, and without
issuing a subpoena, the board may mail a copy of a complaint to the
person named in the complaint, and may require in a written request that
the licensee or certificate holder and his or her employer provide
detailed and good faith written responses to allegations identified by
the board and also provide copies of all records concerning any client
identified in the complaint. The licensee or certificate holder and
others receiving inquiries from the board shall respond within a
reasonable time period of not less than 15 days as the board may
specify. This procedure may also be used in connection with matters the
board has undertaken to investigate on its own motion.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 330-C:29

 **330-C:29 Hearings. –**
                                             
 I. The board may hold adjudicative hearings concerning allegations
of misconduct or other matters within the scope of this chapter. Such
hearings shall be public proceedings. Any member of the board other than
the public members, or any other qualified person appointed by the
board, shall have authority to preside at such a hearing and to issue
oaths or affirmations to witnesses.
                                             
 II. The board shall give the respondent and the complainant, if any,
at least 15 days' written notice of the date, time, and place of a
hearing, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Such notice shall
comply with RSA 541-A and include an itemization of the issues to be
heard, and, in the case of a disciplinary hearing, a statement as to
whether the action has been initiated by a written complaint or upon the
board's own motion, or both. If a written complaint is involved, the
notice shall provide the complainant with a reasonable opportunity to
intervene as a party. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the complainant and to the respondent at
the address provided by the respondent currently on file at the board
offices. Notice mailed in compliance with this section shall be deemed
served.
                                             
 III. The board may at any time dispose of allegations in a
complaint, investigation, or disciplinary hearing by settlement,
default, or consent order, by issuing an order of dismissal for failing
to state a proper basis for disciplinary action, or by summary judgment
order based upon undisputed material facts. In disciplinary hearings,
the board may hold prehearing conferences which shall be exempt from the
provisions of RSA 91-A, but any final disciplinary action or decision
which occurs without holding a public hearing shall be publicly released
at the time it is served upon the parties.
                                             
 IV. Final disciplinary actions and other adjudicative decisions made
by the board shall be in writing and served upon the parties. Such
decisions shall not be released to the public until they are served upon
the parties.
                                             
 V. Any person appearing at a board hearing or investigation may be
represented by legal counsel or other representative, but the board
shall have no obligation or authority to appoint or provide such
representation.
                                             
 VI. The board shall hear any complaint not resolved at or prior to a
prehearing conference.
                                             
 VII. In the case of sanctions for discipline in another
jurisdiction, the decision of the other jurisdiction's disciplinary
authority may not be collaterally attacked and the board may impose any
of the sanctions set forth in this chapter, but shall provide notice and
an opportunity to be heard if it intends to impose sanctions above those
imposed by the other jurisdiction.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 330-C:30

 **330-C:30 Rehearing; Appeals. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who has been refused a license or certification by the
board or has been disciplined by the board shall have the right to
petition for a rehearing within 30 days after the original decision.
                                             
 II. Appeals from a decision on rehearing shall be by appeal pursuant
to RSA 541.
                                             
 III. No sanction shall be stayed by the board during an appeal.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 330-C:31

 **330-C:31 Unlawful Acts. –** It shall be unlawful for any person or
entity to:
                                             
 I. Practice as a licensee or certificate holder without a license or
certification, as applicable, or when the license or certification to do
so has been revoked or suspended or when the license or certification to
do so has lapsed.
                                             
 II. Represent oneself in any way or use, in connection with the
individual's name, any designation tending to imply licensure as an
alcohol and drug counselor or clinical supervisor or certification as a
recovery support worker unless so licensed or certified.
                                             
 III. Represent or imply that the person or entity is conducting an
alcohol and drug use counseling education program which has been
approved by the board when the program has not been so approved.
                                             
 IV. Disclose, solicit, or compile information regarding the contents
of any licensing examinations relative to this chapter, except as
authorized by the board.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:22, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.

### Section 330-C:32

 **330-C:32 Penalty. –** Any person convicted of violating RSA
330-C:31 shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor if a natural person or
guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 330-C:33

 **330-C:33 Exemptions. –**
                                             
 I. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following
individuals:
                                             
 (a) Qualified members of other professions or occupations,
including without limitation those licensed by the board of mental
health practice, the board of medicine, and the board of nursing who
provide treatment for substance use disorders and co-occurring disorders
within the authorized scope of practice of their profession or
occupation and who do not represent themselves as "licensed alcohol and
drug counselors,'' "master licensed alcohol and drug counselors,''
"licensed clinical supervisors'' or "certified recovery support
workers.''
                                             
 (b) Students or counselors engaged in entry-level internships in
a licensed or certified facility and counselors working toward licensure
in a licensed or certified facility, provided that the student or
counselor is practicing as part of supervised work or course of study
and designated by such titles as "counselor intern,'' "counselor,'' or
other title clearly indicating training status.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent members of
the clergy, or peer groups or self-help groups from performing peer
counseling or self-help activities which may be, wholly or in part,
included as a defined professional service. However, no members of a
peer group or self-help group shall use a title stating or implying that
they are a licensed alcohol and drug counselor, a licensed clinical
supervisor, or a certified recovery support worker.

**Source.** 2008, 189:1. 2010, 249:23, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.
