---
title: 'CHAPTER 332-B NEW HAMPSHIRE VETERINARY PRACTICE ACT'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 332-B
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE VETERINARY PRACTICE ACT
-------------------------------------

### Section 332-B:1

 **332-B:1 Definitions. –** When used in this chapter, these words
and phrases shall be defined as follows:
                                             
 I. "Animal'' means any animal other than man and includes fowl,
birds, fish, and reptiles, wild or domestic, living or dead.
                                             
 I-a. "AVMA'' means the American Veterinary Medical Association.
                                             
 II. "Veterinary medicine'' means and includes veterinary surgery,
obstetrics, dentistry, and all other branches or specialties of
veterinary medicine.
                                             
 III. "Practice of veterinary medicine'' means:
                                             
 (a) To diagnose, treat, correct, change, relieve, or prevent
animal disease, lameness, deformity, defect, injury, or other physical
or mental conditions: including the prescription or administration of
any drug, medicine, biologic, apparatus, application, anesthetic, or
other therapeutic or diagnostic substance or technique, and the use of
any manual or mechanical procedure for testing for pregnancy, or for
correcting sterility, or infertility, or to render advice or
recommendation with regard to any of the above.
                                             
 (b) To represent directly or indirectly, publicly or privately,
an ability and willingness to do any act described in subparagraph (a).
                                             
 (c) To use any title, words, abbreviation, or letters in a manner
or under circumstances which induce the belief that the person using
them is qualified to do any act described in subparagraph (a), except
where such person is a veterinarian.
                                             
 IV. "Veterinarian'' means a person who has received a doctor's
degree in veterinary medicine from an accredited school of veterinary
medicine or other veterinary school approved by the board, or a person
from a foreign veterinary school holding an ECFVG certificate or a PAVE
certificate.
                                             
 V. "Licensed veterinarian'' means a person who is validly and
currently licensed to practice veterinary medicine in this state.
                                             
 VI. "School of veterinary medicine'' means any veterinary college or
division of a university or college that offers the degree of doctor of
veterinary medicine or its equivalent and that conforms to the standards
required for accreditation by the AVMA.
                                             
 VII. "Person'' means any individual, firm, partnership, association,
joint venture, cooperative, and corporation, or any other group or
combination acting in concert; and whether or not acting as a principal,
trustee, fiduciary, receiver, or as any other kind of legal or personal
representative, or as the successor in interest, assignee, agent,
factor, servant, employee, director, officer, or any other
representative of such person.
                                             
 VIII. "Board'' means the board of veterinary medicine established in
RSA 332-B:3.
                                             
 IX. "ECFVG certificate'' means a certificate issued by the AVMA
educational commission for foreign veterinary graduates indicating that
the holder has demonstrated knowledge and skill equivalent to that
possessed by a graduate of an accredited or approved college of
veterinary medicine.
                                             
 X. "Animal physical therapist'' means a person who is licensed to
practice physical therapy in New Hampshire pursuant to RSA 328-A and has
obtained a certification to practice animal physical therapy from the
board of veterinary medicine.
                                             
 XI. "Animal physical therapy'' means the practice of physical
therapy on animals.
                                             
 XII. "PAVE'' means the Program for the Assessment of Veterinary
Education Equivalence operated by the American Association of Veterinary
State Boards.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1977, 158:2. 1999, 314:1-6. 2010, 170:2, eff.
June 17, 2010. 2011, 132:1, 2, eff. Aug. 6, 2011.

### Section 332-B:1-a

 **332-B:1-a Purpose. –** The purpose of the board of veterinary
medicine is to promote public health, safety, and welfare by
safeguarding the people of New Hampshire against incompetent,
unscrupulous, and unauthorized persons and from unprofessional or
illegal practices by persons licensed to practice veterinary medicine.
The right to practice veterinary medicine is a privilege granted by
legislative authority to persons possessing personal and professional
qualifications specified in this chapter.

**Source.** 1981, 490:13. 1999, 314:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 332-B:2

 **332-B:2 License Required and Exceptions. –** Except as provided in
RSA 332-B:9, no person may practice veterinary medicine in the state who
is not a licensed veterinarian or the holder of a valid temporary permit
issued by the board. This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit:
                                             
 I. An employee of the federal, state, or local government performing
official duties.
                                             
 II. A person who is a regular student in a veterinary school working
under the direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian.
                                             
 III. A person advising with respect to or performing acts which the
board by rule has prescribed as accepted livestock management
practices.
                                             
 IV. A veterinarian regularly licensed in another state consulting
with a licensed veterinarian in this state.
                                             
 V. The owner of an animal or the owner's regular employee caring for
and treating the animal belonging to such owner, except where the
ownership of the animal was transferred for purposes of circumventing
this chapter.
                                             
 VI. A member of the faculty of a veterinary school performing
regular functions, or a person lecturing, or giving instructions or
demonstrations at a veterinary school or in connection with a continuing
education course or seminar.
                                             
 VII. Any person selling or applying any pesticide, insecticide, or
herbicide.
                                             
 VIII. Any person engaging in bona fide scientific research which
reasonably requires experimentation involving animals.
                                             
 IX. A person from doing veterinary or surgical work or giving advice
to the person's neighbors; provided that the person does not make a
regular practice thereof or receive pecuniary consideration.
                                             
 X. An animal owner or his or her designated agent performing
treatment as prescribed by a veterinarian with a valid
veterinarian-patient relationship.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1999, 314:8, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 332-B:3

 **332-B:3 Board; Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a board of veterinary medicine consisting of 7
members: 5 veterinarians, the state veterinarian, and one public member.
The members, other than the state veterinarian, shall be appointed by
the governor, with the approval of the council, to a term of 5 years,
and until a successor is appointed. No appointed member of the board
shall be appointed to 2 consecutive 5-year terms. Vacancies shall be
filled for the remainder of the term and in the same manner as the
original appointment. Any appointed member of the board may be removed
by the governor after a hearing by the board determines cause for
removal. The state veterinarian may serve as an ex officio member,
provided any duties of the state veterinarian relative to this chapter
shall be agreed upon in writing by the board and the commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food and which agreement may include:
                                             
 (a) Supervision of the board's administrative office and
employees;
                                             
 (b) Assistance with administrative activities;
                                             
 (c) Submission of periodic reports to the board; and
                                             
 (d) Participation in complaint investigations.
                                             
 II. When a vacancy has occurred, or is due to occur in a veterinary
position on the board, the New Hampshire Veterinary Medical Association
shall nominate 3 qualified persons and forward the nominations to the
governor. The governor may make appointments from those nominated by the
association, but shall not be required to appoint one of those so
nominated.
                                             
 III. Each appointed member of the board shall be paid 
                                             $75 for each
day or portion of a day of at least 3 consecutive hours in which the
member is engaged in the work of the board, in addition to such
reimbursement for travel and other expenses as is normally allowed to
state employees.
                                             
 IV. The board shall be an administratively attached agency, under
RSA 21-G:10, to the department of agriculture, markets, and food.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1981, 490:3. 1985, 416:10. 1987, 289:4. 1995,
130:4; 183:2, 3. 1999, 314:9, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 332-B:3-a

 **332-B:3-a Temporary Member. –** The president or acting president
of the board is authorized to appoint an additional person or persons to
sit on a temporary or emergency basis at any hearing at which one or
more board members is absent, so long as each person so chosen has in
the past served as a board member.

**Source.** 1979, 401:1. 1999, 314:9, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 332-B:4

 **332-B:4 Qualifications. –**
                                             
 I. A veterinarian shall be qualified to serve as a member of the
board if the person is a graduate of a veterinary school, a resident of
this state, and has been licensed to practice veterinary medicine in
this state for the 5 years preceding the time of appointment.
                                             
 II. The public member of the board shall be a person who is not, and
never was, a member of the veterinary profession or the spouse of any
such person, and who does not have, and never has had, a material
financial interest in either the provision of veterinary services or an
activity directly related to veterinary medicine, including the
representation of the board or profession for a fee at any time during
the 5 years preceding appointment.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1981, 490:4. 1999, 314:9, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 332-B:5

 **332-B:5 Meetings and Duties. –** The board shall meet at least 6
times a year at the time and place fixed by rule of the board. Other
necessary meetings may be called by the president of the board by giving
notice as may be required by rule. The quorum and the actions of the
board shall be in accordance with RSA 91-A. At its annual meeting, the
board shall organize by electing a president and such other officers as
may be prescribed by rule. Officers of the board serve for terms of one
year and until a successor is elected, without limitation on the number
of terms an officer may serve. The president shall preside at board
meetings and serve as administrative head of the board. The board shall
submit annually to the governor a report on the transactions of the
board, including an account of monies received and disbursed as shall be
required by the state auditors. Records shall be kept by the
administrative assistant pursuant to RSA 91-A:3.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1999, 314:9, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 332-B:6

 **332-B:6 Revenues. –** All revenues received by the board shall be
deposited in the general fund.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1981, 490:14, eff. July 1, 1981.

### Section 332-B:7

 **332-B:7 Powers of the Board. –** The board shall have the power
to:
                                             
 I. Examine and determine the qualifications and fitness of
applicants for a license to practice veterinary medicine in this state.
                                             
 II. Issue, renew, deny, suspend, revoke licenses and temporary
permits to practice veterinary medicine in the state or otherwise
discipline licensed veterinarians consistent with the provisions of this
chapter and the rules and regulations adopted thereunder.
                                             
 III. Establish fees for examination of applicants, for licenses and
for renewal of licenses to practice veterinary medicine, including late
fees, and for transcribing and transferring records and other services.
                                             
 IV. Conduct investigations and hearings as provided in RSA 332-B:15
and RSA 332-B:16.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 V-a. With the approval of the attorney general and the governor and
council, compensate the board's counsel, assistants and investigators
appointed in connection with its activities under this chapter on a
warrant of the governor out of any money in the treasury not otherwise
appropriated. Any sums so expended shall be included in the computation
of fees established for the subsequent fiscal year under RSA 332-B:7,
III.
                                             
 VI. Employ full-time or part-time professional, clerical or special
personnel necessary to effectuate the provisions of this chapter and
purchase or rent necessary office space, equipment and supplies within
the limits of appropriations made therefor.
                                             
 VII. Appoint from its own membership one or more of the members to
act as representatives of the board at any meeting within or without the
state where such representation is deemed desirable.
                                             
 VIII. Bring proceedings in the courts for the enforcement of this
chapter or any regulations made pursuant thereto.
                                             
 IX-XI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1981, 490:5, 11, 16. 1999, 314:10, 11, 32, I,
eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 332-B:7-a

 **332-B:7-a Rulemaking Authority. –** The board shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The application procedure for any license issued under this
chapter;
                                             
 II. The qualifications of applicants in addition to those
requirements set by statute;
                                             
 III. Design and content of all forms required under this chapter;
                                             
 IV. How an applicant shall be examined, including:
                                             
 (a) Time and place of examination;
                                             
 (b) The subjects to be tested;
                                             
 (c) Passing grade; and
                                             
 (d) Disposition of examination papers;
                                             
 V. Dates and conditions for license renewal;
                                             
 VI. Ethical standards required to be met by each holder of any
license issued under this chapter and how such license may be revoked
for violation of these standards;
                                             
 VII. The establishment of all fees required under this chapter;
                                             
 VIII. Procedures for the conduct of investigations;
                                             
 IX. Procedures for the conduct of hearings;
                                             
 X. The training and scope of activity for non-veterinarians employed
under the direction and responsibility of a licensed veterinarian;
                                             
 XI. Standards for approval of educational programs;
                                             
 XII. Establishing and enforcing standards for veterinary facilities;
and
                                             
 XIII. Procedures for assessing, compromising, and collecting civil
penalties.
                                             
 XIV. Additional criteria for the certification and continuing
education requirements of animal physical therapists under RSA
328-A:15-b.
                                             
 XV. Prescribing controlled drugs pursuant to RSA 318-B:41.

**Source.** 1981, 490:6. 1999, 314:12-14. 2009, 311:4, eff. Jan. 1,
2010. 2016, 213:8, eff. June 7, 2016.

### Section 332-B:8

 **332-B:8 Status of Persons Previously Licensed. –** Any person
holding a valid license to practice veterinary medicine in this state on
August 24, 1971, shall be recognized as a licensed veterinarian and
shall be entitled to retain this status so long as the person complies
with the provisions of this chapter, including biennial renewal of the
license.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1999, 314:15, eff. Jan. 1, 2000. 2011, 224:159,
eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 332-B:9

 **332-B:9 Application for License; Qualifications. –** Any person
desiring a license to practice veterinary medicine in this state shall
make written application to the board. The application shall show that
the applicant is 18 years of age or more, a graduate of an AVMA
accredited school of veterinary medicine or other veterinary school
acceptable to the board, or the holder of an ECFVG certificate or a PAVE
certificate, a person of good professional character, and such other
information and proof as the board may require by rule. The application
shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established and published by
the board.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1973, 72:54. 1977, 158:3. 1981, 490:7. 1999,
314:16, eff. Jan. 1, 2000. 2011, 132:3, eff. Aug. 6, 2011.

### Section 332-B:10

 **332-B:10 Examinations. –** The board shall hold at least one
examination during each year and may hold such additional examinations
as are necessary. The board shall give public notice of the time and
place for each examination at least 90 days in advance of the date set
for the examination. A person desiring to take an examination shall make
application at least 30 days before the date of the examination. The
preparation, administration, and grading of examinations shall be
governed by rules prescribed by the board. Examinations shall be
designed to test the examinee's knowledge of and proficiency in the
subjects and techniques commonly taught in veterinary schools and
familiarity with the law and rules governing veterinary medicine in this
state. To pass the examination, the examinee must demonstrate scientific
and practical knowledge sufficient to prove that he or she is a
competent person to practice veterinary medicine in the judgment of the
board. All examinees shall be tested by a written examination,
supplemented by such oral interviews and practical demonstrations as the
board may deem necessary. The board may adopt and use a national
examination as adopted in rules of the board. For purposes of licensure,
except by reciprocity, an individual's results from a national
examination shall be valid for 5 years from the date of the examination.
After each examination, the board shall notify each examinee of the
results of the examination, and the board shall issue licenses to the
persons successfully completing the examination. The board shall record
the new licenses and issue a certificate of registration to the new
licensees. Any person failing an examination shall be admitted to any
subsequent examination on payment of the application fee.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1999, 314:16, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 332-B:11

 **332-B:11 Reciprocity. –**
                                             
 I. The board may issue a license without examination to a person
who:
                                             
 (a) Is a graduate of an accredited school of veterinary medicine
and holds a current license in good standing in another state, U.S.
territory, or province of Canada; or is a graduate of an unapproved
veterinary school outside the United States and Canada and possesses a
certificate of board certification in a clinical specialty from an
organization approved by the American Board of Veterinary Specialists
and holds a current license in good standing in another state, U.S.
territory, or province of Canada;
                                             
 (b) Has passed a national board examination adopted by rules of
the board;
                                             
 (c) Has actively practiced clinical veterinary medicine for at
least 1,000 hours during each of 3 of the previous 5 calendar years with
a minimum of 3,000 practice hours; and
                                             
 (d) Provides evidence of good professional character, completed
application, and payment of fees.
                                             
 II. Applicants who are not graduates of schools of veterinary
medicine accredited by the AVMA, other than those described in paragraph
I, shall possess a certificate issued by the ECFVG, PAVE, or a
Certificate of Qualification issued by the Canadian Veterinary Medical
Association, unless at the time such applicant became licensed in the
state, province, or U.S. territory from which they are applying, an
ECFVG certificate or a PAVE certificate was not required by this state.
                                             
 III. The board may require that prior to licensure under this
section the applicant shall show satisfactory completion of an
examination covering state law and rules concerning veterinary medicine
and state or national veterinary codes of ethics.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1981, 490:8. 1999, 314:17, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.
2011, 132:4, eff. Aug. 6, 2011.

### Section 332-B:12

 **332-B:12 Temporary Permit. –** The board may issue without
examination a temporary permit to practice veterinary medicine in this
state to any person who is a graduate of a veterinary college recognized
as provided for in RSA 332-B:9 for a period not to exceed one year,
providing that the person write the next available set of examinations
and also providing said person is employed by and practices the
profession under the supervision of a duly licensed veterinarian
practicing in the state. A temporary permit may be summarily revoked by
a majority vote of the board.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1999, 314:18, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 332-B:13

 **332-B:13 License Expiration and Renewal. –**
                                             
 I. All licenses shall expire biennially on December 31 of each
even-numbered year for even-numbered licenses and on December 31 of each
odd-numbered year for odd-numbered licenses but may automatically be
renewed by filing a renewal application and paying a renewal fee
established in rules adopted by the board, subject to paragraph II;
except that for licenses which expire December 31, 2011, odd numbered
licenses shall be issued for 2 years and even numbered licenses shall be
issued for one year, and the board shall charge fees accordingly. Not
later than one month prior to the expiration date, the board shall mail
a notice to licensed veterinarians that their license will expire on
December 31 and provide them with a license renewal application. Persons
previously licensed who allow their license to lapse shall be required
to file a reinstatement application containing such information as
required by the board. Persons who have allowed their license to lapse
more than 5 years shall apply for reinstatement of licensure in
accordance with RSA 332-B:17.
                                             
 II. The board may by rule waive the payment of the renewal fee of a
licensed veterinarian during the period when the person is on active
duty with any branch of the armed services of the United States, not to
exceed 3 years or the duration of a national emergency, whichever is
longer.
                                             
 III. As a condition of renewal of license, each licensed
veterinarian shall be required to show proof that he or she has attended
an approved educational program or programs totaling at least 24 hours
in the 2-year period preceding each renewal date. Approved educational
programs shall be at the discretion of the board, in accordance with
rules adopted by the board. The board may excuse a licensee from all or
a portion of the educational requirement upon the filing of a petition
establishing good cause for the waiver as set forth in rules adopted by
the board.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1977, 158:1. 1999, 314:19, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.
2011, 224:158, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 332-B:14

 **332-B:14 Disciplinary Action; Civil Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. The board may undertake disciplinary proceedings:
                                             
 (a) Upon its own initiative; or
                                             
 (b) Upon written complaint of any person which charges that a
person licensed by the board has committed misconduct under paragraph II
and which specifies the grounds therefor.
                                             
 II. Misconduct sufficient to support disciplinary proceedings under
this section shall include:
                                             
 (a) The practice of fraud or deceit in procuring or attempting to
procure a license to practice under this chapter;
                                             
 (b) Conviction of a felony or any offense involving moral
turpitude;
                                             
 (c) Any unprofessional conduct, or dishonorable conduct unworthy
of, and affecting the practice of, the profession;
                                             
 (d) Unfitness or incompetency to practice the profession or any
particular aspect or specialty thereof as evidenced by negligent or
willful acts performed in a manner inconsistent with the health or
safety of animals under the care of the licensee, the intentional injury
of an animal or human in a context related to the profession, or a
pattern of conduct inconsistent with the basic skills and knowledge
required to practice the profession;
                                             
 (e) Addiction to the use of alcohol or other habit-forming drugs
to a degree which renders the person unfit to practice under this
chapter;
                                             
 (f) Mental or physical incompetency to practice under this
chapter;
                                             
 (g) Willful or repeated violation of the provisions of this
chapter;
                                             
 (h) Suspension or revocation of a license, similar to one issued
under this chapter, in another jurisdiction and not reinstated;
                                             
 (i) The use of advertising or solicitation which is false,
misleading, or fraudulent or is otherwise deemed unprofessional under
rules adopted by the board;
                                             
 (j) Having professional association with or employing any person
practicing veterinary medicine unlawfully;
                                             
 (k) Fraud or dishonesty in the application or reporting of any
test disease in animals;
                                             
 (l) Failure to keep the veterinary premises and equipment in a
safe, clean, and sanitary condition;
                                             
 (m) Failure to report as required by law, or making false report
of any contagious or infectious disease;
                                             
 (n) Dishonesty or gross negligence in the inspection of
foodstuffs, maintenance of medical records, or the issuance of health,
vaccination, or inspection certificates; or
                                             
 (o) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (p) Unprofessional conduct as defined in rules adopted by the
board.
                                             
 III. The board may take disciplinary action in any one or more of
the following ways:
                                             
 (a) By reprimand;
                                             
 (b) By suspension, limitation, or restriction of license;
                                             
 (c) By revocation of license;
                                             
 (d) By requiring the person to participate in a program of
continuing education in the area or areas in which the person has been
found deficient; or
                                             
 (e) By the imposition of civil penalties of up to 
                                             $2,000 per
violation, or in the case of continuing violations, not more than 
                                             $200
per day, whichever is greater.
                                             
 IV. The board may informally dispose of any complaint by
stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order or default. The board may
hold preliminary hearings to facilitate the informal disposition of
complaints which, during the preliminary hearing, are found to be
unwarranted or unjustified. The board shall follow the provisions of RSA
541-A:31, V in conducting such hearings. All such investigations and
preliminary hearings shall be confidential and exempt from the
provisions of RSA 91-A, provided that the board shall make public any
action taken under RSA 332-B:14, III resulting from a preliminary
hearing or investigation.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1981, 490:9. 1987, 289:3. 1994, 412:43. 1999,
314:20-24, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 332-B:15

 **332-B:15 Investigations. –**
                                             
 I. The board may investigate possible misconduct by licensees,
permittees, certificate holders, and applicants, and other matters
included in this chapter. Investigations may be conducted with or
without the issuance of a board order setting forth the general scope of
the investigation. Board investigations and any information obtained by
the board pursuant to such investigations shall be exempt from the
public disclosure provisions of RSA 91-A, unless such information is
subsequently included in the record in a public disciplinary hearing.
The board may, however, disclose information obtained in its
investigations to law enforcement or health licensing agencies in this
state or any other jurisdiction, or in accordance with specific
statutory requirements or court orders.
                                             
 II. The board may commence a formal or informal investigation, or an
adjudicative hearing, concerning allegations of misconduct and other
matters within the scope of this chapter on its own motion whenever it
has a reasonable basis for doing so, and the type of procedure chosen
shall be a matter reserved to the discretion of the board. Formal or
informal investigations may be conducted on an ex parte basis.
                                             
 III. The board may administer oaths or affirmations, preserve
testimony, and issue subpoenas for witnesses and for documents during
any formal investigation or adjudicatory hearing, and as provided by
paragraph IV of this section. Subpoenas not covered by paragraph IV
shall be served in accordance with the procedures and fee schedules
established by the superior court, except that:
                                             
 (a) Board licensees shall not be entitled to a witness fee or
mileage expenses for travel within the state.
                                             
 (b) Witness fees and mileage expenses need not be tendered in
advance if the subpoena is annotated: "Fees Guaranteed by the N.H.
Veterinary Board.''
                                             
 (c) The respondent shall be allowed at least 48 hours to comply.
                                             
 IV. The board may at any time subpoena the professional records of
its licensees and relevant veterinary and billing records from
pharmacies and drug suppliers, laboratories, veterinary suppliers, and
veterinary insurers doing business with veterinary licensees in this
state. Such subpoenas shall be served by certified mail or by personal
delivery to the address provided to the board pursuant to RSA 332-B:15,
V, and no witness or other fee shall be necessary for valid service. A
minimum of 15 days' advance notice shall be allowed for complying with a
subpoena duces tecum issued under this chapter.
                                             
 V. Persons holding or applying for licenses or permits granted by
the board shall keep the board informed of their current business and
residence addresses, and shall furnish written notice to the board of
any change in such addresses within 30 days from the date the change
occurs. A licensee or applicant shall receive adequate notice of any
hearing or other action taken by the board under this chapter if notice
is mailed in a timely fashion to the most recent home or business
address furnished under this paragraph.
                                             
 VI. (a) Complaints of licensee misconduct shall be in writing, and
shall be treated as requests for the commencement of a disciplinary
hearing to which the time limitations of RSA 541-A:29 shall not apply.
                                             
 (b) A complaint which fails to state a cause of action may be
dismissed or summarily denied in whole or in part.
                                             
 (c) The board shall fairly investigate all complaints to the
extent warranted by the allegations and the resources available to the
board. Following an investigation, the board shall have discretion to
decline to prosecute or to defer prosecution on allegations made in any
complaint based upon the board's assessment of the seriousness of the
alleged misconduct and the resources and priorities of the board. Board
decisions deferring misconduct prosecutions shall be final and shall not
be subject to judicial review.
                                             
 (d) Some or all of the allegations in a complaint may be
consolidated with another complaint or with issues which the board
wishes to investigate or hear on its own motion.
                                             
 (e) The board may at any time settle misconduct allegations made
in a complaint without the consent of the complainant, provided the
complainant is given an opportunity to comment in writing upon the terms
of the proposed settlement.
                                             
 VII. At the commencement of an adjudicatory proceeding, or at any
time during a formal or informal investigation, and without issuing a
subpoena, the board, or a person to whom the board has delegated
appropriate authority, may mail a statement of the allegations being
investigated to a licensee and order that person to provide a detailed
and good faith written response thereto. In such circumstances the board
may also require a licensee to furnish complete copies of appropriate
professional records concerning matters relevant to allegations at issue
and provide access for inspection of clinic or hospital premises. In
both instances, the licensee shall respond within a reasonable time
period of not less than 15 days as the board may specify in its written
request.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1981, 490:10. 1999, 314:25, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 332-B:15-a

 **332-B:15-a Emergency Suspension. –**
                                             
 I. The board may immediately suspend a veterinarian's license if the
board determines that the public health, safety, or welfare requires
emergency action.
                                             
 II. If the board suspends a license under this section, the licensee
shall be provided a hearing within 10 days of the effective date of
suspension. A suspension shall remain in effect during the pendency of
the hearing, which shall not be unreasonably delayed by the board.

**Source.** 1981, 490:12. 1999, 314:26, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 332-B:16

 **332-B:16 Hearing, Decisions, and Appeals. –**
                                             
 I. Adjudicatory proceedings shall be open to the public. The board's
public docket file for each such proceeding shall include a taped or
written account of all oral hearings and shall be retained by the board
for 6 years from the issuance of the final decision.
                                             
 II. (a) Any member of the board, or any other qualified person
appointed by the board, may act as the presiding officer in an
adjudicatory proceeding and may issue oaths or affirmations to
witnesses, rule on evidentiary and other procedural matters, and prepare
a proposal for decision as provided by RSA 541-A:34, without regard to
any quorum requirements otherwise applicable to board action or
activities.
                                             
 (b) If a non-board member acts as a presiding officer, but does
not prepare a proposal for decision, that person may participate in
board deliberations only to the extent of providing technical assistance
to the board in preparing its final decision.
                                             
 (c) If any person acting as a presiding officer prepares a
proposal for decision, that person shall not participate in the board's
deliberations.
                                             
 III. (a) Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or RSA
541-A:30, respondents in adjudicatory proceedings shall receive at least
15 days written notice of the date, time, and place of a hearing. Such
hearing notices shall include an itemization of the issues to be heard
and shall be public documents.
                                             
 (b) When a board investigation includes consideration of a
written complaint against a licensee, any hearing notice issued by the
board against that licensee shall also be served upon the complainant.
The hearing notice shall constitute a final ruling on the complainant's
request for the initiation of disciplinary proceedings, and shall
provide the complainant with an opportunity to intervene subject to
restrictions which will reasonably advance the public interest
objectives of this chapter.
                                             
 (c) Any person appearing as a party or witness in an adjudicatory
proceeding, or any person who is the subject of an investigation, or who
is questioned in an investigation, is entitled to be represented by
legal counsel, but the board shall have no obligation or authority to
appoint or provide an attorney to any such person.
                                             
 IV. In adjudicatory proceedings, the board may hold prehearing
conferences which are closed to the public and exempt from the
provisions of RSA 91-A until such time as a public evidentiary hearing
is convened in the proceeding. In any event, settlement discussions
engaged in by the parties at prehearing conferences may be conducted off
the record.
                                             
 V. The board may dispose of issues or allegations at any time during
an investigation or adjudicatory proceeding by issuing a settlement
agreement or consent order; an order of dismissal for default or failure
to state a proper basis for disciplinary action; or a summary judgment
order based upon undisputed material facts, provided, however, that
disciplinary action taken by the board at any stage of a proceeding, and
dispositive action of any kind taken after the issuance of a public
hearing notice, shall be reduced to writing and made available to the
public.
                                             
 VI. Final decisions in adjudicatory proceedings shall be made by a
majority of the board members eligible to participate in the decision.
Such decisions shall not be made public until they have been reduced to
writing, signed by a representative of the board, and served upon the
parties.
                                             
 VII. Final disciplinary actions taken by the board may be appealed
to the supreme court pursuant to RSA 541, and shall not be subject to
stay pending appeal.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1989, 62:1. 1999, 314:27, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 332-B:16-a

 **332-B:16-a Immunity From Civil Action. –** No civil action shall
be maintained against the board or any member thereof, or any agent or
employee of the board, with regard to any action or activity in the
performance of any duty or authority established by this chapter. Nor
shall any civil action be maintained against any other organization or
individual for or by reason of any good faith statement, report,
communication, or testimony to the board or determination by the board
in relation to proceedings under this chapter.

**Source.** 1999, 314:28, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 332-B:17

 **332-B:17 Reinstatement Applications. –** Persons whose licenses
have lapsed for 5 or more years due to nonrenewal shall not again be
licensed without filing an application for reinstatement which contains
such information as the board may by rule require for the purpose of
determining whether the applicant retains the level of professional
qualifications expected of existing practitioners, provided, however,
that persons who have not practiced veterinary medicine for at least
1,000 hours per year in a jurisdiction with license requirements
comparable to those of this state for 3 or more years since they were
last licensed in New Hampshire shall meet all requirements for initial
licensure.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1999, 314:29, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.

### Section 332-B:18

 **332-B:18 Practice by Corporations Prohibited. –** No corporation
shall, except in the manner permitted by RSA 294-A, engage in the
practice of, or hold itself out to the public or advertise as being
entitled to engage in the practice of veterinary medicine, in any manner
or as being entitled to do so, by or through any person orally or by
advertisement, letter, or circular; provided that the foregoing
prohibition shall not prevent a corporation from employing a
veterinarian in regard to its own affairs or to existing corporations
organized under the laws of this state so long as its capital stock is
owned by persons who are duly licensed or otherwise legally authorized
to practice veterinary medicine. Any corporation violating any
provisions of this section shall be fined not less than 
                                             $200 nor more
than 
                                             $500; and every officer, agent, or employee of any such
corporation who, on its behalf, directly or indirectly engages in any of
the acts herein prohibited, or assists such corporation to do such
prohibited acts, shall be fined not less than 
                                             $200 nor more than 
                                             $500.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1, eff. Aug. 24, 1971.

### Section 332-B:19

 **332-B:19 Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who shall practice veterinary medicine without a
currently valid license or temporary permit shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and each act of such unlawful practice shall constitute a
distinct and separate offense.
                                             
 II. No person who shall practice veterinary medicine without a
currently valid license or temporary permit may receive any compensation
for services so rendered.
                                             
 III. The board or any citizen of this state may bring an action to
enjoin any person from practicing veterinary medicine without a
currently valid license or temporary permit. If the court finds that the
person is violating, or is threatening to violate, the provisions of
this chapter, it shall enter an injunction restraining the person from
such unlawful acts.
                                             
 IV. The successful maintenance of an action based on any one of the
remedies set forth in this section shall in no way prejudice the
prosecution of an action based on any other of the remedies.
                                             
 V. In addition to other penalties imposed by this section, a person
who practices veterinary medicine without a currently valid license or
temporary permit shall be subject to civil penalties assessed by the
board in the amount of 
                                             $2,000 per violation, or, in the case of
continuing violations, 
                                             $200 for each day the violation continues,
whichever is greater. A person who disputes such an assessment may
request a hearing by the board, and any final disposition rendered by
the board shall be enforceable as any other civil judgement.

**Source.** 1971, 328:1. 1973, 528:218. 1999, 314:30, 31, eff. Jan. 1,
2000.

### Section 332-B:20

 **332-B:20 Animal Physical Therapy Certification. –**
                                             
 I. Any physical therapist practicing physical therapy on any animal
shall meet the requirements of this section and any additional
requirements set by the board of veterinarians pursuant to RSA
332-B:7-a, XIV and shall be certified by the board of veterinary
medicine.
                                             
 II. Before treating an animal, an animal physical therapist shall
receive a referral from a veterinarian licensed under RSA 332-B. Such
referral shall be oral or written and an oral referral shall be followed
by a written referral filed within 7 days of the first treatment by the
animal physical therapist. The written referral shall contain the
following:
                                             
 (a) The name of the animal;
                                             
 (b) The name of the owner;
                                             
 (c) A description of the animal;
                                             
 (d) A veterinary diagnosis; and
                                             
 (e) The referring veterinarian's signature.
                                             
 III. An animal physical therapist treating an animal shall provide
to the referring veterinarian:
                                             
 (a) A written evaluation within 7 days after initial evaluation;
                                             
 (b) Any additional progress notes every 30 days; and
                                             
 (c) Notice of discharge or termination of treatment.

**Source.** 2010, 170:1, eff. June 17, 2010.
