---
title: 'CHAPTER 332-J ATHLETE AGENTS'
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 332-J
                                             
ATHLETE AGENTS
--------------

### Section 332-J:1

 **332-J:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Agency contract'' means an agreement in which a student-athlete
authorizes a person to negotiate or solicit on behalf of the
student-athlete a professional-sports-services contract or an
endorsement contract.
                                             
 II. "Athlete agent'' means an individual who enters into an agency
contract with a student-athlete or, directly or indirectly, recruits or
solicits a student-athlete to enter into an agency contract. The term
includes an individual who represents to the public that the individual
is an athlete agent. The term does not include a spouse, parent,
sibling, or grandparent, or guardian of the student-athlete or an
individual acting solely on behalf of a professional sports team or
professional sports organization.
                                             
 III. "Athletic director'' means an individual responsible for
administering the overall athletic program of an educational institution
or, if an educational institution has separately administered athletic
programs for male students and female students, the athletic program for
males or the athletic program for females, as appropriate.
                                             
 IV. "Contact'' means a communication, direct or indirect, between an
athlete agent and a student-athlete, to recruit or solicit the
student-athlete to enter into an agency contract.
                                             
 V. "Endorsement contract'' means an agreement under which a
student-athlete is employed or receives consideration to use on behalf
of the other party any value that the student-athlete may have because
of publicity, reputation, following, or fame obtained because of
athletic ability or performance.
                                             
 VI. "Intercollegiate sport'' means a sport played at the collegiate
level for which eligibility requirements for participation by a
student-athlete are established by a national association for the
promotion or regulation of collegiate athletics.
                                             
 VII. "Professional sports-services contract'' means an agreement
under which an individual is employed, or agrees to render services, as
a player on a professional sports team, with a professional sports
organization, or as a professional athlete.
                                             
 VIII. "Record'' means information that is inscribed on a tangible
medium or that is stored in an electronic or other medium and is
retrievable in perceivable form.
                                             
 IX. "Registration'' means registration as an athlete agent pursuant
to this chapter.
                                             
 X. "State'' means a state of the United States, the District of
Columbia, Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, or any
territory or insular possession subject to the jurisdiction of the
United States.
                                             
 XI. "Student-athlete'' means an individual who engages in, is
eligible to engage in, or may be eligible in the future to engage in,
any intercollegiate sport. If an individual is permanently ineligible to
participate in a particular intercollegiate sport, the individual is not
a student-athlete for purposes of that sport.

**Source.** 2006, 265:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 332-J:2

 **332-J:2 Service of Process. –** By acting as an athlete agent, a
nonresident individual appoints the New Hampshire secretary of state as
the individual's agent for service of process in any civil action in
this state related to the individual's acting as an athlete agent.

**Source.** 2006, 265:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 332-J:3

 **332-J:3 Registration Required. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in this section, an individual shall
not act as an athlete agent in this state without holding a certificate
of registration pursuant to RSA 332-J:4.
                                             
 II. Before being issued a certificate of registration, an individual
may act as an athlete agent in this state for all purposes except
signing an agency contract, if:
                                             
 (a) A student-athlete or another person acting on behalf of the
student-athlete initiates communication with the individual; and
                                             
 (b) Within 7 days after an initial act as an athlete agent, the
individual submits an application for registration pursuant to RSA
332-J:4 as an athlete agent in this state.
                                             
 III. An agency contract resulting from conduct in violation of this
section is void and the athlete agent shall return any consideration
received under the contract.

**Source.** 2006, 265:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 332-J:4

 **332-J:4 Registration Procedure. –**
                                             
 I. An applicant for registration shall submit an application for
registration to the secretary of state in a form prescribed by the
secretary of state. An application filed under this section shall be a
public record for the purposes of RSA 91-A. The application shall be in
the name of an individual and, except as otherwise provided in this
section, signed or otherwise authenticated by the applicant under
penalty of perjury, and shall contain:
                                             
 (a) The name of the applicant and the address of the applicant's
principal place of business.
                                             
 (b) The name of the applicant's business or employer, if
applicable.
                                             
 (c) Any business or occupation engaged in by the applicant for
the 5 years preceding the date of submission of the application.
                                             
 (d) A description of the applicant's formal training as an
athlete agent, practical experience as an athlete agent, and educational
background relating to the applicant's activities as an athlete agent.
                                             
 (e) The names and addresses of 3 individuals not related to the
applicant who are willing to serve as references.
                                             
 (f) The name, sport, and last known team for each individual for
whom the applicant acted as an athlete agent during the 5 years
preceding the date of submission of the application.
                                             
 (g) The names and addresses of all persons who are, with respect
to the athlete agent's business if it is not a corporation, the
partners, members, officers, managers, associates, or profit-sharers of
the business, and with respect to a corporation employing the athlete
agent, the officers, directors, and any shareholder of the corporation
having an interest of 5 percent or greater.
                                             
 (h) Whether the applicant or any person named pursuant to this
section has been convicted of a crime that, if committed in this state,
would be a crime involving moral turpitude or a felony, and, if so,
identify the crime.
                                             
 (i) Whether there has been any administrative or judicial
determination that the applicant or any person named pursuant to this
section has made a false, misleading, deceptive, or fraudulent
representation.
                                             
 (j) Any instance in which the conduct of the applicant or any
person named pursuant to this section resulted in the imposition of a
sanction, suspension, or declaration of ineligibility to participate in
an interscholastic or intercollegiate athletic event at a
student-athlete or educational institution.
                                             
 (k) Any sanction, suspension, or disciplinary action taken
against the applicant or any person named pursuant to this section
arising out of occupational or professional conduct.
                                             
 (l) Whether there has been any denial of an application for,
suspension or revocation of, or refusal to renew, the registration or
licensure of the applicant or any person named pursuant to this section
as an athlete agent in any state.
                                             
 II. (a) An individual who holds a certificate of registration or
licensure as an athlete agent in another state may submit a verified
copy of such certificate or license in lieu of submitting an application
in the form prescribed pursuant to this chapter. The secretary of state
shall accept the certificate or license from the other state as an
application for registration in this state.
                                             
 (b) An individual who has submitted an application for
registration or licensure as an athlete-agent in another state may
submit a verified copy of such application to the secretary of state who
shall accept such application as an application for registration in this
state; provided, that the application to the other state:
                                             
 (1) Was submitted in the other state within 6 months of the
date the individual sought to obtain registration in this state and the
applicant certifies that the information contained in the application is
current;
                                             
 (2) Contains information substantially similar to or more
comprehensive than that required in an application submitted in this
state; and
                                             
 (3) Was signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury.

**Source.** 2006, 265:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 332-J:5

 **332-J:5 Issuance, Denial, or Renewal of Certificate of
Registration. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the secretary of
state shall issue a certificate of registration to an individual who
complies with RSA 332-J:4, I, or whose application has been accepted
under RSA 332-J:4, II.
                                             
 II. The secretary of state may refuse to issue a certificate of
registration if the secretary of state determines that the applicant has
engaged in conduct that has a significant adverse effect on the
applicant's fitness to act as an athlete agent. In making the
determination, the secretary of state may consider whether the applicant
has:
                                             
 (a) Been convicted of a crime that, if committed in this state,
would be a crime involving moral turpitude or a felony.
                                             
 (b) Made a materially false, misleading, deceptive, or fraudulent
representation in the application or as an athlete agent.
                                             
 (c) Engaged in conduct that would disqualify the applicant from
serving in a fiduciary capacity.
                                             
 (d) Engaged in conduct prohibited by RSA 332-J:13.
                                             
 (e) Had a registration or licensure as an athlete agent
suspended, revoked, or denied or been refused renewal of registration or
licensure as an athlete agent in any state.
                                             
 (f) Engaged in conduct the consequence of which was that a
sanction, suspension, or declaration of ineligibility to participate in
an interscholastic or intercollegiate athletic event was imposed on a
student-athlete or educational institution.
                                             
 (g) Engaged in conduct that significantly adversely reflects on
the applicant's credibility, honesty, or integrity.
                                             
 III. In making a determination under paragraph II, the secretary of
state shall consider:
                                             
 (a) How recently the conduct occurred;
                                             
 (b) The nature of the conduct and the context in which it
occurred; and
                                             
 (c) Any other relevant conduct of the applicant.
                                             
 IV. An athlete agent may apply to renew a registration by submitting
an application for renewal in a form prescribed by the secretary of
state. A renewal application filed under this section shall be a public
record for the purposes of RSA 91-A. The application for renewal shall
be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury and shall contain
current information on all matters required in an original
registration.
                                             
 V. An individual who has submitted an application for renewal of
registration or evidence of licensure in another state in lieu of
submitting an application for renewal in the form prescribed pursuant to
paragraph IV, may file a copy of the application for renewal and a valid
certificate of registration or licensure from the other state. The
secretary of state shall accept the application for renewal from the
other state as an application for renewal in this state if the
application to the other state:
                                             
 (a) Was submitted in the other state within 6 months next
preceding the filing in this state and the applicant certifies the
information contained in the application for renewal is current;
                                             
 (b) Contains information substantially similar to or more
comprehensive than that required in an application for renewal submitted
in this state; and
                                             
 (c) Was signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury.
                                             
 VI. A certificate of registration or a renewal of a registration
shall be valid for 2 years.

**Source.** 2006, 265:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 332-J:6

 **332-J:6 Suspension, Revocation, or Refusal to Renew Registration.
–** The secretary of state may suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew a
registration for conduct that would have justified denial of
registration under RSA 332-J:5, II only after proper notice and an
opportunity for a hearing.

**Source.** 2006, 265:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 332-J:7

 **332-J:7 Temporary Registration. –** The secretary of state may
issue a temporary certificate of registration while an application for
registration or renewal of registration is being processed; provided,
that any temporary certificate of registration issued under this section
shall be conspicuously marked as a temporary, and shall be valid for not
more that 10 days from the date of issuance.

**Source.** 2006, 265:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 332-J:8

 **332-J:8 Fees. –** An application for registration or renewal of
registration shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the secretary of
state in the following amount:
                                             
 I. 
                                             $100 for an initial application for registration.
                                             
 II. 
                                             $100 for an application for registration based upon a
certificate of registration or licensure issued by another state.
                                             
 III. 
                                             $50 for an application for renewal of registration.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             $50 for an application for renewal of registration based upon
an application for renewal of registration or licensure submitted in
another state.

**Source.** 2006, 265:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 332-J:9

 **332-J:9 Required Form of Contract. –**
                                             
 I. An agency contract shall be in a record, signed or otherwise
authenticated by the parties.
                                             
 II. An agency contract shall state or contain:
                                             
 (a) The amount and method of calculating the consideration to be
paid by the student-athlete for services to be provided by the athlete
agent under the contract and any other consideration the athlete agent
has received or will receive from any other source for entering into the
contract or for providing the services;
                                             
 (b) The name of any person not listed in the application for
registration or renewal of registration who will be compensated because
the student-athlete signed the agency contract;
                                             
 (c) A description of any expenses that the student-athlete agrees
to reimburse;
                                             
 (d) A description of the services to be provided to the
student-athlete;
                                             
 (e) The duration of the contract; and
                                             
 (f) The date of execution.
                                             
 III. An agency contract shall contain, in close proximity to the
signature of the student-athlete, a conspicuous notice in boldface type
in capital letters stating:

**WARNING TO STUDENT-ATHLETE:**

+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|   --------------------------------                                       |
|   **IF YOU SIGN THIS CONTRACT:**                                         |
|   --------------------------------                                       |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+


                                             
 **(1) YOU MAY LOSE YOUR ELIGIBILITY TO COMPETE AS A
STUDENT-ATHLETE IN YOUR SPORT.**
                                             
 **(2) IF YOU HAVE AN ATHLETIC DIRECTOR, WITHIN 72 HOURS AFTER
ENTERING INTO THIS CONTRACT, BOTH YOU AND YOUR ATHLETE AGENT MUST NOTIFY
YOUR ATHLETIC DIRECTOR; AND**
                                             
 **(3) YOU MAY CANCEL THIS CONTRACT WITHIN 14 DAYS AFTER
SIGNING IT. CANCELLATION OF THIS CONTRACT MAY NOT REINSTATE YOUR
ELIGIBILITY.**
                                             
 IV. An agency contract that does not conform to this section is
voidable by the student-athlete. If a student-athlete voids an agency
contract, the student-athlete is not required to pay any consideration
under the contract or to return any consideration received from the
athlete agent to induce the student-athlete to enter into the contract.
                                             
 V. The athlete agent shall give a record of the signed or otherwise
authenticated agency contract to the student-athlete at the time of
execution.

**Source.** 2006, 265:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 332-J:10

 **332-J:10 Notice to Educational Institution. –**
                                             
 I. Within 72 hours after entering into an agency contract or before
the next scheduled athletic event in which the student-athlete may
participate, whichever occurs first, the athlete agent shall give notice
of the existence of the contract to the athletic director of the
educational institution at which the student-athlete is enrolled, or the
educational institution at which the athlete agent has reasonable
grounds to believe the student-athlete intends to enroll.
                                             
 II. Within 72 hours after entering into an agency contract or before
the next athletic event in which the student-athlete may participate,
whichever occurs first, the student-athlete shall inform the athletic
director of the educational institution at which the student-athlete is
enrolled that he or she has entered into an agency contract.

**Source.** 2006, 265:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 332-J:11

 **332-J:11 Student-Athlete's Right to Cancel. –**
                                             
 I. A student-athlete may cancel an agency contract by giving written
notice of the cancellation to the athlete agent within 14 days after the
contract is signed.
                                             
 II. A student-athlete may not waive the right to cancel an agency
contract.
                                             
 III. If a student-athlete cancels an agency contract, the
student-athlete is not required to pay any consideration under the
contract or to return any consideration received from the athlete agent
to induce the student-athlete to enter into the contract.

**Source.** 2006, 265:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 332-J:12

 **332-J:12 Required Records. –**
                                             
 I. An athlete agent shall retain the following records for a period
of 5 years:
                                             
 (a) The name and address of each individual represented by the
athlete agent.
                                             
 (b) Any agency contract entered into by the athlete agent.
                                             
 (c) Any direct costs incurred by the athlete agent in the
recruitment or solicitation of a student-athlete to enter into an agency
contract.
                                             
 II. Records required to be retained under this section are open to
public inspection during normal business hours.

**Source.** 2006, 265:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 332-J:13

 **332-J:13 Prohibited Conduct; Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. An athlete agent, with the intent to induce a student-athlete to
enter into an agency contract, shall not:
                                             
 (a) Give any materially false or misleading information or make a
materially false promise or representation.
                                             
 (b) Furnish anything of value to a student-athlete before the
student-athlete enters into the agency contract.
                                             
 (c) Furnish anything of value to any individual other than the
student-athlete or another registered athlete agent.
                                             
 II. An athlete agent shall not:
                                             
 (a) Initiate contact with a student-athlete unless registered
under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Refuse or fail to retain or permit inspection of the records
required to be retained by RSA 332-J:12.
                                             
 (c) Fail to register when required by RSA 332-J:3.
                                             
 (d) Provide materially false or misleading information in an
application for registration or renewal of registration.
                                             
 (e) Predate or postdate an agency contract.
                                             
 (f) Fail to notify a student-athlete before the student-athlete
signs or otherwise authenticates an agency contract for a particular
sport that the signing or authentication may make the student-athlete
ineligible to participate as a student-athlete in that sport.
                                             
 III. (a) An athlete agent who violates any provision of paragraph I
is guilty of a class B felony.
                                             
 (b) An athlete agent who violates any provision of paragraph II
is guilty of a class A misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2006, 265:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 332-J:14

 **332-J:14 Civil Remedies. –**
                                             
 I. An educational institution has a right of action against an
athlete agent or a former student-athlete for damages caused by a
violation of RSA 332-J:13. In an action under this section, the court
may award to the prevailing party costs and reasonable attorney's fees.
                                             
 II. Damages of an educational institution under paragraph I include
losses and expenses incurred because, as a result of the conduct of an
athlete agent or former student-athlete, the educational institution was
injured by a violation of RSA 332-J:13 or was penalized, disqualified,
or suspended from participation in athletics by a national association
for the promotion and regulation of athletics, by an athletic
conference, or by reasonable self-imposed disciplinary action taken to
mitigate sanctions likely to be imposed by such an organization.
                                             
 III. A right of action under this section does not accrue until the
educational institution discovers or by the exercise of reasonable
diligence would have discovered the violation by the athlete agent or
former student-athlete.
                                             
 IV. Any liability of the athlete agent or the former student-athlete
under this section is several and not joint.
                                             
 V. This chapter does not restrict rights, remedies, or defenses of
any person under law or equity.

**Source.** 2006, 265:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 332-J:15

 **332-J:15 Administrative Penalty. –** Notwithstanding RSA 651:2,
IV, the secretary of state may assess a civil penalty against an athlete
agent not to exceed 
                                             $25,000 for a violation of this chapter.

**Source.** 2006, 265:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.
