---
title: |
    CHAPTER 332-H DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLICATIONS BY LICENSING COMMISSIONS AND
    BOARDS
---

TITLE XXX
                                             
OCCUPATIONS AND PROFESSIONS
===========================

CHAPTER 332-H
                                             
DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLICATIONS BY LICENSING COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
----------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 332-H:1

 **332-H:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means any department, division, commission, agency, or
board under this title which examines and licenses an occupation or
profession.
                                             
 II. "Publication'' includes any document supplied by a board which
contains the rules relating to the examining, licensing, and regulation
of the occupation or profession.

**Source.** 1986, 94:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 332-H:2

 **332-H:2 Distribution of Publications. –**
                                             
 I. One copy of a publication which contains the rules relating to
the examination, licensing, and regulation of a person's occupation or
profession shall be automatically provided to a person who is newly
licensed at the time he receives his license as a member of an
occupation or profession. In addition, upon the written or oral request
of a person to be examined or of a person who presently holds a license
as a member of an occupation or profession, the appropriate board shall
on the same day that the request is made provide the person with one
copy of a publication which contains the rules relating to the
examination, licensing and regulation of the person's occupation or
profession.
                                             
 II. Publications which are distributed under paragraph I shall be a
compilation of the current rules relating to examining, licensing, and
regulation for which the board is responsible.

**Source.** 1986, 94:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 332-H:3

 **332-H:3 Cost of Publications. –** Every board shall recover the
cost of printing and issuing publications to examinees and licensees as
provided in RSA 332-H:2. The expenses for such publications shall be
covered by the examination and licensing fees charged by the board.

**Source.** 1986, 94:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.
