---
title: 'CHAPTER 227-M COMMUNITY HERITAGE INVESTMENT PROGRAM'
---

TITLE XIX-A
                                             
FORESTRY
============

CHAPTER 227-M
                                             
COMMUNITY HERITAGE INVESTMENT PROGRAM
-------------------------------------

### Section 227-M:1

 **227-M:1 Purpose. –** The general court finds that in order to
maintain New Hampshire's quality of life and economic vitality for its
citizens, growth and development should be balanced with careful
protection of the state's most important natural, cultural, and
historical resources. Permanent protection of these resources, through
acquisition of lands, buildings, and other physical assets, or interests
in these assets, must be accomplished along with their planned long-term
stewardship. The general court further recognizes the importance of
public-private partnerships to achieve these ends. To protect and
preserve New Hampshire's natural, cultural, and historical resources for
this and future generations, the general court establishes in this
chapter the New Hampshire land and community heritage investment
program. The intent of the program is to conserve and preserve this
state's most important natural, cultural, and historical resources
through the acquisition of lands, and cultural and historical resources,
or interests therein, of local, regional, and statewide significance, in
partnership with the state's municipalities and the private sector, for
the primary purposes of protecting and ensuring the perpetual
contribution of these resources to the state's economy, environment, and
overall quality of life.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1, eff. June 8, 2000.

### Section 227-M:2

 **227-M:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Authority'' means the New Hampshire land and community heritage
investment authority.
                                             
 II. "Board'' means the board of directors of the New Hampshire land
and community heritage investment authority.
                                             
 III. "Building'' means a construction made by humans and created to
shelter human activity.
                                             
 IV. "Easement interests'' means conservation, historic preservation,
or scenic easements, development rights, or any other similar protective
interest in real property held in perpetuity, or a term easement that is
held for a specific period of time and not in perpetuity as part of a
farm viability program.
                                             
 V. "Eligible resource'' means a natural, cultural, or historical
resource including archaeological sites; historic buildings and
structures which house cultural events and programs; historic properties
including buildings and structures; historic and cultural lands and
features; ecologically significant lands; existing and potential public
water supply lands; farmland; forestland; habitat for rare species or
important wildlife; lands for recreation; riverine, lake, estuarine, and
ocean shorelands; scenic areas and viewsheds; and wetlands and
associated uplands.
                                             
 V-a. "Farm viability program'' means a program overseen by an
eligible applicant under RSA 227-M:8, I that preserves farmland:
                                             
 (a) By enhancing the long-term viability of farms, principally
through assistance in business plan development and implementation; and
                                             
 (b) By requiring term easements on farms participating in such a
program and receiving assistance funded through this chapter.
                                             
 VI. "Monitoring'' means the regular and systematic gathering of
information about a resource asset to identify changes to the property
over time to ensure that it is being used in accordance with any
easement interest restrictions or other legal obligations entered into
under this chapter.
                                             
 VII. "Resource asset'' means the lands, buildings, structures, and
other physical assets or the easement interests in the lands, buildings,
structures, and other physical assets that comprise the real property of
an eligible resource.
                                             
 VIII. "Stewardship'' means planning for and taking the necessary
actions over the long term to successfully preserve and protect the
natural, cultural, or historical value of a resource asset. Such actions
include, as applicable, managing the resource asset in accordance with
all legal obligations entered into under this chapter, performing
regular maintenance and upkeep, providing for necessary monitoring,
educating or informing those that might negatively impact upon the
resource asset about the need and/or legal obligation to protect and
preserve it, paying tax or in-lieu-of tax obligations, obtaining
liability insurance, and securing sufficient levels of financial
resources to carry out all such necessary actions.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1. 2006, 39:1. 2008, 136:1, 2, eff. Aug. 5, 2008.

### Section 227-M:3

 **227-M:3 Land and Community Heritage Investment Program
Established. –** There is hereby established the New Hampshire land and
community heritage investment program. The program shall acquire
resource assets, through voluntary negotiations with property owners and
utilization of all available federal, state, local, private, and other
matching funds and incentives. The program shall also provide funding
for restoration and rehabilitation of cultural and historical resources
and for certain costs associated with the acquisition of resource
assets. All deeds or other documents evidencing purchase of any fee
interest or other easement interest in resources under this chapter
shall be drawn and held in the name of the municipality, other political
subdivision, or qualified publicly-supported nonprofit corporation
purchasing the interest through the use of program funds. All easement
interests and legal obligations that are attached in perpetuity to any
property shall be recorded in the deed. The state of New Hampshire shall
hold an executory interest in all easement interests acquired by the
program and held by municipalities, other political subdivisions, or
qualifying nonprofit corporations. There shall be no power by the state
of New Hampshire to take any resource by eminent domain, nor shall any
funds made available by this program be used to take by eminent domain
except in cases involving the voluntary quieting of title. All
acquisition projects shall involve a willing seller and willing buyer,
or a willing donor of resource assets.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1, eff. June 8, 2000.

### Section 227-M:4

 **227-M:4 New Hampshire Land and Community Heritage Authority
Established; Board of Directors. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established the New Hampshire land and community
heritage investment authority, a body corporate and politic. The
authority is constituted a public instrumentality of the state. The
exercise by the authority of the powers conferred by this chapter shall
be deemed and held to be the performance of public and essential
governmental functions. The authority shall be a nonprofit corporation
organized under RSA 292.
                                             
 II. The authority shall be governed by a board of directors composed
of 18 members. Voting members shall not appoint designees to act in
their places. The chairperson shall be elected from among the public
members. Board membership shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) Two members of the senate, to be appointed by the senate
president.
                                             
 (b) Two members of the house of representatives, to be appointed
by the speaker of the house.
                                             
 (c) Eight public members, to be appointed by the governor and
council:
                                             
 (1) Two of whom shall represent cultural and historic resource
interests;
                                             
 (2) One of whom shall represent natural resources interests;
                                             
 (3) One of whom shall represent outdoor recreation interests;
                                             
 (4) One of whom shall represent business or real estate
interests;
                                             
 (5) One of whom shall represent municipal interests;
                                             
 (6) One of whom shall represent local planning interests; and
                                             
 (7) One of whom shall represent regional planning
commissions.
                                             
 (d) The director of the office of energy and planning, or
designee.
                                             
 (e) The commissioner of the department of cultural resources, or
designee.
                                             
 (f) The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development, or designee.
                                             
 (g) The commissioner of the department of environmental services,
or designee.
                                             
 (h) The commissioner of the department of agriculture, markets,
and food, or designee.
                                             
 (i) The executive director of the department of fish and game, or
designee.
                                             
 III. Members appointed under subparagraphs II(d) through II(i) shall
be advisory, non-voting members.
                                             
 IV. (a) The terms of the state agency members and the members of the
senate and the house of representatives shall be coterminous with their
respective terms in office. Members appointed by the governor and
council under subparagraph II(c) shall serve a 4-year term, and may
serve no more than 10 successive years.
                                             
 (b) Members appointed by the governor and council may be removed
from office for cause, by the governor and council. Cause for removal
shall include, but not be limited to, incapacity or failure to perform
the duties of a member of the board of directors. Vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term of the office in the same manner as the
original appointment. Legislative members shall be entitled to mileage
reimbursement at the legislative rate.
                                             
 V. Seven voting members shall constitute a quorum. Decisions shall
be made by a majority of those present and voting. Each member appointed
under subparagraphs II(a) through (c) shall have one vote on matters
coming before the board. The board shall meet quarterly and at such
other times as may be deemed necessary by the chairperson.
                                             
 VI. Board members shall not be subject to civil liability for acts
performed in accordance with their duties under this chapter.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 227-M:5

 **227-M:5 Powers and Duties of the Authority. –** The authority
shall have all the powers necessary and convenient to carry out and
effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter and shall:
                                             
 I. Adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of
its business.
                                             
 II. Adopt criteria and guidelines for:
                                             
 (a) The acquisition of resource assets;
                                             
 (b) The restoration or rehabilitation of cultural and historical
buildings or structures; and
                                             
 (c) The stewardship and monitoring of resource assets on which
program funds are expended.
                                             
 III. Adopt definitions deemed important or necessary to carry out
the purposes of this chapter.
                                             
 IV. Oversee and direct the expenditure of funds deposited in the
trust fund of the New Hampshire land and community heritage investment
program in accordance with the purposes of this chapter. This includes,
but is not limited to, the authority to draw upon funds for acquisition
of resource assets, or related program purposes, and for the
administrative costs of the program.
                                             
 V. Make and execute contracts for services necessary to carry out
the purposes of this chapter or necessary and convenient for the
exercise of its powers and functions.
                                             
 VI. Temporarily acquire real property or interests in real property,
only when such acquisition is necessary or appropriate to protect or
secure any investment in which the authority has an interest.
                                             
 VII. Prepare an annual report to be presented no later than December
1 of each year to the president of the senate, the speaker of the house,
and the governor and council, and filed with the state library. The
report shall detail the activities of the program during the past year
including a listing of all resource assets acquired and restoration and
rehabilitation projects undertaken, along with the associated
expenditures. All administrative costs shall be provided, as well as a
complete financial accounting of the trust fund established under RSA
227-M:7. The report shall also include a historical summary of the
program's activities to date. A copy of the report shall be made
available to any interested person. The authority shall cause an audit
by an independent certified public accountant of its books and accounts
to be made each fiscal year.
                                             
 VIII. In addition, the authority may:
                                             
 (a) Adopt an official seal.
                                             
 (b) Maintain an office and hire staff.
                                             
 (c) Apply for and accept from any source gifts and donations of:
money, including money from appropriate fundraising activities; labor,
equipment, and supplies; land and other real property; interests in land
and other real property; federal, local, private, and other matching
funds and incentives; and other assets to be deposited in the fund for
the purposes of this chapter and to aid the authority in the conduct of
its affairs.
                                             
 (d) Employ or retain as independent contractors architects,
engineers, attorneys, accountants, and other advisors and employees,
consultants, and agents as may be necessary in its judgment without
regard to any personnel or civil service law of the state to prescribe
their duties and qualifications and to fix and pay their compensation if
any.
                                             
 (e) Appoint qualified individuals to serve as unpaid volunteers
under such terms and conditions as it deems necessary. Said volunteers
or advisors may be paid a stipend and/or reimbursed for any incidental
expenses determined by the authority to be necessary and incurred while
performing the business of the authority.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1. 2001, 158:12, July 1, 2001.

### Section 227-M:6

 **227-M:6 Executive Director. –** The board of directors shall
nominate one or more persons for appointment by the governor and council
to serve as executive director. The executive director shall serve a
term of 5 years, with reappointment or a vacancy to be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment. At the request of the board,
the governor and council may remove the executive director for cause.
The executive director shall:
                                             
 I. Coordinate the activities of state agencies directly involved
with the administration of the program in accordance with this chapter.
                                             
 II. Evaluate the eligible resources proposed for protection or
restoration under this program, and determine if these resources meet
the criteria of the program, subsequent to instruction by the board.
                                             
 III. At the direction of the board, administer the affairs of the
program and be directly responsible for executing all policies of the
board.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1, eff. June 8, 2000.

### Section 227-M:6-a

 **227-M:6-a Status of Employees. –**
                                             
 I. The authority may hire, fix, and pay compensation, prescribe
duties and qualifications, and establish personnel policies without
regard to any personnel or civil service law or personnel or civil
service rule of the state. The employees of the authority shall not be
classified employees of the state within the meaning of RSA 21-I:49. Any
individual employed by the authority shall be deemed an employee at will
and shall serve at the pleasure of the authority.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph I, any individual
employed by the authority whose employment calls for 30 hours or more
work in a normal calendar week, and whose position is anticipated to
have a duration of 6 months or more, shall be entitled to elect to
receive such health, dental, life insurance, deferred compensation, and
retirement benefits as are afforded to classified employees of the state
provided, however, that the election is made in writing within 30 days
of the start of employment. Upon election by such individual, the
authority shall pay from its revenues the state's share of such
benefits. Any remaining costs of health, dental, life insurance,
deferred compensation, and retirement benefits which an individual
elects to receive pursuant to this section, shall be withheld from such
individual's salary as a payroll deduction. Written notice of the
availability of these benefit options shall be provided to each
individual upon employment by the authority.

**Source.** 2001, 158:14, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 227-M:7

 **227-M:7 Trust Fund Established; Administration. –**
                                             
 I. There is established in the office of the state treasurer the
trust fund for the New Hampshire land and community heritage investment
program. Moneys in the fund and any interest earned on the fund shall be
used for the purpose of this chapter and shall not be used for any other
purpose. The trust fund shall be non-lapsing.
                                             
 II. The state treasurer is instructed to invest the sums deposited
in the fund in a prudent manner consistent with the purposes of this
chapter. Interest earned on moneys in the fund shall accrue to the fund
to the extent allowed under federal law.
                                             
 III. No funds of any state agency shall be transferred to the trust
fund without specific authorization from the general court. Federal
funds accepted by the fiscal committee and governor and council for
purposes similar to those of this chapter may be deposited in the trust
fund.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1, eff. June 8, 2000.

### Section 227-M:7-a

 **227-M:7-a Administrative Fund. –**
                                             
 I. There is established in the office of the New Hampshire land and
community heritage investment authority a fund to be known as the land
and community heritage investment program administrative fund into which
the commissioner of safety shall credit any revenue generated pursuant
to RSA 261:97-b, I-a. There shall also be deposited, on a monthly basis,
interest income generated on appropriations made to the land and
community heritage investment program trust fund pursuant to RSA
227-M:7. The total revenues generated to the administrative fund from
these 2 sources shall not exceed 
                                             $335,000 for each fiscal year. Any
revenue generated from these 2 sources in excess of the 
                                             $335,000
maximum per year shall be credited by the New Hampshire land and
community heritage investment authority to the land and community
heritage investment program trust fund in RSA 227-M:7. The authority
shall include in its annual report the amount of revenues exceeding the
maximum which are credited to the trust fund.
                                             
 II. All sums so credited shall be appropriated to the authority for
the following purposes:
                                             
 (a) To pay the costs of administering and operating the
authority, including, but not limited to, all wages, salaries, benefits,
and other expenses authorized by the board or the executive director.
The authority may enter into a contract or agreement for provision of
services to withhold on a monthly basis all payroll and benefit costs
for employees.
                                             
 (b) In general for the payment of all expenses incident to the
management and operation of the authority as are consistent with its
statutory purpose and as the board or the executive director thereof may
from time to time determine.
                                             
 III. This fund shall constitute a continuing appropriation for the
benefit of the authority. Any amount remaining to the credit of the
authority at the close of any fiscal year, and any interest accrued,
shall be nonlapsing and shall be carried over and credited to the fund
for the succeeding year.

**Source.** 2001, 158:13. 2003, 319:170. 2005, 177:22. 2007, 375:2, eff.
July 1, 2007. 2016, 61:2, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 227-M:8

 **227-M:8 Program Administration; Eligible Applicants; Matching
Funds. –**
                                             
 I. The authority shall distribute funds to further the purposes of
this chapter only to eligible applicants. Eligible applicants shall
include:
                                             
 (a) Municipalities or other political subdivisions of the state;
and
                                             
 (b) Publicly-supported nonprofit corporations exempt from federal
income taxation under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
                                             
 II. Other parties wishing to participate in the program may partner
with one or more eligible applicants. At the option of eligible
applicants and with the approval of the board, state agencies may hold
rights in resource assets acquired through the program by eligible
applicants. The applicant must demonstrate the commitment of the owner
of the assets to participate in the proposed action.
                                             
 III. Financial assistance to eligible applicants shall be provided
through grants and block grants (grants to another organization for
re-granting) and loans. Up to 50 percent of financial assistance
provided each year may be provided through loans. Principal and interest
paid on such loans shall be deposited in the trust fund for the New
Hampshire land and community heritage investment program established in
RSA 227-M:7. Financial assistance may only be expended on eligible
resources for the following purposes:
                                             
 (a) Acquisition of real property in fee simple.
                                             
 (b) Acquisition of easement interests in real property.
                                             
 (c) Restoration or rehabilitation of buildings or structures
which are publicly-owned, or which are owned by a qualified
publicly-supported nonprofit corporation.
                                             
 (d) Surveys, appraisals, title work, and other legal or ancillary
work necessary to carry out acquisitions.
                                             
 (e) Resource inventories and planning.
                                             
 (f) Other professional services.
                                             
 IV. The authority shall not fund more than 50 percent of the
appraised market value of any resource asset acquisition or more than 50
percent of any other expense eligible for financial assistance under RSA
227-M:8, III(c)-(f).
                                             
 V. All eligible applicants are required to provide a level of
matching resources that is no less than 50 percent of the appraised
market value for any resource asset acquisition and that is no less than
50 percent of any other expense for which financial assistance is sought
under RSA 227-M:8, III(c)-(f). A minimum of 1/2 of the applicant's
minimum match requirement must be provided in cash to be used in the
purchase or preservation of the resource asset. Nothing shall prevent
the eligible applicant from using all cash to fulfill the match
requirements of the program. The balance, if any, of the non-cash match
requirement may be met through any combination of:
                                             
 (a) In-kind services;
                                             
 (b) The appraised market value of donated real property or
interest in real property, provided such real property is located in the
municipality or municipalities in which the applicant property is
located;
                                             
 (c) Expenses specified under RSA 227-M:8, III(c)-(f), incurred or
to be incurred; or
                                             
 (d) A one-time investment in a stewardship endowment fund
established by the applicant for the resource asset.
                                             
 VI. Qualifying matching funds from the applicant may include, but
are not limited to, municipal appropriations, private donations, federal
funds, and monies from a conservation fund established under RSA
36-A:5.
                                             
 VII. Matching beyond the minimum shall be encouraged of all
applicants. The board is authorized, for a particular project, to either
reduce the applicant's minimum match requirements under paragraph V or
exceed the amount of financial assistance allowed under paragraph IV,
but only by an affirmative vote of 9 voting members.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1. 2002, 148:10. 2005, 234:1, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 227-M:9

 **227-M:9 Acquisition, Restoration, and Protection Criteria and
Guidelines. –**
                                             
 I. The criteria and guidelines adopted pursuant to RSA 227-M:5, II
for acquiring resource assets shall include, but shall not be limited
to, the following:
                                             
 (a) Imminence of threat to the land or property, such that the
preservation of endangered structures and land conservation projects in
densely developed or rapidly developing areas of the state shall receive
a higher ranking;
                                             
 (b) Uniqueness or significance of the resource;
                                             
 (c) Proximity to other protected resources;
                                             
 (d) Extent to which project meets multiple objectives of the
program (natural, historic, and cultural);
                                             
 (e) Strength of local support, such that project applications
accompanied by an affirmative vote of the governing body of the
municipality or governing bodies of the municipalities in which the
project is located shall receive a higher ranking;
                                             
 (f) Strength of private support;
                                             
 (g) Cooperation between or among communities;
                                             
 (h) Extent of leverage (ability of state funds to attract other
public and private funds in a cost-share arrangement);
                                             
 (i) Demonstrated ability and qualifying stewardship plan of
eligible applicant to provide stewardship for the resource being
protected; and
                                             
 (j) Extent to which benefits can be conserved only through fee
acquisition of the resource asset, weighed against acquisition through
easement interest.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that each
acquisition of a resource asset under this chapter must meet all the
criteria listed in this section.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1, eff. June 8, 2000.

### Section 227-M:10

 **227-M:10 Management. –** Any owner of a resource asset acquired in
fee simple under this chapter or for which program funds have been
expended for restoration or rehabilitation work, shall manage such asset
in accordance with any stewardship plan approved for the asset and any
legal obligations entered into under this chapter pertaining to the
resource asset. The program shall not manage any resource asset, except
to the extent permissible under RSA 227-M:5, VI.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1, eff. June 8, 2000.

### Section 227-M:11

 **227-M:11 Stewardship. –** All applications submitted for funding
resource asset acquisitions or restoration or rehabilitation projects
must contain a stewardship plan. Applicants shall be allowed flexibility
in devising such plans, but the authority shall make an affirmative
finding that the stewardship plan is acceptable before awarding funds.
Applications to the program for activities such as resource inventories
and engineering studies are not required to include stewardship plans.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1, eff. June 8, 2000.

### Section 227-M:12

 **227-M:12 Monitoring Endowment. –**
                                             
 I. For every eligible resource protected under this chapter by an
easement interest, a percentage of funds from the program or
contributions from the applicant, as specified by the authority, shall
be provided to the monitoring endowment established under RSA 162-C:8.
                                             
 II. Funds added to the monitoring endowment pursuant to RSA
227-M:12, I shall be used to support monitoring by state agencies, local
municipalities, and qualifying nonprofit corporations of easement
interests acquired under this chapter. Such monitoring shall be to
ensure that the resource protected through the program will be managed
according to the legal agreements concerning easement interests in the
resource.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1, eff. June 8, 2000.

### Section 227-M:13

 **227-M:13 Road Expansion. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the New
Hampshire land and community heritage authority shall recognize that the
public interest and public safety and welfare may, from time to time,
require minor expansion, minor modification, or minor alteration of
existing roads within the state highway system. After review and
approval by the authority, and notwithstanding RSA 227-M:14, the
department of transportation may obtain interests in lands acquired by
the authority under this chapter adjacent to state highways. Permissible
expansion, modifications, or alterations under this section shall
include drainage easements, slope easements, lane widening, the addition
of a passing, climbing, or turning lane, or similar adjustments, but
shall not include construction of a new highway or portion thereof,
construction of a bypass for an existing highway, or similar major
alterations. Approval shall not be granted if reasonable and prudent
alternatives exist nor if individual or cumulative approvals are likely
to materially impair the conservation or preservation purposes for which
the parcel was originally protected. Projects determined by the
authority to be outside of the scope permitted by this chapter shall
require approval from the general court.
                                             
 II. The department of transportation shall submit a written request
to the authority with plans and supporting documentation to demonstrate
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The authority shall hold
a public hearing within 90 days of receipt of a complete request to
release land and community heritage investment program interests. The
authority shall provide at least 10 calendar days notice in advance of
such hearing. Notification shall be made, at the expense of the
department, to the landowner, local governing body and conservation
commission, abutters, the Society for the Protection of New Hampshire
Forests, the Nature Conservancy, the Audubon Society of New Hampshire,
the New Hampshire Wildlife Federation, the New Hampshire Preservation
Alliance, the local historic district commission or the local heritage
commission, or both, and the county conservation district, or their
successors. Notification of the public hearing shall be published, by
the department, in a paper of general circulation in the municipality
and shall be posted, by the department, in at least 2 public places. At
the hearing or within 15 days after the hearing, a majority of the
authority's voting members shall vote to approve or deny the
application, unless a time extension is requested by the department.
Aggrieved parties, which include all parties who must be notified under
this paragraph, may appeal the authority's decision to the superior
court in the same manner as planning board decisions are appealed under
RSA 677:15.
                                             
 III. Compensation for any interest in land obtained by the
department of transportation under this section shall be at the
appraised full fair market value of those property interests at the time
of the department's acquisition. Alternative forms of compensation such
as replacement land with comparable conservation value, or a combination
of monetary compensation and replacement land may be considered in
appropriate circumstances, provided all parties owning an interest in
the property agree to such terms.
                                             
 IV. Compensation due to municipalities and nonprofit organizations
shall be dedicated to the acquisition, managing, or monitoring of
protected lands consistent with the purposes of this chapter.
Compensation due landowners shall be as specified in the deed or as
otherwise negotiated. Any party aggrieved by the amount of compensation
may file a petition with the superior court in the same manner as damage
appeals are filed from the board of tax and land appeals under RSA
498-A:27.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1, eff. June 8, 2000.

### Section 227-M:14

 **227-M:14 Public Trust. –** Resource assets acquired under this
chapter through the use of the trust fund for the program shall be held
in public trust and used and applied for the purposes of this chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law relating to the disposal of
publicly-owned real estate, no deviation in the uses of any resource
asset so acquired to uses or purposes not consistent with the purposes
of this chapter shall be permitted. The sale, transfer, conveyance, or
release of any resource asset from public trust is prohibited, except as
provided in RSA 227-M:13.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1, eff. June 8, 2000.

### Section 227-M:15

 **227-M:15 Public Access; Liability. –** Lands and interests in
lands purchased with funds from this program by any eligible applicant
shall be open in perpetuity for passive recreational purposes or shall
be for the term of any farm viability term easement. Language to be used
in easement interests secured through the program shall approximate the
intent of the following:
                                             
 I. There is hereby conveyed pedestrian access to, on, and across the
property for hunting, fishing, and transitory passive recreational
purposes, but not camping, by members of the public. A grantor may
reserve the right to post against vehicles, motorized or otherwise and
against access to active livestock fields, against access to
agricultural cropland during planting and growing season, and against
access to forest land during harvesting or establishment of
plantations.
                                             
 II. The authority shall have the discretion to limit or prohibit
passive recreational use on a case-by-case basis, where this activity
would be inconsistent with the purpose for protecting the property
and/or when public safety would be at risk. Additionally, the authority
may stipulate, as a condition of funding, on a case-by-case basis where
appropriate, that certain lands or interests in lands be available for
motorized recreational uses.
                                             
 III. No person, or successor in title, who has granted or sold
rights of public access by virtue of an easement, right-of-way,
development right, or other means in accordance with the purposes of
this chapter shall be liable to a user of that right of access for
injuries suffered on that portion of the access unless those injuries
are caused by the willful or wanton misconduct of the grantor or
successor in title.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1. 2006, 39:2. 2008, 136:3, eff. Aug. 5, 2008.

### Section 227-M:16

 **227-M:16 Recapture. –** If property is sold, by a seller who has
received funds under this program regarding such property, to a
non-eligible applicant, the program trust fund's cash investment in the
property shall be returned to the program trust fund by the property
seller. This section shall not apply to a sale between eligible
applicants.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1, eff. June 8, 2000.

### Section 227-M:17

 **227-M:17 Receipt of Grant Recorded in Registry of Deeds. –**
Receipt of a grant award under this program and conditions of such award
shall be recorded in the registry of deeds for the county in which the
property is located.

**Source.** 2000, 245:1, eff. June 8, 2000.
