---
title: 'CHAPTER 227-J TIMBER HARVESTING'
---

TITLE XIX-A
                                             
FORESTRY
============

CHAPTER 227-J
                                             
TIMBER HARVESTING
-----------------

### Section 227-J:1

 **227-J:1 Declaration of Purpose. –** It is hereby recognized and
declared that the public welfare of this state requires the care and
protection of forest cover adjacent to certain waters of the state and
along public highways, and the proper disposal of slash and mill residue
resulting from forest operations in certain circumstances to help
conserve the amount and quality of surface waters and groundwaters of
the state; reduce the incidence and severity of forest fires; promote
healthful surroundings, recreational opportunities, and scenic values;
ensure future forest productivity; improve conditions for wildlife; and
provide other benefits to the public as the result of perpetuating a
proper forest cover, while continuing to meet the timber needs of forest
industries and providing income and employment for our citizens without
undue infringement on the rights of private forest landowners.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-J:2

 **227-J:2 Duties and Authority of the Director. –**
                                             
 I. The director, or the director's authorized agents shall:
                                             
 (a) Be the primary enforcement agency for this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Enforce the provisions of RSA 637 insofar as they pertain to
the protection and improvement of forestlands.
                                             
 II. The director or the director's authorized agents may:
                                             
 (a) For the purpose of performing the duties under this chapter,
enter upon all lands in this state, posted or otherwise.
                                             
 (b) Exercise the powers of arrest pursuant to RSA 227-G:7.
                                             
 (c) Issue a written cease and desist order against any timber
operation in violation of this chapter, with the exception of RSA
227-J:4. Any such violation may be enjoined by the superior court, upon
application of the attorney general. A person failing to comply with the
cease and desist order shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor.
                                             
 (d) Issue cease and desist orders to temporarily suspend logging
or other operations in forest areas when the director determines that
such actions have resulted in, or are likely to result in, pollution of
surface water or groundwater. In such instances, the director shall
immediately notify the division of water supply and pollution control,
which shall investigate at once. The cease and desist order issued by
the director shall remain in force until such time as the division of
water supply and pollution control determines whether the action in
question constitutes a threat to water supplies.
                                             
 III. The director may enter into cooperative agreements or memoranda
of understanding for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1. 2010, 171:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 227-J:3

 **227-J:3 Special Deputy Forest Rangers. –** The director may
appoint, as special deputy forest rangers, persons to assist the
director in the enforcement of the provisions of this title and any
other laws for which the division has enforcement authority, the
protection and improvement of forestlands throughout the state, and the
protection of persons and property on property owned, leased, or under
the control of the department. Such individuals shall be employees of
the division and shall have powers and duties exercised only at the
discretion of the director. Such appointees shall be allowed, for their
services, such compensation as may be fixed by the commissioner and the
director, and such compensation shall be deemed an expense of enforcing
state forest protection laws and paid by the state.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1. 2008, 98:1, eff. July 20, 2008.

### Section 227-J:4

 **227-J:4 Licensed Foresters. –** It shall be unlawful for any
person to practice for compensation or offer to practice for
compensation in this state, the profession of forestry, as defined in
RSA 310-A:99, II, or to use in connection with a name or otherwise
assume, use, or advertise any title or description tending to convey the
impression that such person is a forester, unless such person has been
duly licensed according to the provisions of RSA 310-A. Failure to
comply with these requirements may result in penalties under RSA 310-A.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-J:5

 **227-J:5 Notice of Intent to Cut and Report of Wood Cut. –**
Pursuant to RSA 79:10 and 11, any owner, as defined in RSA 79:1, II,
conducting a cutting operation shall file an intent to cut and a report
of wood cut. Pursuant to RSA 79:10, I(d), the intent to cut form as
signed or properly noted as being signed by the assessing officials or
the certificate issued by the department of revenue administration shall
be posted prior to starting a cutting operation. Failure to comply with
these requirements and those contained in RSA 79 may result in penalties
to the owner or any other person doing the cutting, or both, under RSA
79.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1. 1998, 286:1. 2003, 138:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 227-J:6

 **227-J:6 Operations in Wetlands. –**
                                             
 I. Pursuant to RSA 482-A no person shall excavate, remove, fill,
dredge, or construct any structures in or on any bank, flat, marsh, or
swamp in and adjacent to any waters of the state without a permit from
the department of environmental services. Failure to comply with these
requirements may result in penalties under RSA 482-A.
                                             
 II. Pursuant to RSA 482-A:3, V, persons who have complied with
notice of intent to cut wood requirements under RSA 79:10, and who have
filed an appropriate notification of forest management activities having
minimum wetlands impact with the department of environmental services
and the department of resources and economic development, shall have
satisfied the permitting requirements for minimum impact activities.
                                             
 III. Pursuant to the rules of the department of environmental
services, skid trails, truck roads and culverts, bridges, pole fords, or
other crossings on the skid trails or truck roads shall be constructed
in accordance with procedures as currently cited in the Best Management
Practices for Erosion Control on Timber Harvesting Operations in New
Hampshire, published by the department.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1. 1996, 296:37, eff. Aug. 9, 1996.

### Section 227-J:7

 **227-J:7 Alteration of Terrain. –**
                                             
 I. Pursuant to RSA 485-A:17, any person proposing to dredge,
excavate, place fill, mine, transport forest products, or undertake
construction in or on the border of the surface waters of the state, and
any person proposing to significantly alter the characteristics of the
terrain, in such a manner as to impede the natural runoff or create an
unnatural runoff shall comply with the provisions of RSA 485-A. Failure
to comply with these requirements may result in penalties under RSA
485-A.
                                             
 II. Permits are obtained by signing the intent to cut form as
provided in RSA 485-A:17, III.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-J:8

 **227-J:8 Trespass; Civil Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall negligently cut, fell, destroy, injure, or carry
away any tree, timber, log, wood, pole, underwood, or bark which is on
the land of another person, or aid in such actions without the
permission of that person or the person's agent.
                                             
 II. In addition to any other civil or criminal penalty allowed by
law, any person who violates the provisions in paragraph I shall forfeit
to the person injured no less than 3 and not more than 10 times the
market value of every such tree, timber, log, lumber, wood, pole,
underwood, or bark cut, felled, destroyed, injured, or carried away.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1. 1998, 286:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 227-J:8-a

 **227-J:8-a Trespass; Criminal Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall recklessly cut, fell, destroy, injure, or carry
away any tree, timber, log, wood, pole, underwood, or bark which is on
the land of another person, or aid in such actions without the
permission of that person or the person's agent.
                                             
 II. A person who violates the provisions of paragraph I shall be
guilty of a class B felony if the loss is greater than 
                                             $1,000, or a
misdemeanor for any other loss.

**Source.** 1998, 286:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 227-J:9

 **227-J:9 Cutting of Timber Near Certain Waters and Public Highways
of the State; Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Within a 12-month period, no more than 50 percent of the basal
area of trees shall be cut or otherwise felled, leaving a well
distributed stand of healthy, growing trees:
                                             
 (a) Within 150 feet of:
                                             
 (1) Any great pond;
                                             
 (2) Any standing body of water 10 acres or more in area;
                                             
 (3) Any fourth order or higher stream; or
                                             
 (4) Any public highway; or
                                             
 (b) Within 50 feet of:
                                             
 (1) Any stream, river, or brook not included in subparagraph
(a)(3) which normally flows throughout the year; or
                                             
 (2) Any standing body of water less than 10 acres in area
associated with a stream, river, or brook which normally flows
throughout the year.
                                             
 This paragraph shall not apply if the person who pushes over, cuts,
saws, or operates upon, or causes to be pushed, cut, sawed, or operated
upon, any trees described in subparagraphs (a) or (b), obtains the prior
written consent of the director, or of the director's agents in
accordance with paragraph V.
                                             
 II. Timber cutting for land conversion purposes, other than timber
growing and forest uses, shall be exempt from this section if those
persons intending to convert the use of the land have secured all
required local permits including, but not limited to, building,
subdivision or zoning permits, excavation permits, or site plan approval
necessary for the use to which the land will be converted, and are able
to furnish proof of such permits.
                                             
 III. No person shall clear land of natural vegetation on a given
lot, tract, or parcel proposed for subdivision pursuant to RSA 485-A:32,
unless such subdivision plan has been submitted and approved in
accordance with the requirements of RSA 485-A.
                                             
 IV. Timber cutting for land conversion purposes, other than timber
growing and forest uses, that does not require any local permits shall
be exempt from this section if conversion occurs within 180 days of
exceeding the provisions in paragraph I, or there has been prior written
consent to extend the 180-day period from the director or the director's
agents in accordance with paragraph V.
                                             
 V. (a) Before the director grants a request to exceed the limits
established in this section, the landowner or authorized agent shall
demonstrate that it is necessary to exceed such limits and that any and
all actions are consistent with the purposes of this chapter. The
director shall provide a standard request form for this purpose. This
form shall be submitted to the director or the director's agents at
least 30 days prior to commencing the timber cutting operation.
                                             
 (b) Failure of the division to act upon the request within 30
days shall serve as automatic approval.
                                             
 VI. (a) Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                             
 (b) Each 200 linear feet or fraction thereof of frontage on the
affected great pond, any standing body of water 10 acres or more in
area, fourth order stream or higher, or public highway, or any other
stream, river or brook which normally flows throughout the year or
standing body of water less than 10 acres in size associated with a
stream, river or brook which normally flows throughout the year, from
which trees are cut in excess of limits prescribed in this section shall
constitute a separate offense.
                                             
 VII. This section shall be enforceable by the municipality in which
the land is situated; provided, however, that before initiating any
enforcement action, the municipality shall notify the director, who
shall take action to the extent the director deems necessary to ensure
uniform statewide enforcement. If, within 10 days of notification to the
director, no enforcement action has been taken by the director or the
director's agent, the municipality may proceed with actions necessary to
ensure compliance with the law.
                                             
 VIII. Forest management not associated with shoreland development
nor land conversion and conducted in compliance with the provisions of
this section shall be exempt from the provisions of RSA 483-B.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1. 1996, 86:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 227-J:10

 **227-J:10 Care of Slash and Mill Residue; Penalty. –** Whoever
pushes over, cuts, saws, or operates on or causes to be pushed over,
cut, sawed, or operated on any timber, brush, lumber, or wood shall
dispose of the slash and mill residue caused by such action so that
slash and mill residue shall not remain:
                                             
 I. In any stream, river, or brook which normally flows throughout
the year or in any other standing body of water, public highway, or
active railroad bed.
                                             
 II. On the property of another, or in a cemetery.
                                             
 III. Within 25 feet of land of another, or fourth order stream.
                                             
 IV. Within 50 feet of any great pond, any standing body of water 10
acres or more in area, public highway, or active railroad bed.
                                             
 V. Within 100 feet of any occupied structure as defined in RSA
635:1, III, including all barns, sheds, and other storage buildings,
except a temporary lumber camp.
                                             
 VI. Disposal of slash and mill residue shall be in such manner that
it is disposed of within the area between 50 feet and 150 feet of any
great pond, standing body of water 10 acres or more in area, or public
highway so it lies on the ground and no part of the slash or residue
extends more than 4 feet above the ground.
                                             
 VII. If more than one of the limitations in paragraphs I-VI on the
disposal of slash and mill residue shall be applicable, the most
restrictive shall control.
                                             
 VIII. Any person who pushes over, cuts, saws, or operates on or who
causes to be pushed over, cut, sawed, or operated on any such timber,
brush, lumber or wood, or any owner of land where cutting is done, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor for each 200 linear feet or fraction thereof
of property boundaries, water frontage, public highway, and railroad
frontage from which the slash and mill residue is not properly removed
or disposed of as provided under RSA 227-J:10, I-VII, within 30 days
after such cutting unless an extension is approved by the director. If
the person refuses or neglects to properly remove or dispose of the
slash or mill residue within the time prescribed, the person shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in this paragraph for each
subsequent 30-day period of refusal or neglect to so remove or dispose
of such slash or mill residue.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-J:11

 **227-J:11 Prohibition on the Transportation of Coniferous Trees;
Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. During the period from October 1 to December 25, inclusive, no
person shall transport at any one time more than 3 coniferous trees,
obtained from another, from place to place along any public highway
unless the person has available for inspection evidence that the person
is the owner of the trees, and can furnish the name, address, and
telephone number of the person from whom the trees were obtained.
                                             
 II. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-J:12

 **227-J:12 Mill Logs; Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall knowingly cut out or alter the mark of any mill
log, or cut into any lumber or log belonging to another person, without
the permission of the owner or the owner's agent.
                                             
 II. In addition to any other civil or criminal penalty allowed by
law, any person who violates the provisions of paragraph I shall forfeit
to the person injured 10 times the market value of every such mill log
or lumber, cut or altered.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-J:13

 **227-J:13 Damage to Fences. –** Pursuant to RSA 539:3, no person
shall knowingly throw down, damage, or leave open any fence, gate or bar
belonging to or enclosing land held in common, or belonging to another
person, or shall aid in such act, without being subject to the penalties
provided in RSA 539:3.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-J:14

 **227-J:14 Administrative Fines. –**
                                             
 I. The director, with the approval of the commissioner and after
notice and hearing pursuant to RSA 541-A, may impose an administrative
fine not to exceed 
                                             $2,000 for each offense upon any person who violates
any provision of this chapter. Rehearings and appeals from a decision of
the commissioner under this paragraph shall be in accordance with RSA
541. Any administrative fine imposed under this section shall not
preclude the imposition of further penalties under this chapter. The
commissioner shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (a) A schedule of administrative fines which may be imposed under
this paragraph for violation of this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Procedures for notice and hearing prior to the imposition of
an administrative fine.
                                             
 II. The proceeds of administrative fines levied pursuant to
paragraph I shall be deposited by the commissioner into the forest
management and protection fund established under RSA 227-G:5, I.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-J:15

 **227-J:15 Deceptive Forestry Business Practices. –**
                                             
 I. A person is guilty of a class B felony if the loss is greater
than 
                                             $1,000 or otherwise guilty of a misdemeanor who in the course of
buying and selling of a forest product, as defined under RSA 227-G:4,
VII, recklessly:
                                             
 (a) Uses or possesses for use a false weight or measure, or any
other device for falsely determining or recording any quality or
quantity as provided under RSA 438; or
                                             
 (b) Sells, offers, or exposes for sale or delivers less than the
represented quantity of any forest product or service; or
                                             
 (c) Takes or attempts to take more than the represented quantity
of any forest product or service when as buyer the person furnishes the
weight or measure; or
                                             
 (d) Sells, offers, or exposes for sale adulterated or mislabeled
commodities; or
                                             
 (e) Does not remunerate the owner of the timber for the value of
the forest products pursuant to a written contract; or
                                             
 (f) Does not furnish the owner, upon written request, with all
scale slips to verify the amount of the forest products removed from the
owner's property.
                                             
 II. In this section, "adulterated'' means varying from a standard of
composition or quality prescribed by any statute providing criminal
penalties for such variance, or set by established commercial usage. In
this section, "mislabeled'' means varying from a standard of truth or
disclosure in labeling prescribed by any law providing criminal
penalties for such variance, or set by established commercial usage. In
this section, "scale slip'' means a written or printed form or
combination of forms which provide an accurate, readily understandable
record containing the species of wood product, board footage of each
individual log when the standard unit of measurement is per thousand
board feet, or tonnage or cordage when not sold per thousand board feet,
gross scale, defect, net scale, date wood was measured, and the name of
the party scaling the wood.
                                             
 III. A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if, in the course of buying
or selling a forest product as defined in RSA 227-G:4, VII, he or she
recklessly fails to provide a written contract to the owner, prior to
the cutting from the owner's property any forest products which are
subject to a notice of intent to cut as defined in RSA 79:10. The
contract shall be signed by both parties, specify the remuneration for
the forest products to be cut, and the time in which remuneration shall
be made.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1. 1998, 286:4. 2003, 43:2. 2007, 88:11, eff. Aug.
10, 2007.
