---
title: 'CHAPTER 227-K FOREST HEALTH'
---

TITLE XIX-A
                                             
FORESTRY
============

CHAPTER 227-K
                                             
FOREST HEALTH
--------------

### Section 227-K:1

 **227-K:1 Declaration of Purpose. –** It is hereby recognized and
declared that the public welfare of this state requires monitoring and
assessment of the status of changes and long-term trends in the health
of the state's forests and the ability to detect and reduce the
incidence and severity of forest insect and disease infestations.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-K:2

 **227-K:2 Duties of the Director. –**
                                             
 I. The director shall:
                                             
 (a) Be responsible for the protection of forests from forest
pests in order to reduce and prevent loss of timber resources, enhance
the growth and maintenance of forests, conserve forest cover on
watersheds, and promote stability of forest-using industries.
                                             
 (b) Coordinate forest pest control efforts with the commissioner
of agriculture and the state entomologist. The director and commissioner
of agriculture shall establish and publish an annual work plan outlining
these efforts and specifying the responsibilities of each agency.
                                             
 (c) Coordinate efforts with the federal forest health monitoring
program.
                                             
 (d) Prepare a biennial report summarizing the status of forest
health.
                                             
 II. The director or the director's authorized agents may, for the
purpose of performing the duties under this chapter, enter upon all
lands in this state, posted or otherwise.
                                             
 III. The director, in consultation with the commissioner and under
the direction of the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food, or
designee, may establish quarantines as specified in the law or under the
rules to prevent dissemination of forest pests within the state or into
the state that have the potential to cause serious damage to forests.
                                             
 IV. The director, with the approval of the commissioner and after
notice and hearing pursuant to RSA 541-A, may impose an administrative
fine not to exceed 
                                             $2,000 for each offense upon any person who violates
any provision of this chapter. Rehearings and appeals from a decision of
the director under this paragraph shall be in accordance with RSA 541.
Any administrative fine imposed under this section shall not preclude
the imposition of further penalties under this chapter. The commissioner
shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (a) A schedule of administrative fines which may be imposed under
this paragraph for violation of this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Procedures for notice and hearing prior to the imposition of
the administrative fine.
                                             
 V. The proceeds of administrative fines levied pursuant to paragraph
IV shall be deposited by the director into the forest management and
protection fund established under RSA 227-G:5, I.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1. 2007, 88:6, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 227-K:3

 **227-K:3 Designation of Control Areas. –**
                                             
 I. The director may publicize information concerning forest insects
and diseases.
                                             
 II. Control areas may be designated upon determination of the
director, in consultation with the commissioner, the state entomologist,
the commissioner of the department of agriculture, other agencies as
necessary, and affected landowners, that an exotic, non-native forest
insect or disease poses a significant threat to forests and that there
is the potential for localized infestations to spread to adjacent lands.
Notification of such designation may be provided as authorized under
paragraph I.
                                             
 III. (a) A landowner within a control area shall carry out such
control measures as are ordered by the director, to the extent practical
and where proven technology is available, including but not limited to,
the removal and destruction of any plants harboring insects or
diseases.
                                             
 (b) If such control measures are not immediately taken by the
property owner, the director or authorized agent may remove and destroy
infected vegetation from any land within the control area. Cost of
actions taken by the state shall be borne by the state.
                                             
 (c) A landowner's right to appeal a decision by the director
under this chapter shall be provided in rules adopted by the
commissioner under RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-K:4

 **227-K:4 Cooperation of Agencies. –** The commissioner and director
may cooperate with departments of the federal government, the state
department of agriculture, and the agricultural experiment station for
the control or eradication of forest insects and diseases in the state
generally, and for carrying out such investigations as are deemed
advisable by the commissioner.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

White Pine Blister Rust Control Areas
-------------------------------------

### Section 227-K:5

 **227-K:5 Entry on Land. –** The director or the director's
authorized agents shall have the right to enter upon any public or
private property to determine the presence of the fungus disease
Cronartium ribicola commonly known as white pine blister rust in any of
its stages, and to carry out the necessary eradication measures.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-K:6

 **227-K:6 Planting Currant or Gooseberry Bushes Within Control Area.
–** No person shall plant any currant or gooseberry bush within a
control area without the permission of the director.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-K:7

 **227-K:7 Diseased Plants, Etc. –** Any currant or gooseberry bushes
which are found to threaten any white pine trees with Cronartium
ribicola are hereby declared to be a public pest, and any such plants
may be destroyed by order of the director or the director's authorized
agents.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-K:8

 **227-K:8 Obligation of Towns. –** When, in the opinion of the
director and the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food a
necessity exists requiring the destruction of currant and gooseberry
bushes in any town, the director or the director's authorized agents may
remove or destroy any currant and gooseberry bushes within such town and
charge the expense to state appropriations made available for this
purpose or in the event state appropriations are not made available or
are insufficient for this purpose, charge said expenses to the town;
provided, however, that no town shall be required to expend more than

                                             $400 in any one year for such control measures. If such order is not
complied with, the governor and council may order such town to carry out
any control measures specified by the director.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-K:9

 **227-K:9 Expense. –** The expenses to the town provided for in RSA
227-K:8 for control measures shall be deemed to be a judgment against
the town and the amount shall, without vote of the town, be paid by the
selectmen.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-K:10

 **227-K:10 Notice Required. –** Two weeks prior to removal or
destruction of any currant or gooseberry bushes within any town by the
director or the director's authorized agents, a written notice shall be
given by the director to the selectmen of the town stating the date
when, and the location where, operations for such removal or destruction
will begin.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-K:11

 **227-K:11 Damages for Destruction of Bushes or Trees. –** If within
any designated control area, bushes or trees other than currants and
gooseberries which threaten white pine trees with Cronartium ribicola
are designated by the director or the director's agents and destroyed by
the director or the director's agent's specific order, the owner may be
compensated, the damages to be assessed by the director at not more than
the actual value of the material destroyed, and paid to the owner by the
state treasurer upon authorization of the commissioner.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-K:12

 **227-K:12 Alternative. –** In lieu of money damages for any trees
or bushes destroyed under RSA 227-K:11, the director may offer, and the
owner may accept, forest planting stock to be furnished from the state
forest nursery.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

Nursery Inspection
------------------

### Section 227-K:13

 **227-K:13 Nursery Inspection. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2007, 88:12, eff. Aug.
10, 2007.
                                             ]

### Section 227-K:14

 **227-K:14 Regulation of Entry. –** The director's authorized
agents, under the direction of the director, may prohibit or regulate
the entry into the state, or the movement within the state, of any tree,
timber, log, wood, pole, underwood, or bark, or the products thereof,
which in the agent's judgment may cause the introduction or spread of a
dangerous insect or disease. This authority shall not extend to
agricultural crops, nurseries, or nursery stock as regulated under RSA
433.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1. 2007, 88:7, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 227-K:15

 **227-K:15 Orders. –** The director and the commissioner of
resources and economic development may issue such orders, notifications,
and permits as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of RSA
227-K:14.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1. 2007, 88:8, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 227-K:16

 **227-K:16 Expenses. –** The expenses necessary for carrying out the
provisions of this subdivision shall be paid from the appropriation for
nursery inspection or other funds of the department of agriculture,
markets, and food.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-K:17

 **227-K:17. Prohibitions; Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. The following actions are prohibited:
                                             
 (a) Violating any provisions of a quarantine issued under RSA
227-K:2, III.
                                             
 (b) Violating any order or failing to obtain a permit issued
under RSA 227-K:15.
                                             
 (c) Selling, offering for sale, giving away, moving or shipping
any tree, timber, log, wood, pole, underwood, or bark, or the products
thereof into this state, or within this state, knowing or having reason
to believe that they may be harboring a forest pest declared as a
dangerous insect or disease, or have been exposed to any such pest. This
authority shall not extend to agricultural crops, nurseries, or nursery
stock as regulated under RSA 433.
                                             
 II. Any person, or employee or agent of that person, who violates
any provision of this section or rule adopted under this chapter shall
be guilty of a violation. For any subsequent offense, a person shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if
any other person.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1. 2007, 88:9, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.
