---
title: 'CHAPTER 227-G POLICY, DEFINITIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION'
---

TITLE XIX-A
                                             
FORESTRY
============

CHAPTER 227-G
                                             
POLICY, DEFINITIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION
---------------------------------------

### Section 227-G:1

 **227-G:1 Declaration of Purpose. –** It is hereby recognized and
declared that the public welfare of this state requires the maintenance,
protection, conservation, multiple use, and rehabilitation of forests
for the social, economic, and environmental benefits that result from a
diverse forest cover. Such benefits include forest products, a viable
forest-based economy, recreation opportunities, scenic values, healthful
surroundings, climate mitigation, clean water, and biologically diverse
populations of plants and animals. It is further recognized that
long-term sustainability of the state's forests will require: the
prudent acquisition and management of state-owned forests; data
collection, planning, and education; protection of critical resources;
monitoring and protection of forest health; and control of woodland
fires.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-G:2

 **227-G:2 Definitions. –** In this title:
                                             
 I. "Basal area'' means the cross sectional area of a tree measured
at a height of 4- 1/2 feet above the ground, usually expressed in square
feet per acre for a stand of trees.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
resources and economic development.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of resources and economic
development.
                                             
 IV. "Director'' means the director of the division of forests and
lands, department of resources and economic development, also known as
the state forester.
                                             
 V. "Division'' means the division of forests and lands, department
of resources and economic development.
                                             
 VI. "Forest benefits'' include, but are not limited to, forest
products, a viable forest-based economy, recreation opportunities,
scenic values, healthful surroundings, climate mitigation, clean water,
and biologically diverse populations of plants and animals.
                                             
 VII. "Forest fire district'' means a geographical area of
responsibility for a forest ranger of the department of resources and
economic development, division of forests and lands.
                                             
 VIII. "Forestland'' means all lands in this state, except those
owned and managed by the United States of America, which by reason of
their location and character of soil have the capacity to grow trees and
the continuance of which under forest cover is of substantial importance
to the public interest.
                                             
 IX. "Forest management'' means the application of scientific and
economic principles to conserve forest resources and obtain forest
benefits.
                                             
 X. "Forest resources'' include, but are not limited to, soil, air,
and water and the full range of plants, animals, and other organisms.
                                             
 XI. "Forestry'' means the science of silviculture and the practice
and art of managing and using for human benefit forestlands and the
natural resources that occur in association with forestlands, including
trees, other plants, animals, soil, water, and related air and climate.
                                             
 XII. "Fourth order streams'' means those streams on a list
maintained by the office of energy and planning, as of the effective
date of this section, using the Strahler method whereby the highest
year-round streams in a watershed are first order streams, their
juncture yields second order streams, the juncture of second order
streams yields third order streams, and the juncture of third order
streams yields fourth order.
                                             
 XIII. "Primary forest product'' means any portion of a tree, after
felling, which will be processed into a secondary forest product, or
will be utilized in its primary form.
                                             
 XIV. "Primary wood processing mill'' means any permanent or portable
mill, or any off-site log yard operated by a primary wood processing
mill, wherever located, sawing or otherwise processing logs, bolts,
pulpwood, or other primary forest products into secondary forest
products.
                                             
 XV. "Quarantine'' means a legal restriction duly imposed or enacted
as a means for preventing or delaying the spread of a forest pest.
                                             
 XVI. "Reservation'' means public land under the jurisdiction of the
department including, but not limited to: state forest, state park,
natural area, historic site, geological site, recreation trail, memorial
area, fire tower, wayside area, heritage park, resource center,
agricultural area, state forest nursery, fish pier, administrative
facility, information center, demonstration forest, certain islands, and
lands under lease to the department.
                                             
 XVII. "Special purpose'' means the management of reservations and
state-owned forestlands which have been excluded from forest management
due to environmental, public safety, or other reasons unique to the
reservation or state-owned forestland as determined by the agency
responsible for the reservation or state-owned forestland.
                                             
 XVIII. "Wood concentration yard'' means any site established and
used for the purchase and resale of primary forest products from
off-site locations and which is not a primary wood processing mill. Any
site used primarily to process or store bark mulch shall not be a wood
concentration yard.
                                             
 XIX. "Woodland'' includes cut-over land, slash, and such other land
as bears a sufficient amount of wood growth, wood, weeds, grass, or
other growth as to be likely to be burned

**Source.** 1995, 299:1. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44. 2007, 88:1, eff.
Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 227-G:3

 **227-G:3 Duties and Authority of the Director of the Division of
Forests and Lands. –**
                                             
 I. The director shall:
                                             
 (a) Execute all matters pertaining to forestry, forest
management, and forestlands within the jurisdiction of the state,
including cooperation with other state and federal agencies, with the
approval of governor and council as required.
                                             
 (b) Be responsible for the forest management of all reservations
and state-owned forestlands except those areas managed for special
purposes. The director shall consult with the directors of all agencies
responsible for such areas in regard to forest management.
                                             
 (c) Execute all matters pertaining to the use of state
reservations, except matters pertaining to the recreational development,
administration, and maintenance, which shall be done in cooperation with
the director of the division of parks and recreation, department of
resources and economic development, with the approval of governor and
council as required.
                                             
 (d) Gather information on the state's forest resources and plan
for the multiple use and perpetuation of those resources.
                                             
 (e) Enforce provisions on timber harvesting in RSA 227-J.
                                             
 (f) Be responsible for overall forest health monitoring,
reporting, and protection.
                                             
 (g) Be responsible for the overall prevention and control of
woodland fires throughout the state except within the boundaries of the
White Mountain National Forest.
                                             
 (h) Administer the funds in RSA 227-G:5.
                                             
 (i) Prepare biennially a report to the governor on the activities
and plans of the division. Such report shall contain an itemized
statement of all expenses incurred or authorized by the director or by
the commissioner.
                                             
 (j) Carry out such other duties relating to forests, forest
management, and forestlands as may be delegated by the commissioner
lying within the jurisdiction of the department.
                                             
 II. The director may:
                                             
 (a) Within the limits of appropriations, hire such field and
office assistants as, in the judgment of the commissioner, are necessary
for the proper execution of the director's duties.
                                             
 (b) With the consent of the commissioner secure the assistance of
experts and pay such experts' expenses, as necessary for the proper
execution of their duties.
                                             
 (c) Upon terms approved by the commissioner, enter into
cooperative agreements with departments of the federal government and
other public and private agencies and organizations for the promotion of
forestry within the state.
                                             
 (d) Conduct investigations within the state on forestry matters
and publish for distribution literature of scientific or general
interest pertaining to forestry.
                                             
 (e) Call training sessions of division employees, representatives
of cooperating public and private agencies and organizations, town
forestry officials, interested citizens, and others.
                                             
 (f) With the approval of the commissioner or the commissioner's
agents, impose administrative fines as provided in RSA 227-J:14, and RSA
227-L:2, V.
                                             
 III. All duties and authorities assigned to the director under this
title shall be performed under the supervision of the commissioner.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-G:4

 **227-G:4 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules, under
RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The management of reservations, pursuant to RSA 227-H.
                                             
 II. Registration of primary wood processing mills, and regulation of
mill sites.
                                             
 III. The cutting of timber near certain waters and public highways,
pursuant to RSA 227-J:9.
                                             
 IV. The preparation and issuance of a standard request form to
exceed the cutting limits near certain waters and public highways and
the criteria for evaluating such a request pursuant to RSA 227-J:9, V.
                                             
 V. Imposition of administrative fines pursuant to RSA 227-J:14.
                                             
 VI. The regulation and permitting of floating timber, pursuant to
RSA 485-B.
                                             
 VII. The definition of buying and selling of forest products in
relation to deceptive forestry business practices pursuant to RSA
227-J:15.
                                             
 VIII. The designation of control areas for forest insect and disease
infestations and rights of appeal pursuant to RSA 227-K.
                                             
 VIII-a. Quarantine measures that may be taken when forest pests are
found in any geographic area pursuant to RSA 227-K.
                                             
 VIII-b. The issuing of orders and permits pursuant to RSA 227-K:15.
                                             
 IX. The preparation and issuance of burning permits, and the
kindling of camp or cooking fires, pursuant to RSA 227-L:17.
                                             
 X. Emergency rules during high forest fire danger periods.
                                             
 X-a. The requirements for enhanced penalties pursuant to RSA
227-G:10.
                                             
 XI. Any other rules specifically authorized under the provisions of
this title.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1. 2007, 88:2. 2010, 171:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 227-G:5

 **227-G:5 Forest Funds. –**
                                             
 I. Forest management and protection fund.
                                             
 (a) There is hereby established a forest management and
protection fund. This fund shall be used for the following:
                                             
 (1) Managing state-owned forestlands.
                                             
 (2) Monitoring of forest health and protection of state and
private forestlands from disease and insect infestations.
                                             
 (3) Enforcing the laws relating to the harvesting of timber.
                                             
 (b) The forest management and protection fund shall be a
nonlapsing fund administered by the treasurer of the state of New
Hampshire. The fund shall be continually appropriated and expended at
the discretion of the director of the division and the commissioner. Any
funds in excess of that appropriated from the fund may be expended by
the commissioner, with prior approval of the fiscal committee and
governor and council, in accordance with RSA 227-G:5, I(a). Revenues
shall be derived from the proceeds of the sale of timber and other
forest products from state-owned forestlands, less 13 percent which
shall be deposited into the general fund. Revenues shall also be derived
from the lease of state-owned forestlands, or billable services provided
by the division of forests and lands, if the revenues are not dedicated
to any other purpose. Revenues for the fund shall also be derived from
administrative fines collected pursuant to RSA 227-J:1.
                                             
 II. Forest improvement fund.
                                             
 (a) All revenue derived from rentals and sales of forest products
from federal lands placed under the jurisdiction of the department shall
be kept by the state treasurer in a separate account as a continuous
fund to be known as the forest improvement fund from which the expenses
of forest management and silvicultural operations on these federal lands
may be paid. Such funds may be used interchangeably between the various
federal lands under the jurisdiction of the department, with the
approval of the concerned federal agency or agencies.
                                             
 (b) All revenues derived from the sale of state lands and
buildings under the jurisdiction of the department shall be kept by the
state treasurer in a separate account as a continuous fund within the
forest improvement fund from which payment shall be made by the
department for the purchase and improvement of areas suitable for state
reservations.
                                             
 (c) At the close of each fiscal year the unexpended balance of
moneys in the forest improvement fund shall not lapse but shall be
carried forward and be made available for use in subsequent years for
such purposes.
                                             
 III. Forest protection personnel training fund. The court or justice
of any court in which a complaint for a violation of any law or rule
relating to this title and other laws pertaining to the protection and
improvement of forestlands is prosecuted shall, within 30 days after any
fine or forfeiture is paid, remit the amount of such fine or forfeiture
to the commissioner, provided, however, that from each fine collected by
a municipal or district court, there shall be deducted 
                                             $10 and 20
percent of that part of the fine that exceeds 
                                             $10 and the same shall be
dispensed of as provided for in RSA 502:14 or 502-A:8. The portion of
the fine or forfeiture returned to the commissioner shall be placed in
an account to be known as the forest protection personnel training fund
which shall be continually appropriated to the division for the purpose
of training forest protection personnel. All administrative fines
collected under RSA 227-L:2, V shall be deposited into this fund.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996. 2015, 276:25, eff. July 1,
2015.

### Section 227-G:5-a

 **227-G:5-a Fines. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall recommend a uniform fine schedule for any
forestry law violation, which shall be submitted to the supreme court
for its use under RSA 502-A:19-b, V.
                                             
 II. Any person charged with a violation of any provision of title
XIX-A, excluding any offense for which the penalty is a misdemeanor or
felony, may plead guilty or nolo contendere by mail by entering a plea
as provided in RSA 502-A:19-b. If the plea is accepted by the court, the
defendant shall not be required to appear.
                                             
 III. Unless otherwise provided by law, any person who violates any
rule adopted under RSA 227-G:4 shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 2003, 43:1. 2007, 88:3, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 227-G:6

 **227-G:6 Expenditure of Federal Funds. –** In case the federal
government shall make available to the division for its activities any
funds in excess of the amounts estimated for such activities in the
so-called appropriation acts, the division, with the approval of the
governor and council, may expend such additional federal funds.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-G:7

 **227-G:7 Powers; Arrest; Validity of Prosecutions. –**
                                             
 I. The director and the director's authorized agents shall have the
authority of peace officers as defined under RSA 594:1 to serve criminal
processes and make arrests to enforce the provisions of this title and
any other laws, including title LXII, insofar as they pertain to the
protection and improvement of forestlands throughout the state, and for
the protection of persons and property on lands or property owned by,
leased to, or otherwise under the control of the department.
                                             
 II. Wardens, deputy wardens, and other persons authorized by the
director may arrest without a warrant any person taken by the authorized
person in the act of violating any of the laws for the protection and
improvement of woodlands and may bring such person forthwith before the
court or justice having jurisdiction.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 227-G:8

 **227-G:8 Validity of Prosecutions. –** Forest rangers and officials
of the division appointed to enforce this title and other laws provided
for in RSA 227-G:7 are authorized, upon successful completion of the
preparatory training programs for full-time or part-time police officers
established by the police standards and training council under RSA 188-F
and their subsequent certification as full-time or part-time police
officers, to prosecute these laws within the jurisdiction of municipal
and district courts, unless the prosecutorial jurisdiction over a
particular case or class of cases is preempted by the county attorney or
the attorney general. Prosecutions for violations of any provisions of
this title are declared to be valid and proper, notwithstanding the
existence of any law of this state dealing with matters that may be the
same as or similar to those covered by this title.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1. 2007, 88:4, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 227-G:9

 **227-G:9 Training of Forest Rangers. –**
                                             
 I. Any forest ranger of the division appointed to enforce the
provisions of this title and other laws provided for in RSA 227-G:7,
shall successfully complete the preparatory training for part-time
police officers established by the police standards and training council
pursuant to RSA 188-F no later than one year from the date of hire. Upon
successful completion of the training program, such forest ranger shall
be certified as a part-time police officer.
                                             
 II. Any forest ranger of the division hired after January 1, 2005
appointed to enforce the provisions of this title and other laws
provided for in RSA 227-G:7, shall successfully complete the preparatory
training for full-time police officers established by the police
standards and training council pursuant to RSA 188-F no later than one
year from the date of hire. Upon successful completion of the training
program, such forest ranger shall be certified as a full-time police
officer.
                                             
 III. Any forest ranger of the division hired before January 1, 2005
shall be certified as a full-time police officer upon successful
completion of the preparatory training for full-time police officers
established by the police standards and training council pursuant to RSA
188-F.

**Source.** 1995, 299:1. 2007, 88:5, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 227-G:10

 **227-G:10 Enhanced Penalty. –** A court may, upon separate petition
of the attorney general, or in connection with a petition for equity
relief filed by the attorney general, levy upon any person who meets the
requirements for enhanced penalties as defined in departmental rule, a
civil penalty in an amount not to exceed 
                                             $10,000 per violation, along
with any other injunctive relief deemed necessary by the court. The
proceeds of any civil penalty levied pursuant to this section shall be
deposited by the commissioner into the forest management and protection
fund established under RSA 227-G:5, I.

**Source.** 2010, 171:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.
