---
title: 'CHAPTER 33-B MUNICIPAL REVENUE BONDS'
---

TITLE III
                                             
TOWNS, CITIES, VILLAGE DISTRICTS, AND UNINCORPORATED PLACES
===========================================================

CHAPTER 33-B
                                             
MUNICIPAL REVENUE BONDS
-----------------------

### Section 33-B:1

 **33-B:1 Definitions. –** This chapter may be referred to as the
"Municipal Revenue Bond Act''. For purposes of this chapter, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context, the following words
shall have the following meanings:
                                             
 I. "Authorized officers'' means the treasurer of a municipality or
regional water district and the mayor or city manager of a city, the
selectmen of a town, and the commissioners or comparable officers of a
village district, and the directors, commissioners, or other officers of
a regional water district.
                                             
 II. "Bonds'' means any bonds, notes or other evidences of
indebtedness issued under this chapter.
                                             
 III. "Construction'' means acquisition, construction,
reconstruction, equipping, enlargement or other capital improvement.
                                             
 III-a. "Governing body'' means the board of selectmen in a town, the
board of aldermen or council in a city or town with a council, the
village commissioners in a village district, or the directors of a
regional water district.
                                             
 IV. "Legislative body'' means the city council of a city, and the
voters present and voting at an annual or special meeting of a town or
village district, or the directors of a regional water district.
                                             
 V. "Municipality'' means a city, town or village district.
                                             
 V-a. "Regional water district'' means an entity formed by agreement
between government units pursuant to RSA 53-A, for the purpose of
providing and assuring the provision of an adequate and sustainable
supply of clean water.
                                             
 VI. "Revenue-producing facilities'' means water works, broadband
infrastructure as defined in RSA 38:38, I(e), purchased or constructed
in areas not served by an existing broadband carrier or provider,
sewerage systems, sewage treatment or disposal facilities, solid waste
disposal or resource recovery facilities, parking facilities, facilities
for the production, generation, transmission, or distribution of
electricity or gas, any other real or personal property or interests in
a municipality or regional water district owned or controlled by the
municipality or regional water district, from the operation of which
revenues are or are expected to be derived by the municipality, or
regional water district, and qualifying energy conservation and clean
energy improvements for which a municipality provides financing pursuant
to RSA 53-F.
                                             
 VII. "Revenues'' means any rates, rents, fees, charges and other
receipts and moneys held or to be received by or on behalf of a
municipality or regional water district from or with respect to the
construction, financing, operation and disposition of a
revenue-producing facility and all rights to receive the same including,
without limitation, rates, rents, fees, charges and other moneys
received for the use or occupancy of the facility or any part thereof or
any service provided thereby, repayments of loans made in respect of the
cost of the facility, grants, loans and other contributions from any
governmental unit or any other person for or in respect of proceeds of
the lease, sale or other disposition of the facility or any interest
therein; revenues shall not include any ad valorem taxes on the real
estate and personal property comprising any revenue-producing facility.

**Source.** 1988, 90:1. 1989, 124:7. 1990, 70:4, eff. Jan. 30, 1991.
1997, 206:2, eff. July 1, 1997. 2003, 281:1-5, eff. July 18, 2003. 2006,
225:5, eff. July 31, 2006. 2011, 68:1, eff. July 15, 2011.

### Section 33-B:2

 **33-B:2 Issuance of Revenue Bonds. –** A municipality or regional
water district may issue bonds or notes under this chapter for
construction of revenue-producing facilities. Bonds issued by a
municipality or regional water district under this chapter shall not be
deemed to be a pledge of the faith and credit of the state or of the
municipality or municipalities that are members of a regional water
district. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the principal
of, premium, if any, and interest on all bonds shall be payable solely
from the particular funds provided therefor under this chapter. Bonds
issued by a municipality shall be issued in such amounts as the
legislative body may authorize by a vote as required under RSA 33:8 or
9, as applicable. Bonds issued by regional water districts shall be
issued in such amounts as the governing body may authorize pursuant to
the regional water district's charter. Bonds of each issue shall be
dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates, including rates
variable from time to time as determined by such index, banker's loan
rate or other method as may be determined by the authorized officers,
and shall mature at such time or times as may be determined by the
authorized officers, except that no bond shall mature more than 40 years
from the date of its issue or beyond the expiration of the expected
useful life of the facilities being financed by the bonds as determined
by the authorized officers. Bonds may be made redeemable before maturity
at the option of the municipality or regional water district at such
price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by
the authorized officers prior to the issue of bonds. The authorized
officers shall determine the form and details and the manner of
execution of bonds. The municipality or regional water district may sell
its bonds in such manner, either at public or private sale, for such
price, at such rate or rates of interest, or at such discount in lieu of
interest, as the authorized officers may determine. The provisions of
RSA 33:11-a, 14 and 15 shall apply to bonds issued under this chapter.

**Source.** 1988, 90:1, eff. June 17, 1988. 2003, 281:6, eff. July 18,
2003.

### Section 33-B:3

 **33-B:3 Project Costs. –** In addition to other lawful items, the
costs to be financed by the issuance of bonds under this chapter may
include interest during construction and for up to one year after
completion of the revenue-producing facilities being financed as
estimated by the authorized officers, the cost of architectural,
engineering, financial and legal services, plans, specifications,
studies, expenses as may be necessary or incident to determining the
feasibility or practicability of constructing the revenue-producing
facilities, the funding of reserves for debt service or other expenses,
and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the
construction of the revenue-producing facilities, the financing of such
construction and the placing of the facilities in operation.

**Source.** 1988, 90:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 33-B:4

 **33-B:4 Trust or Security Agreement or Resolution. –** Any bonds
issued under this chapter may be secured by a resolution or by a trust
or security agreement between the municipality and a corporate trustee,
which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust
company within or without the state, or by a trust or security agreement
directly between the municipality and the purchasers of the bonds, and
such resolution or trust or security agreement shall be in such form and
executed in such manner as may be determined by the authorized officers.
Such trust or security agreement or resolution may pledge or assign, in
whole or in part, the revenues held or to be received by the
municipality from or on account of the revenue-producing facilities, and
any contract or other rights to receive the same, whether then existing
or thereafter coming into existence and whether then held or thereafter
acquired by the municipality, and the proceeds thereof. Such trust or
security agreement or resolution may contain such provisions for
protecting and enforcing the rights, security and remedies of the
bondholders as may, in the discretion of the authorized officers, be
reasonable and proper and not in violation of law. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, such agreement or resolution may include
provisions defining defaults and providing for remedies in the event of
default, which may include the acceleration of maturities, and covenants
setting forth the duties of, and limitations on, the municipality in
relation to the custody, safeguarding, investment and application of
moneys, the issue of additional or refunding bonds, the fixing, revision
and collection of fees, charges and other revenues, the use of any
surplus bond proceeds, the establishment of reserves, the construction
and operation of the revenue-producing facilities, and the making and
amending of contracts relating to the bonds. It shall be lawful for any
bank or trust company described in RSA 41:29 or RSA 48:16 to act as a
depository or trustee of the proceeds of bonds, revenues or other moneys
under a trust or security agreement or resolution and to furnish such
indemnification or to pledge such securities and issue such letters or
lines of credit or other credit facilities as may be required by a
municipality acting under this chapter. Any such trust or security
agreement or resolution may set forth the rights and remedies of
bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of
action by bondholders.

**Source.** 1988, 90:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 33-B:5

 **33-B:5 Credit Facilities and Insurance. –** Any bonds issued under
authority of this chapter may be issued by a municipality pursuant to
lines of credit or other banking arrangements under such terms and
conditions not inconsistent with this chapter, and under such agreements
as the authorized officers may determine to be in the best interests of
the municipality. In addition to other security provided herein or
otherwise by law, bonds issued by a municipality under this chapter may
be secured, in whole or in part, by insurance or by letters or lines of
credit or other credit facilities issued to the municipality by any
bank, trust company or other financial institution, within or without
the state, and the municipality may pledge or assign any of the revenues
from its revenue-producing facilities as security for the reimbursement
by the municipality to the issuers of such letters or lines of credit,
insurance or credit facilities of any payments made thereunder.

**Source.** 1988, 90:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 33-B:6

 **33-B:6 Pledge of Revenues or Other Property. –** Any pledge of
revenues, contract or other rights to receive revenues, or the proceeds
thereof made by a municipality under this chapter shall be valid and
binding and shall be deemed continuously perfected for the purposes of
the Uniform Commercial Code and other laws from the time when the pledge
is made; the revenues, moneys, rights and proceeds so pledged and then
held or thereafter acquired or received by the municipality shall
immediately be subject to the lien of such pledge without any physical
delivery or segregation thereof or further act; and the lien of such
pledge shall be valid and binding against all parties having claims of
any kind in tort, contract or otherwise against the municipality,
irrespective of whether such parties have notice thereof. Neither the
resolution, any trust or security agreement nor any other agreement by
which a pledge is created need be filed or recorded except in the
records of the municipality and no filing need be made under the Uniform
Commercial Code.

**Source.** 1988, 90:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 33-B:7

 **33-B:7 Enforcement of Rights. –** Any owner of a bond issued by a
municipality under the provisions of this chapter and any trustee under
a trust or security agreement or resolution securing the same, except to
the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by such agreement
or resolution, may bring suit upon the bonds and may, either at law or
in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceeding for legal or
equitable relief, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws
of the state or granted hereunder or under such trust or security
agreement or resolution and may enforce and compel the performance of
all duties required by this chapter or by such agreement or resolution
to be performed by the municipality or by any officer of a municipality.

**Source.** 1988, 90:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 33-B:8

 **33-B:8 Refunding Bonds. –** A municipality, when authorized by its
legislative body, may issue refunding bonds for the purpose of paying
any of its bonds issued pursuant to this chapter at or prior to maturity
or upon acceleration or redemption. Refunding bonds may be issued at
such times prior to the maturity or redemption of the refunding bonds as
the authorized officers may determine. The refunding bonds may be issued
in sufficient amounts to pay or provide the principal of the bonds being
refunded, together with any redemption premium on the bonds, any
interest accrued or to accrue to the date of payment of such bonds, the
expenses of issue of the refunding bonds, the expenses of redeeming the
bonds being refunded, and such reserves for debt service or other
expenses from the proceeds of such refunding bonds as may be required by
a trust or security agreement or resolution securing the bonds. The
authorization and issue of refunding bonds, the maturities and other
details of such bonds, the security for the bonds, the rights of the
holders of the bonds, and the rights, duties and obligations of the
municipality in respect to the same shall be governed by the provisions
of this chapter relating to the issue of the bonds other than refunding
bonds insofar as the same may be applicable.

**Source.** 1988, 90:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 33-B:9

 **33-B:9 Governmental Consents. –**
                                             
 I. Bonds may be issued under this chapter without obtaining the
consent of any department, division, commission, board, or agency of the
state except as provided in paragraph II, and without any other
proceedings or the happening of any condition or things other than those
proceedings, conditions or things which are specifically required
therefor by this chapter, and the validity of and security for any bonds
issued by a municipality pursuant to this chapter shall not be affected
by the existence or nonexistence of any such consent or other
proceedings, condition or things.
                                             
 II. If in the opinion of either the authorized officers or the state
treasurer more than 1/2 of the revenues derived or expected to be
derived from a revenue-producing facility will be in the form of rents,
fees, grants or other moneys paid by the state, no bonds may be issued
for the revenue-producing facility in excess of an amount approved for
the purpose by the governor and council.

**Source.** 1988, 90:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 33-B:10

 **33-B:10 Investment Securities. –** Notwithstanding any of the
provisions of this chapter or any recitals in any bonds issued under
this chapter, all such bonds shall be deemed to be investment securities
under the Uniform Commercial Code.

**Source.** 1988, 90:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 33-B:11

 **33-B:11 Separate Funds. –** Any debt service fund, construction
fund, debt service reserve fund, depreciation reserve fund or other fund
established in connection with the issuance of bonds under this chapter
shall be kept separate from other moneys of the municipality. The moneys
deposited in any such funds, together with income derived from any
investments held as part of such funds, shall be expended without
further authorization or appropriation as provided for in the trust or
security agreement or resolution establishing such funds.

**Source.** 1988, 90:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 33-B:12

 **33-B:12 Trust Funds. –** All moneys received pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, whether as proceeds from the issue of bonds,
as revenues, or otherwise, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held
and applied solely as provided in this chapter.

**Source.** 1988, 90:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 33-B:13

 **33-B:13 Tax Exemption. –** Bonds issued under this chapter, their
transfer and income from them, including any profit made on their sale,
shall at all times be exempt from taxation within the state.

**Source.** 1988, 90:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 33-B:14

 **33-B:14 Eligible Investments. –** Bonds issued under this chapter
are hereby made securities in which all public officers, agencies and
authorities of the state and of its political subdivisions, insurance
companies, investment companies, executors, administrators, trustees and
other fiduciaries may properly and legally invest funds, including
capital in their control or belonging to them. Such bonds are hereby
made securities which may properly and legally be deposited with and
received by any state or municipal officer or any agency, authority or
political subdivision of the state for any purpose for which the deposit
of bonds or obligations of the state or of any political subdivision is
now or may hereafter be authorized by law.

**Source.** 1988, 90:1, eff. June 17, 1988.

### Section 33-B:15

 **33-B:15 Construction and Effect of Other Laws. –**
                                             
 I. The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to provide an
additional and alternative method for the effectuation of the purposes
of this chapter and shall be construed to be supplemental to, and not in
derogation of, powers otherwise conferred by law on municipalities,
provided, however, that insofar as the provisions of this chapter are
inconsistent with the provisions of any general or special law,
administrative order or rule or any limitation imposed by a
municipality's charter, the provisions of this chapter shall be
controlling.
                                             
 II. If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be
given effect without the invalid provisions or application, and to this
end the provisions of this chapter are severable.
                                             
 III. This chapter shall be construed in all respects so as to meet
all constitutional requirements. In carrying out the purposes and
provisions of this chapter, all steps shall be taken which are necessary
to meet constitutional requirements.
                                             
 IV. This chapter shall be interpreted liberally to effect the
purposes set forth in this chapter.

**Source.** 1988, 90:1, eff. June 17, 1988.
