---
title: |
    CHAPTER 35 CAPITAL RESERVE FUNDS OF COUNTIES, TOWNS, DISTRICTS, AND
    WATER DEPARTMENTS
---

TITLE III
                                             
TOWNS, CITIES, VILLAGE DISTRICTS, AND UNINCORPORATED PLACES
===========================================================

CHAPTER 35
                                             
CAPITAL RESERVE FUNDS OF COUNTIES, TOWNS, DISTRICTS, AND WATER DEPARTMENTS
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 35:1

 **35:1 Establishment of Reserves Authorized. –** Any town, school
district, village district, or county, as provided by RSA 35:3 may raise
and appropriate money for the establishment of a capital reserve fund
for the financing of all or part of the cost of:
                                             
 I. The construction, reconstruction or acquisition of a specific
capital improvement, or the acquisition of a specific item or specific
items of equipment; or
                                             
 II. The construction, reconstruction, or acquisition of a type of
capital improvement or the acquisition of a type of equipment; or
                                             
 III. A reappraisal by appraisers of the department of revenue
administration or such other appraisers, appraisal firms or corporations
approved by the commissioner of revenue administration, of the real
estate in such town for tax assessment purposes; or
                                             
 III-a. The acquisition of land; or
                                             
 IV. The acquisition of a tax map of said town; or
                                             
 V. Extraordinary legal fees and expenses related to present or
foreseeable litigation involving the town or its officers and employees;
or
                                             
 VI. Municipal and regional transportation improvement projects
including engineering, right-of-way acquisition and construction costs
of transportation facilities, and for operating and capital costs for
public transportation.

**Source.** 1943, 160:1. RSA 35:1. 1973, 51:2. 1983, 42:2. 1985, 285:2,
eff. Aug. 10, 1985. 1998, 4:3, eff. May 17, 1998.

### Section 35:1-a

 **35:1-a Reserve Fund in Anticipation of New Fiscal Year. –** Any
county, city or town may establish a reserve fund in anticipation of the
optional fiscal year pursuant to RSA 31:94-a through 94-d.

**Source.** 1973, 96:1, eff. June 23, 1973.

### Section 35:1-b

 **35:1-b Reserve Fund for Education of Persons With Disabilities.
–** Any school district may establish a reserve fund under RSA 35:1 to
meet the expenses of educating children with disabilities.

**Source.** 1983, 106:1. 1990, 140:2, III, X, eff. June 18, 1990. 2008,
274:31, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 35:1-c

 **35:1-c Non-Capital Reserve Funds Authorized. –** Any town, school
district, county, or village district may establish a reserve fund for
the maintenance and operation of a specific public facility or type of
facility, a specific item or type of equipment, or for any other
distinctly-stated, specific public purpose that is not foreign to its
institution or incompatible with the objects of its organization. Such
funds shall be subject to all provisions and limitations of this chapter
as are applicable to capital reserve funds. The legal validity of such a
fund properly established shall not be affected by its designation as a
"trust,'' "reserve,'' "capital reserve,'' or any other designation.

**Source.** 1995, 20:6, eff. June 11, 1995.

### Section 35:2

 **35:2 Custody of School District Reserves. –** Whenever any capital
reserve of a school district is established the same shall be held in
custody by the trustees of trust funds of the town wherein the school
district lies or, in case of school district embracing 2 or more towns,
by the trustees of trust funds of that town which the voters of the
school district may elect.

**Source.** 1947, 8:2, eff. Feb. 26, 1947.

### Section 35:3

 **35:3 Meetings. –** Except as provided in RSA 35:7, the authority
granted by RSA 35:1 shall be exercised only by a majority vote of the
legal voters present and voting at an annual or special meeting in the
case of a town, school district, or village district. The warrant for a
town, school district, or village district meeting, to consider the
establishment or discontinuance of such a reserve, shall include an
article distinctly stating the purposes for which such reserve is to be
established or was established as appropriate. In the case of a county,
the authority granted in RSA 35:1 shall be exercised by a majority vote
of the county delegation after a public hearing on the budget as
required by RSA 24:23, RSA 24:13-c, IV, or RSA 24:14-a. The public
notice of such hearing shall include a statement distinctly stating the
purpose for which such reserve is to be established.

**Source.** 1943, 160:2. RSA 35:3. 1977, 287:2. 1991, 167:1, eff. July
26, 1991.

### Section 35:4

 **35:4 Exception. –** The authority hereby granted shall not be
exercised by any city, except as may be necessary in connection with the
authority granted by RSA 35:7.

**Source.** 1943, 160:3, eff. May 5, 1943.

### Section 35:5

 **35:5 Payments Into Fund. –** There may be paid into any such
capital reserve fund, except as provided in RSA 35:7, such amounts as
may from time to time be raised and appropriated therefor, from any
source other than money given to the town, district, or county for
charitable purposes. Such amounts shall be within the limits as provided
in RSA 35:8, and any such town, district or county may also vote to
transfer to said fund, under a proper article in the warrant in the case
of a town or district, any of its unencumbered surplus funds remaining
on hand at the end of any fiscal year.

**Source.** 1943, 160:4, eff. May 5, 1943. 2000, 224:4, eff. July 31,
2000.

### Section 35:6

 **35:6 Funds Received in Eminent Domain Proceedings. –** Any town,
school district, village district or county which may receive funds from
the United States or any agency thereof in eminent domain proceedings
for the taking of its property or other public facilities or in
settlement for such taking or of claims for damages to its property or
other public facilities, may vote to use said funds, under a proper
article in the warrant in the case of a town, school district or village
district or by vote of the county delegation in the case of a county, to
establish a capital reserve fund under this chapter. Funds so received
shall not be subject to restriction as to investments prescribed in RSA
35:9 and may be invested in the same manner as trust funds under RSA
31:25. Funds so received may, if so voted, be used to retire existing
indebtedness as well as for the purposes specified in RSA 35:1. In cases
in which the United States or any agency thereof shall acquire a flowage
easement in highways or bridges under the jurisdiction of a town, the
town, if it votes to establish a capital reserve fund out of the funds
received therefor from the United States or any agency thereof, may use
such fund not only for capital improvements and capital expenditures as
provided in RSA 35:1, but also for the maintenance, repair and
reconstruction of the particular highways and bridges in which easements
have been acquired or of such highways and bridges as may be provided in
substitution therefor.

**Source.** 1947, 91:1. 1951, 106:1, eff. May 11, 1951.

### Section 35:7

 **35:7 Water Departments. –** Any water works or sewer department of
a city or town, organized by general law or special act of the
legislature and financed principally by water or sewer rentals, may, by
unanimous vote of the body charged with the administration thereof,
whether the local governing body, water board, or a board of water or
sewer commissioners, establish a capital reserve fund for said
department for the purposes as provided in RSA 35:1. Such reserve shall
be established only from surplus from water or sewer rentals and no part
thereof shall be made from appropriations by said city or town.

**Source.** 1943, 160:5. 1994, 95:1, eff. July 8, 1994.

### Section 35:8

 **35:8 Limitations on Appropriations. –** No town, school district,
or village district shall raise and appropriate in any one year for such
reserve an amount in excess of 1/2 of one percent of the last base
valuation for debt limit computed pursuant to RSA 33:4-b of said town or
district; no county shall raise and appropriate for such reserve an
amount in excess of 1/50 of one percent of the last base valuation for
debt limit computed pursuant to RSA 33:4.

**Source.** 1943, 160:6. 1945, 35:2. RSA 35:8. 1993, 176:6, eff. Aug. 8,
1993. 2016, 114:1, eff. July 19, 2016.

### Section 35:9

 **35:9 Investment. –** Each capital reserve fund shall be maintained
separately on the books of the town. The assets of such funds may be
pooled in order to invest in a broader range of investments to maximize
growth and mitigate risk. Said capital reserve funds shall be invested
only in deposits in any federally or state-chartered bank or association
authorized to engage in a banking business in this state, or in bonds or
notes of this state, in such stocks and bonds as are legal for
investment by banks and associations chartered by this state to engage
in a banking business, or in participation units in the public deposit
investment pool established pursuant to RSA 383:22, or in obligations
with principal and interest fully guaranteed by the United States
government. The obligations may be held directly or in the form of
securities of or other interests in any open-end or closed-end
management-type investment company or investment trust registered under
15 U.S.C. section 80a-1 et seq., if the portfolio of the investment
company or investment trust is limited to such obligations and
repurchase agreements fully collateralized by such obligations. When so
invested the trustees hereinafter named shall not be liable for the loss
thereof. Any interest earned or capital gains realized on the moneys so
invested shall accrue to and become a part of the individual funds on a
pro rata basis. Deposits in federally or state-chartered banks and
associations shall be made in the name of the town, district, or county
which holds the same as a reserve, and it shall appear upon the books
thereof that the same is a capital reserve fund. Any person who directly
or indirectly receives any such capital reserve funds for deposit or for
investment in securities of any kind shall, prior to acceptance of such
funds, make available at the time of such deposit or investment an
option to have such funds secured by collateral having a value at least
equal to the amount of such funds. Such collateral shall be segregated
for the exclusive benefit of the town, school district, village
district, or county depositing or investing such funds. Only securities
defined by the bank commissioner as provided by rules adopted pursuant
to RSA 383-B:3-301(e) shall be eligible to be pledged as collateral. The
trustees shall formally adopt an investment policy for all investments
made by them or by their agents for any trust funds in their custody in
conformance with the provisions of applicable statutes. The trustees
shall review and confirm the investment policy at least annually. A copy
of the investment policy shall be filed with the attorney general.

**Source.** 1943, 160:7. RSA 35:9. 1961, 136:8. 1991, 268:7; 383:4.
1995, 20:7, eff. June 11, 1995. 1996, 209:9, eff. Aug. 9, 1996. 2001,
54:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2002. 2007, 164:3, eff. Aug. 17, 2007. 2010, 52:1,
eff. July 17, 2010. 2015, 272:42, eff. Oct. 1, 2015.

### Section 35:9-a

 **35:9-a Professional Banking or Brokerage Assistance. –**
                                             
 I. Any trustee or trustees of trust funds having custody of capital
reserve funds authorized by this chapter may contract with the trust
department or departments of a bank, a brokerage firm, a portfolio
management department, or investment advisor in the same manner and for
the same purposes as described in RSA 31:38-a, III. They may also place
securities in the nominee name of a trust department of a bank, or
departments, a brokerage firm, a portfolio management department, or
investment advisor, to facilitate transfers for such securities. Capital
reserve fund records maintained by any bank, brokerage firm, portfolio
management department, or investment advisor shall be available at all
times for examination by local auditors, by independent accountants or
auditors retained by a municipality, or by the auditors of the
department of revenue administration; and such records shall be
municipal records and property. In employing such trust departments of
banks, brokerage firms, portfolio management departments, or investment
advisor, the trustees may enter into contracts or agreements delegating
the management of such capital reserve funds to those departments or
brokerage firms subject to investment guidelines adopted by the trustees
under applicable statutes and subject to at least quarterly review and
approval of such management by the trustees. For purposes of this
section, the terms "bank,'' "brokerage firm,'' "portfolio management
department'' and "investment advisor'' shall have the definitions set
forth in RSA 31:38-a.
                                             
 II. The town meeting may adopt an article authorizing the trustees
of trust funds, without further action of the town meeting, to charge
any expenses incurred pursuant to paragraph I against the capital
reserve funds involved. Such authority shall remain in effect until
rescinded by a vote of the town meeting. No vote by the town to rescind
such authority shall occur within 5 years of the original adoption of
such article. In a town that has a town council, such authority may be
granted by the town council and shall remain in effect until rescinded
by the town council. No vote by the town council to rescind such
authority shall occur within 5 years of the original adoption of such
article. Any professional banking and brokerage fees incurred shall be
reported in the annual report of the trustees of trust funds as
expenditures out of capital reserve funds.

**Source.** 2014, 32:5, eff. July 26, 2014.

### Section 35:10

 **35:10 Trustees of Funds. –** The trustees of trust funds of a town
or city shall have custody of any capital reserve of a town, district or
water departments therein, the trustees of trust funds as provided in
RSA 35:2 shall have custody of such capital reserve of a school
district, and the county treasurer of a county shall have custody of any
capital reserve of his county. Said trustees or treasurer shall give
bond in such amount and in such form as the commissioner of revenue
administration shall prescribe, and any such trustee or treasurer who
shall make any payment of income or principal from any such capital
reserve fund before the approval of his bond in writing by the
commissioner of revenue administration shall be personally liable to the
town, district, department or county for any loss resulting from such
payment, to be recovered for the town, district, department or county at
the suit of any citizen. The expenses of said trustees or treasurer in
said capacity and the expense of their bonds shall be charged as
incidental town, district, department or county charges.

**Source.** 1943, 160:8. RSA 35:10. 1973, 544:8, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 35:11

 **35:11 Payments From Surplus. –** Whenever any town shall have
voted to transfer any accumulated surplus to the capital reserve fund,
the town clerk shall forward to the board of selectmen and to the town
treasurer, within 10 days of the adoption of such vote, a certified copy
of the same. The selectmen shall then draw an order on the town
treasurer for the amount of surplus set forth in said vote. The town
treasurer shall on receipt of the order immediately transfer to the
trustees of trust funds of the town the amount specified in the order,
or in the case of an optional fiscal year town, within 10 days of the
determination of surplus following the close of the fiscal year.

**Source.** 1947, 91:2, par. 8a. RSA 35:11. 1993, 176:7, eff. Aug. 8,
1993.

### Section 35:12

 **35:12 Appropriation. –** Whenever the vote of the town is to
appropriate any sum for the capital reserve fund, the same duties shall
devolve upon the town clerk, selectmen, and town treasurer, as specified
in RSA 35:11, except that the order must be drawn, and the sum
transferred on or before December 15 following the vote, or, in the case
of an optional fiscal year town, after July 1, but no later than June
15, of the fiscal year for which the sum was appropriated.

**Source.** 1947, 91:2, par. 8b. RSA 35:12. 1993, 176:8, eff. Aug. 8,
1993. 2000, 224:5, eff. July 31, 2000. 2014, 32:3, eff. July 26, 2014.

### Section 35:13

 **35:13 School or Village District. –** When a capital reserve fund
is established by a school or village district, the same duties shall
devolve upon the clerk of the school or village district, the members of
the school board or the commissioners of the village district, the
treasurer of the school district or the treasurer of the village
district, as are prescribed in RSA 35:11 and 35:12 for the corresponding
town officers.

**Source.** 1947, 91:2, par. 8c, eff. April 15, 1947.

### Section 35:14

 **35:14 Penalty. –** Any of the above officers failing to perform
the duties above set forth, shall be guilty of a violation for every
week said failure shall continue.

**Source.** 1947, 91:2, par. 8d. RSA 35:14. 1973, 531:9, eff. Oct. 31,
1973, at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 35:15

 **35:15 Expenditures. –**
                                             
 I. Persons holding said capital reserve funds in trust, as provided
in this chapter, shall hold the same until such time as the town,
district or county shall have voted to withdraw funds from such capital
reserve fund or shall have named agents of the town, district or county
to carry out the objects designated by the town, district or county, in
the manner prescribed by RSA 35:3.
                                             
 II. Expenditures from any fund established for the acquisition of
land pursuant to RSA 35:1 shall be made only as authorized:
                                             
 (a) By a majority vote of the legal voters present and voting at
an annual or special meeting, in the case of a town, school district or
village district, or by majority vote of the county delegation, in the
case of a county, or
                                             
 (b) By the selectmen, appointed as agents pursuant to RSA
41:14-a, provided that the selectmen shall not have authority to expend
any sum in excess of the amount contained in any capital reserve account
created for the purchase of land other than any grant moneys which may
be received.
                                             
 III. (a) Notwithstanding the prohibition of debt retirement fund
establishment in RSA 33:2, capital reserve funds may be used for
multiple payments under a financing agreement for the purpose for which
the capital reserve was established. If the financing agreement is a
lease/purchase agreement the following shall apply:
                                             
 (1) The lease/purchase agreement does not contain an "escape
clause'' or "non-appropriation clause''; and
                                             
 (2) The lease/purchase agreement has been ratified by the
legislative body by a vote by ballot of 2/3 of all the voters present
and voting at an annual or special meeting.
                                             
 (b) If agents have been named according to RSA 35:15, then no
further vote is required to disburse funds following the initial vote
which ratified the financing agreement.
                                             
 IV. In the case of a water works or sewer department, as provided in
RSA 35:7, the governing body, water board, or the water or sewer
commissioners if any, shall determine when expenditures from said
reserve shall be made.
                                             
 V. In all cases, expenditures from a capital reserve fund shall be
made only for or in connection with the purposes for which said fund was
established or as amended as provided in RSA 35:16.

**Source.** 1943, 160:9. RSA 35:15. 1985, 285:3. 1991, 167:2. 1994,
95:2, eff. July 8, 1994. 1998, 43:1, eff. July 4, 1998. 2001, 187:1,
eff. Sept. 3, 2001. 2007, 178:3, eff. Aug. 17, 2007.

### Section 35:16

 **35:16 Change of Purpose. –** After the purpose for which a capital
reserve fund is established has been determined, no change shall be made
in the purpose for which said fund may be expended unless and until such
change has been authorized by a vote of 2/3 of all the voters present
and voting at an annual town or district meeting, in the case of a town
or district, or by vote of 2/3 of the entire membership of a county
delegation, in case of a county, or by unanimous vote of the water board
or commissioners of the water department, in the case of a water works
department, as provided in RSA 35:7.

**Source.** 1943, 160:10, eff. May 5, 1943.

### Section 35:16-a

 **35:16-a Discontinuing Fund. –** Any town, school district, village
district or county which has established a capital reserve fund pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter may, as provided by RSA 35:3, vote to
discontinue such capital reserve fund. If such fund is discontinued, the
trustees of the trust fund holding the account for said fund shall pay
all the monies in such fund to the town, district or county treasury as
applicable.

**Source.** 1977, 287:1, eff. Aug. 26, 1977.

### Section 35:17

 **35:17 Audit; Records. –** The accounts of the persons holding
capital reserve funds shall be audited annually by the auditor of the
town, in the case of a town, district, or water works department, or by
the commissioner of revenue administration, in the case of a county, the
securities shall be exhibited to said auditor or commissioner, and said
auditor or commissioner shall certify the facts found by the audit and
the list of all securities held. Said persons holding said funds shall
keep a record of all such capital reserve funds in a record book, which
shall be open to the inspection of all persons of their town, district,
or county respectively.

**Source.** 1943, 160:11. RSA 35:17. 1973, 544:8, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 35:18

 **35:18 Disbursements. –** No person holding in custody such capital
reserve fund shall make any payment of income or principal or authorize
the same to be done except in accordance with the provisions hereof.
Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other
person.

**Source.** 1943, 160:12. RSA 35:18. 1973, 529:5, eff. at 11:59 P.M.,
Oct. 31, 1973.
