---
title: 'CHAPTER 36-B INTERSTATE REGIONAL PLANNING COMPACT'
---

TITLE III
                                             
TOWNS, CITIES, VILLAGE DISTRICTS, AND UNINCORPORATED PLACES
===========================================================

CHAPTER 36-B
                                             
INTERSTATE REGIONAL PLANNING COMPACT
------------------------------------

### Section 36-B:1

 **36-B:1 Compact Authorized. –** The director of the office of
energy and planning and/or a regional planning commission which is
established under RSA 36, or both, may negotiate with the proper
authorities of the states of Maine, Massachusetts, and Vermont a compact
for interstate regional planning substantially in form as follows, which
is hereby ratified:

**Interstate Regional Planning Compact**


                                             
 Whereas, the social, economic, and esthetic growth and development
of the several states has, in certain regions, extended beyond the
boundaries of two or more states; and
                                             
 Whereas, such growth and development has resulted in physical
problems, which require co-operative regional planning and mutual
assistance toward their solution for the betterment of the health,
welfare, and economic prosperity of the people living in such regions;
and
                                             
 Whereas, Congress has recognized the need for co-operative planning
by giving its consent to two or more states entering into compacts for
interstate regional planning; and
                                             
 Whereas, co-operative regional planning between states can be best
accomplished through interstate regional planning agencies; now
therefore, the signatory states do agree and are bound as follows:

Article I


                                             
 Any New Hampshire municipality is authorized by vote of its city
council or town meeting to become a member of a regional planning agency
established under the statutes of Maine, Massachusetts and Vermont
provided that the office of energy and planning, and the state agency
with regional planning responsibilities in the signatory state, and the
regional planning agency concerned determine that membership in such
agency would be effective for planning purposes.

Article II


                                             
 Any city or town in the states of Maine, Massachusetts or Vermont is
authorized by a vote of its municipal legislative body to become a
member of a regional planning commission established under RSA 36,
provided that the regional planning commission, and the office of energy
and planning, and the state agency with regional planning
responsibilities in the signatory state determine that such membership
would be effective for planning purposes.

Article III


                                             
 Any municipality becoming a member of an interstate regional
planning agency located in another state shall adopt the statute
establishing such agency, and shall be subject to all provisions of such
statute for representation, financial contributions, duties, reports,
and otherwise hold full membership, except that requirements for initial
establishment of the regional planning agency shall be based only on the
municipalities in the state in which the agency is located.

Article IV


                                             
 A municipality which becomes a member of a regional planning agency
in another state may regard any plans, studies, proposals, and
recommendations by such agency as advisory and need not be bound by
them, and shall not be required to make any financial contribution
thereto unless said contribution has been voted by its legislative body.

Article V


                                             
 An annual report on the activities of any regional planning agency
engaged in interstate regional planning under the provisions of this
compact shall be filed with the state agency with regional planning
responsibilities in each signatory state, in addition to any reports
otherwise required from the regional planning agency.

**Source.** 1969, 27:1, eff. May 3, 1969. 2003, 319:9, eff. July 1,
2003. 2004, 257:44, eff. July 1, 2004.

### Section 36-B:2

 **36-B:2 Title. –** This chapter shall be known and may be cited as
the Interstate Regional Planning Compact.

**Source.** 1969, 27:1, eff. May 3, 1969.
