---
title: 'CHAPTER 38-C BOARDS OF PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSIONERS'
---

TITLE III
                                             
TOWNS, CITIES, VILLAGE DISTRICTS, AND UNINCORPORATED PLACES
===========================================================

CHAPTER 38-C
                                             
BOARDS OF PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSIONERS
------------------------------------

### Section 38-C:1

 **38-C:1 Establishment. –** For the more convenient management of
local operations, any municipality which has a municipal, gas, electric,
or waterworks system under RSA 38, a municipal sewer system under RSA
149-I, or highway agents under RSA 231:62 or any combination, may
combine any 2 or more of the following into one board of public works
commissioners:
                                             
 I. Board of sewer commissioners.
                                             
 II. Board of commissioners of a gas, electric, or waterworks
system.
                                             
 III. Highway agents.

**Source.** 1996, 197:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 38-C:2

 **38-C:2 Commissioners. –** The board of public works commissioners
shall consist of 3 or more citizens of such municipality, who shall have
such powers and duties as the municipality may prescribe. Their terms of
office shall be for 3 years and until their successors are elected and
qualified. The first board of commissioners may be chosen for terms of
one, 2, and 3 years, respectively, by the legal voters of the
municipality at any legal meeting or election called for that purpose,
and their successors shall be elected at each annual meeting or election
after that in a manner or form as the municipality may determine.

**Source.** 1996, 197:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 38-C:3

 **38-C:3 Appointment. –** The commissioners may be appointed by the
mayor and board of aldermen or city council, by the selectmen of the
town, by the town council, or by the commissioners of the district if
the municipality fails to elect or votes to provide for appointment.

**Source.** 1996, 197:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 38-C:4

 **38-C:4 Compensation and Organization. –** The compensation of the
commissioners shall be fixed by the municipality. They shall be sworn to
the faithful discharge of their duties. They shall annually organize by
choosing one of their number as chairperson of the board. They shall
appoint a clerk and a superintendent of public works and such other
officers as they deem necessary. A certificate of such organization
shall be filed with the clerk of the municipality. The commissioners
shall fix the compensation of all officers and agents appointed by them.
All officers and agents shall be sworn to the faithful discharge of
their duties.

**Source.** 1996, 197:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 38-C:5

 **38-C:5 Reports. –** The commissioners shall annually, at the time
other city, town, or district officers report, make a report to the
municipality of the condition of any facilities and equipment
financially and otherwise showing the funds, expenses and income of the
works, and all other material facts. This report shall be published in
the annual report of the municipality.

**Source.** 1996, 197:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 38-C:6

 **38-C:6 Applicability. –** This chapter is intended to ease the
administrative demands on municipalities by allowing them to form a
single board of commissioners; however, nothing in this chapter is to be
construed to alter the applicability of RSA 38, 149-I or 231.

**Source.** 1996, 197:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.
