---
title: 'CHAPTER 38-D ENERGY COMMISSIONS'
---

TITLE III
                                             
TOWNS, CITIES, VILLAGE DISTRICTS, AND UNINCORPORATED PLACES
===========================================================

CHAPTER 38-D
                                             
ENERGY COMMISSIONS
------------------

### Section 38-D:1

 **38-D:1 Method of Adoption. –** Any governing or legislative body
of a municipality may adopt or rescind the provisions of this chapter at
any duly warned meeting.

**Source.** 2009, 275:1, eff. Sept. 27, 2009.

### Section 38-D:2

 **38-D:2 Energy Commission. –** A city or town may establish an
energy commission, hereinafter called the commission, for the study,
planning, and utilization of energy resources for municipal buildings
and built resources of such city or town.

**Source.** 2009, 275:1, eff. Sept. 27, 2009.

### Section 38-D:3

 **38-D:3 Membership. –** The commission shall consist of no fewer
than 3 nor more than 10 members. In cities, the members of the
commission shall be appointed by the city council subject to the
provisions of the city charter, and in towns the members of the
commission shall be appointed by the board of selectmen. Alternate
members may be appointed in a like manner and when the alternate serves
in the absence or disqualification of a regular member, the alternate
shall have full voting powers. When a commission is first established,
terms of the members shall be for one, 2, or 3 years, and so arranged
that the terms of approximately 1/3 of the members will expire each
year, and their successors shall be appointed for terms of 3 years each.
Any member of a commission so appointed may, after a public hearing with
notice under RSA 675:7, if requested, be removed for cause by the
appointing authority. A vacancy occurring other than by expiration of a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment. Members of an energy commission shall be residents
of the city or town which they represent. Members of an energy
commission also may serve on other municipal boards and commissions,
including but not limited to, a conservation commission under RSA 36-A,
local planning boards under RSA 672, a historic district commission
established under RSA 673:4, and a heritage commission established under
RSA 673:4-a.

**Source.** 2009, 275:1, eff. Sept. 27, 2009.

### Section 38-D:4

 **38-D:4 Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall:
                                             
 (a) Research municipal energy use and cost and make such
information available to the town on at least an annual basis.
                                             
 (b) Make recommendations to local boards and committees
pertaining to municipal energy plans and sustainable practices such as
energy conservation, energy efficiency, energy generation, and zoning
practices.
                                             
 II. The commission may appoint subcommittees as it may from time to
time require.

**Source.** 2009, 275:1, eff. Sept. 27, 2009.

### Section 38-D:5

 **38-D:5 Appropriations Authorized. –**
                                             
 I. A town or city, having established an energy commission, may
appropriate money as necessary for the purpose of this chapter. All or
any part of money so appropriated in any year and any gifts of money
received under this chapter may be placed in an energy commission fund
and allowed to accumulate from year to year. Money may be expended from
such fund by the energy commission for the purposes of this chapter
without further approval of the town meeting; however, acceptance of
gifts over 
                                             $500 and disbursements over 
                                             $500 shall require a public
hearing with notice under RSA 675:7 and approval of the governing body.
                                             
 II. The town treasurer, under RSA 41:29, shall have custody of all
moneys in the energy fund and shall pay out the same only upon order of
the energy commission. The disbursement of energy commission funds
following the approval required under paragraph I shall be authorized by
a majority of the energy commission.

**Source.** 2009, 275:1, eff. Sept. 27, 2009.

### Section 38-D:6

 **38-D:6 Energy Commission Support. –** The office of energy and
planning and New Hampshire regional planning commissions may establish
programs to assist, at their request, the cities and towns which have
established an energy commission.

**Source.** 2009, 275:1, eff. Sept. 27, 2009.
