---
title: CHAPTER 39 TIME FOR HOLDING TOWN MEETINGS AND WARNING THEREOF
---

TITLE III
                                             
TOWNS, CITIES, VILLAGE DISTRICTS, AND UNINCORPORATED PLACES
===========================================================

CHAPTER 39
                                             
TIME FOR HOLDING TOWN MEETINGS AND WARNING THEREOF
--------------------------------------------------

### Section 39:1

 **39:1 Meetings, When Held. –** A meeting of every town shall be
held annually on the second Tuesday of March, or in accordance with RSA
40:13 if that provision is adopted in the town, for the choice of town
officers and the transaction of all other town business. A town meeting
may be warned by the selectmen, when, in their opinion, there shall be
occasion therefor. In no event shall a special town meeting be held on
the biennial election day.

**Source.** RS 32:1. CS 34:1. GS 35:1. 1878, 60:1. GL 38:1. PS 41:1. PL
45:1. RL 57:1. RSA 39:1. 1971, 562:1. 1976, 33:1. 1991, 370:4, eff. Aug.
31, 1991. 2000, 16:1, eff. April 30, 2000.

### Section 39:1-a

 **39:1-a Towns Adopting a Fiscal Year. –** Notwithstanding the
provisions of RSA 39:1 any town which adopts a fiscal year accounting
period pursuant to RSA 31, may by majority vote, hold its annual town
meeting on the second Tuesday of May for the selection of town officers
and the transaction of all other town business. A meeting shall be
warned by the selectmen, when in their opinion, there shall be occasion
therefor.

**Source.** 1971, 512:12, eff. July 6, 1971.

### Section 39:1-b

 **39:1-b Meetings Outside Town. –**
                                             
 I. A town may hold its town meeting outside the geographical
boundaries of the town, if the town does not have a facility with a
large enough seating capacity to accommodate the meeting.
                                             
 II. Warrants and other items required to be posted shall be posted
for review by qualified voters at the place of the meeting on the day of
the meeting.
                                             
 III. The selectmen of the town shall arrange transportation, for
those voters who need it, from the usual polling place in the town to
the out-of-town facility and back to the usual polling place.
                                             
 IV. The out-of-town meeting shall be held in an adjacent town or
nearest appropriate facility.

**Source.** 1979, 191:1. 1993, 120:1, eff. July 16, 1993.

### Section 39:1-c

 **39:1-c Updated Checklist. –** An updated checklist shall be used
at all town meetings and elections as provided in RSA 669:5.

**Source.** 1981, 571:2, eff. Sept. 4, 1981.

### Section 39:2

 **39:2 Warrant. –** The warrant for any town meeting shall be under
the hands of the selectmen, and shall prescribe the place, day and hour
of the meeting, and, if there is an election at said meeting, in which
an official printed ballot containing more than one name is used, the
warrant therefor shall prescribe the time the polls are to open and also
an hour before which the polls may not close. A town meeting may vote to
keep the polls open to a later hour but may not vote to close the polls
at an earlier hour than that prescribed by the selectmen hereunder. The
subject matter of all business to be acted upon at the town meeting
shall be distinctly stated in the warrant, and nothing done at any
meeting, except the election of any town officer required by law to be
made at such meeting, shall be valid unless the subject thereof is so
stated. Provided that in a case where the article in the warrant calls
for the appropriation of a specific sum of money, the sum of money
appropriated thereunder may be decreased or increased by the vote of the
town, provided further that in a town under the municipal budget act no
increase shall be valid which would violate the provisions of RSA 32:18,
except as provided in RSA 32:18-a.

**Source.** RS 32:2. CS 34:2. GS 35:2. GL 38:2. 1885, 45:1. PS 41:2. PL
45:2. 1941, 130:1. RL 57:2. RSA 39:2. 1957, 239:1. 1993, 332:3, eff.
Aug. 28, 1993. 2000, 193:4, eff. July 29, 2000.

### Section 39:2-a

 **39:2-a Optional Provisions. –**
                                             
 I. Any town may at an annual meeting vote to conduct the choice of
town officers elected by an official ballot and other action required to
be inserted on said official ballot on the second Tuesday of March or on
the second Tuesday of May if the town has adopted the provisions of RSA
31:94-a and authorize the selectmen to choose another day for the second
session of the town meeting for the transaction of all other town
business. Upon written application of 25 or more voters, addressed to
the selectmen, the following question shall be submitted to the voter at
such annual meeting: "Do you approve of having 2 sessions for the annual
town meeting in this town, the first session for choice of town officers
elected by an official ballot and other action required to be inserted
on said official ballot and the second session, on a date set by the
selectmen, for transaction of other business?'' This question shall
appear upon the official ballot in towns having such a ballot, otherwise
upon a special ballot prepared by the town clerk. Proper provision shall
be made on the ballot to permit the voter clearly to indicate his choice
on the question. If a majority of the legal voters present and voting on
the question vote in the affirmative, the provisions of this section
shall be declared adopted. In any town adopting the provisions hereof
the warrant for an annual meeting held hereunder shall prescribe the
place, day and hours of each session of said meeting and said warrant
shall be posted as required for any town meeting. In a town which has
adopted the provisions of this section no business other than the
election of town officers elected by an official ballot and other action
required to be inserted on said official ballot shall be taken up at the
first session of said meetings. A town which has adopted the provisions
hereof may rescind such action in the same manner as provided for its
adoption. The question in this case shall be: "Shall the provisions for
having 2 sessions of the annual town meeting be declared no longer in
effect in this town?''
                                             
 II. Alternatively, a town may conduct its meetings and the election
of officers through use of the official ballot by adoption of the
provisions of RSA 40:13.

**Source.** 1969, 106:1. 1971, 562:2. 1976, 33:2. 1977, 267:1, eff. Aug.
21, 1977. 1997, 318:3, eff. Aug. 22, 1997.

### Section 39:2-b

 **39:2-b Time Polls Open. –** The warrant for any town meeting shall
provide that polls at the additional polling place, if any, shall open
at the same time as the polls at the central polling place.

**Source.** 1969, 117:1, eff. May 9, 1969.

### Section 39:3

 **39:3 Articles. –** Upon the written application of 25 or more
registered voters or 2 percent of the registered voters in town,
whichever is less, although in no event shall fewer than 10 registered
voters be sufficient, presented to the selectmen or one of them not
later than the fifth Tuesday before the day prescribed for an annual
meeting, the selectmen shall insert in their warrant for such meeting
the petitioned article with only such minor textual changes as may be
required. For the purposes of this section, the number of registered
voters in a town shall be the number of voters registered prior to the
last state general election. The right to have an article inserted in
the warrant conferred by this section shall not be invalidated by the
provisions of RSA 32. In towns with fewer than 10,000 inhabitants upon
the written application of 50 or more voters or 1/4 of the voters in
town, whichever is fewer, and in towns with 10,000 or more inhabitants
upon the written application of 5 percent of the registered voters in
the town, so presented not less than 60 days before the next annual
meeting, the selectmen shall warn a special meeting to act upon any
question specified in such application. The checklist for an annual or
special town meeting shall be corrected by the supervisors of the
checklist as provided in RSA 654:25-31. Those persons qualified to vote
whose names are on the corrected checklist shall be entitled to vote at
the meeting. The same checklist used at a recessed town meeting shall be
used at any reconvened session of the same town meeting. In no event
shall a special town meeting be held on the biennial election day.

**Source.** RS 32:3. CS 34:3. GS 35:3. GL 38:3. PS 41:3. PL 45:3. 1937,
40:1. RL 57:3. 1947, 21:1. RSA 39:3. 1969, 59:1. 1971, 79:1. 1975,
160:1. 1981, 454:1. 1987, 299:1. 1990, 192:1. 1991, 223:1; 370:5. 1994,
197:1, eff. July 23, 1994. 1998, 194:1, eff. Aug. 17, 1998.

### Section 39:3-a

 **39:3-a Time for Presentation of Articles. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1969,
59:2, eff. June 3, 1969.
                                             ]

### Section 39:3-b

 **39:3-b Penalty. –** A board of selectmen is guilty of a violation
if it refuses to insert an article in the warrant, after being
petitioned to do so in accordance with RSA 39:3.

**Source.** 1971, 79:4. 1977, 588:26, eff. Sept. 16, 1977.

### Section 39:3-c

 **39:3-c Limitation. –** Any petitioned article, which if adopted,
would abolish a planning board, or zoning commission shall not be
included in the warrant, unless such petition meets the requirements
established by RSA 673:18, II.

**Source.** 1971, 396:1. 1985, 103:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 39:3-d

 **39:3-d Placement of Articles on Official Ballot. –**
                                             
 I. No article included in a warrant for a town meeting may be
considered by placing a question on the official ballot used for
election of town officers unless use of the official ballot for that
article or type of article is specifically authorized or required by
law.
                                             
 II. For purposes of this section and RSA 40:4-e:
                                             
 (a) Any law which requires a ballot vote on an article, and which
uses the term "official ballot'', shall be deemed to require the use of
the official ballot for voting on that article, in towns which use the
official ballot for the election of officers.
                                             
 (b) Any law which prescribes the wording of a question, but where
the term "official ballot'' is not used, shall be deemed to authorize,
but not require, the use of the official ballot for that question,
unless a contrary intent is specified. If the official ballot is not
used for voting on such a question, the prescribed wording shall be
placed in the warrant, and may also be placed upon a preprinted ballot
to be acted upon in open meeting in the same manner as a secret
"yes-no'' ballot under RSA 40:4-a.
                                             
 III. This section shall not prohibit the use of secret written
ballots at any town meeting pursuant to RSA 40:4-a or 4-b.
                                             
 IV. Articles concerning the issuance of bonds or notes shall not be
placed on the official ballot, unless the municipality has adopted a
charter provision authorizing that votes on the issuance of bonds or
notes shall be placed on the official ballot or unless the municipality
has adopted the provisions of RSA 40:12-14.
                                             
 V. Notwithstanding paragraph IV, in the town of Bedford, articles
concerning the issuance of bonds or notes shall be in accordance with
Bedford's Town Charter, Article 1-5 Finance, Paragraph 1-5-11 Borrowing
Procedure.

**Source.** 1979, 445:1. 1988, 126:1. 1991, 113:1, eff. July 13, 1991.
1996, 156:3, eff. May 29, 1996. 1998, 166:1, eff. Aug. 14, 1998.

### Section 39:4

 **39:4 Special Meetings. –** The selectmen when calling a special
town meeting shall, within one week after posting the warrant therefor,
cause copy of said warrant to be published once in a newspaper of
general circulation in said town.

**Source.** 1945, 39:1, eff. March 6, 1945.

### Section 39:5

 **39:5 Posting Warrant. –** The selectmen may address their warrant
to the voters of the town, in which case they shall post an attested
copy of such warrant at the place of meeting, and a like copy at one
other public place in the town, at least 14 days before the day of
meeting. The 14 days shall not include the day of posting nor the day of
the meeting, but shall include any Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays within the said period.

**Source.** RS 32:4. CS 34:4. GS 35:4. GL 38:4. PS 41:4. PL 45:4. RL
57:4. RSA 39:5. 1967, 90:1. 1975, 11:3, eff. April 25, 1975. 2003,
289:4, eff. Sept. 1, 2003.

### Section 39:6

 **39:6 Warrant to Constable. –** Warrants for town meetings may be
directed to a constable of the town, requiring the constable to notify
the voters; and such constable shall post an attested copy of such
warrant, as provided in RSA 39:5.

**Source.** RS 32:5. CS 34:5. GS 35:5. GL 38:5. PS 41:5. PL 45:5. RL
57:5. 2003, 289:5, eff. Sept. 1, 2003.

### Section 39:7

 **39:7 Return of Warrant. –** The selectmen or the constable serving
any warrant shall return the same, at the time and place of meeting,
with a certificate of the service thereof, to the town clerk, or, in his
absence, to one of the supervisors.

**Source.** RS 32:7. CS 34:7. GS 35:7. GL 38:7. PS 41:7. PL 45:6. RL
57:6.

### Section 39:8

 **39:8 Selectmen's Power. –** In case of the death or removal of any
of the selectmen of a town the major part of those who remain in office
shall have power to warn meetings.

**Source.** RS 32:8. CS 34:8. GS 35:8. GL 38:8. PS 41:8. PL 45:7. RL
57:7.

### Section 39:9

 **39:9 Warning, Upon Neglect. –** If the selectmen unreasonably
neglect or refuse to warn a meeting, or to insert any article in their
warrant, a justice of the superior court, upon application in writing of
25 or more voters or of 1/6 part of the voters of such town, may issue a
warrant for such meeting, or order the insertion of an article in the
warrant.

**Source.** RS 32:9. CS 34:9. GS 35:9. GL 38:9. PS 41:9. PL 45:8. 1939,
21:1. RL 57:8.

### Section 39:10

 **39:10 Warning by Justice: Other Cases. –** If the biennial or
annual meeting in any town shall not have been held, or if there has
never been any legal meeting of the town; or if, by reason of death,
removal from the town, disability or resignation of the board of
selectmen, no member of the board remains in office, a justice of the
superior court, on application of 25 voters, or of 1/6 part of the
voters of the town, may issue a warrant for such meeting.

**Source.** RS 32:10. CS 34:10. GS 35:10. 1875, 2:1. GL 38:10. PS 41:10.
PL 45:9. 1939, 21:1. RL 57:9.

### Section 39:11

 **39:11 Warrant of Justice. –** The warrant of a justice of the
superior court for a town meeting shall be under his hand, directed to
the sheriff or a deputy sheriff of the county in which the town is
situate; it shall specify the time, place and object of such meeting and
shall be served and returned in the same manner as warrants issued by
selectmen.

**Source.** RS 32:11. CS 34:11. GS 35:11. GL 38:11. PS 41:11. PL 45:10.
1939, 21:1. RL 57:10.

### Section 39:12

 **39:12 Other Warning. –** Any town may, by vote, prescribe a
different method of warning meetings; and the meetings warned in
pursuance of such vote shall be legal and valid.

**Source.** RS 32:6. CS 34:6. GS 35:6. GL 38:6. PS 41:6. PL 45:11. RL
57:11.

### Section 39:13

 **39:13 Penalty for Failure to Give Notice. –** If the selectmen
neglect to issue a warrant for any town meeting or town election or
neglect to cause copies of such warrant, if not directed to a constable,
to be duly posted, or notice of such meeting or election to be given
agreeably to any vote of the town, they shall for each offense be guilty
of a violation and any fines collected shall be remitted to the town.

**Source.** RS 32:12. CS 34:12. GS 35:12. GL 38:12. PS 41:12. PL 45:12.
RL 57:12. RSA 39:13. 1973, 531:10. 1979, 410:5, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 39:14

 **39:14 Adjournment Date Falling on Sunday. –** Whenever any
adjournment of any town meeting shall fall upon a Sunday, it shall be
held on the next secular day thereafter, at the same time and place, and
the proceedings thereon at that time shall be of the same force and
validity as if the meeting had been adjourned thereto.

**Source.** 1919, 102:1. PL 45:13. RL 57:13.
