---
title: CHAPTER 42 OATHS OF TOWN OFFICERS
---

TITLE III
                                             
TOWNS, CITIES, VILLAGE DISTRICTS, AND UNINCORPORATED PLACES
===========================================================

CHAPTER 42
                                             
OATHS OF TOWN OFFICERS
----------------------

### Section 42:1

 **42:1 Oath Required. –** Every town officer shall make and
subscribe the oath or declaration as prescribed by part 2, article 84 of
the constitution of New Hampshire and any such person who violates said
oath after taking the same shall be forthwith dismissed from the office
involved.

**Source.** RS 35:1. CS 37:1. GS 38:1. GL 41:1. PS 44:1. PL 48:1. RL
60:1. RSA 42:1. 1969, 372:4, eff. Aug. 31, 1969.

### Section 42:1-a

 **42:1-a Manner of Dismissal; Breach of Confidentiality. –**
                                             
 I. The manner of dismissing a town officer who violates the oath as
set forth in RSA 42:1 shall be by petition to the superior court for the
county in which the town is located.
                                             
 II. Without limiting other causes for such a dismissal, it shall be
considered a violation of a town officer's oath for the officer to
divulge to the public any information which that officer learned by
virtue of his official position, or in the course of his official
duties, if:
                                             
 (a) A public body properly voted to withhold that information
from the public by a vote of 2/3, as required by RSA 91-A:3, III, and if
divulgence of such information would constitute an invasion of privacy,
or would adversely affect the reputation of some person other than a
member of the public body or would render proposed municipal action
ineffective; or
                                             
 (b) The officer knew or reasonably should have known that the
information was exempt from disclosure pursuant to RSA 91-A:5, and that
its divulgence would constitute an invasion of privacy, or would
adversely affect the reputation of some person other than a member of
the public body or agency, or would render proposed municipal action
ineffective.
                                             
 III. No town officer who is required by an order of a court to
divulge information outlined in paragraph II in a legal proceeding under
oath shall be guilty of a violation under this section.

**Source.** 1994, 249:1. 2008, 303:7, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 42:2

 **42:2 Before Whom. –** The moderator, town clerk, one of the
selectmen or a justice of the peace are authorized to administer the
oath required by this chapter.

**Source.** RS 35:2. CS 37:2. GS 38:2. GL 41:2. PS 44:2. PL 48:2. RL
60:2. RSA 42:2. 1969, 372:5, eff. Aug. 31, 1969.

### Section 42:3

 **42:3 Swearing in of Officers. –** Any person elected to an office
where no other person was a candidate on the ballot for that office and
no write-in candidate received 5 percent or more of the votes cast for
that office, may be sworn in after the results are declared from the
election and the annual business meeting has ended or at any time
thereafter provided the oath is taken by the deadline established by RSA
42:6. If no recount of the office is requested, any person elected to an
office that was contested or for which a write-in candidate received 5
percent or more of the votes cast may be sworn in upon the expiration of
the period for requesting a recount provided in RSA 669:30.

**Source.** RS 35:3. CS 37:3. GS 38:3. GL 41:3. PS 44:3. PL 48:3. RL
60:3. 1994, 70:2. 2008, 280:1, eff. Aug. 26, 2008.

### Section 42:4

 **42:4 Notice to Take. –** The town clerk shall immediately, or in
accordance with the time adopted by the governing body, if one has been
adopted, direct a constable or police officer to notify the persons so
chosen or notify such persons by registered mail, return receipt
requested, to appear before the clerk within 6 days after receiving the
notice, and take the oath by law prescribed. The officer shall, within 4
days, give personal notice to the persons therein named, or leave a
notice in writing at the abode of each, and make return of the precept
and of his doings therein to the town clerk within 6 days.

**Source.** RS 35:4. CS 37:4. GS 38:4. GL 41:4. PS 44:4. PL 48:4. RL
60:4. 1994, 70:3, eff. July 5, 1994.

### Section 42:5

 **42:5 Neglect to Notify. –** Any constable or police officer
neglecting his duty in any of the foregoing particulars shall be guilty
of a violation. One-half of all fines collected hereunder shall inure to
the use of the town and the remaining 1/2 shall inure to the use of the
county.

**Source.** RS 35:5. CS 37:5. GL 41:5. PS 44:5. GS 38:5. PL 48:5. RL
60:5. RSA 42:5. 1973, 531:13, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 42:6

 **42:6 Penalty for Neglect to Appear. –** Every person so chosen and
notified, not by law exempt from serving, who shall neglect, for 6 days
after personal notice, or notice left at the person's abode, or after
the person's return in the case of absence when such notice was left,
but in no case later than 30 days after the person's election, to appear
before the town clerk and take the oath, shall be guilty of a violation,
and any fines shall be appropriated as in RSA 42:5.

**Source.** RS 35:6. CS 37:6. GS 38:6. GL 41:6. PS 44:6. PL 48:6. RL
60:6. RSA 42:6. 1973, 531:14. 1994, 70:4, eff. July 5, 1994.

### Section 42:7

 **42:7 Exception. –** Any person so chosen and notified, who shall
take the oath of office before one of the selectmen or a justice of the
peace, and file a certificate thereof with the town clerk within said 6
days, shall be exempt from such penalty.

**Source.** RS 35:7. CS 37:7. GS 38:7. GL 41:7. PS 44:7. PL 48:7. RL
60:7.

### Section 42:8

 **42:8 Record. –** The town clerk shall make a record of every oath
of a town officer taken in open town meeting at the time of the
election, and of every such oath taken before him at any other time and
place, the import of which record may be that the officer took the oath
of office prescribed by law; and he shall record and keep on file every
certificate filed with him pursuant to RSA 42:7.

**Source.** RS 35:8. CS 37:8. GS 38:8. GL 41:8. PS 44:8. PL 48:8. RL
60:8.
