---
title: CHAPTER 45 MAYORS OF CITIES
---

TITLE III
                                             
TOWNS, CITIES, VILLAGE DISTRICTS, AND UNINCORPORATED PLACES
===========================================================

CHAPTER 45
                                             
MAYORS OF CITIES
----------------

Election
--------

### Section 45:1

 **45:1 Procedure. –** The qualified voters in each ward, at the
meeting for the choice of city and ward officers, shall give in to the
moderator their votes for a mayor of the city, which shall be received,
sorted, counted and declared, and a record thereof made in the same
manner as votes for senators; and a copy of the record, certified by the
moderator, a majority of the selectmen and the ward clerk, shall be
delivered by the ward clerk to the city clerk within 24 hours after the
meeting.

**Source.** 1846, 384:7. 1855, 1699:9. GS 41:1. GL 45:1. PS 47:1. PL
51:1. RL 63:1.

### Section 45:2

 **45:2 Canvass; Notice. –** The city councils shall meet in
convention on the day appointed by law or ordinance for that purpose,
and the city clerk, having entered upon the record the number of votes
given in each ward for every person voted for as mayor, shall lay before
the convention the returns of such votes, and the convention shall
examine the same and declare the person who has the largest number of
votes to be elected mayor, and cause him to be notified of his election.

**Source.** 1846, 384:7. 1849, 837:1. GS 41:2. GL 45:2. PS 47:2. PL
51:2. RL 63:2.

### Section 45:3

 **45:3 Contest. –** In case the election of mayor is contested the
city councils in convention shall have power to send for persons and
papers, may inquire into the correctness of the returns, and shall hear
and receive evidence as to any fraud or misconduct in relation to the
election; and for that purpose may adjourn from time to time, not later
than the time appointed for the convention of the new city councils.

**Source.** 1859, 2250:1. GS 41:3. GL 45:3. PS 47:3. PL 51:3. RL 63:3.

### Section 45:4

 **45:4 Non-Election. –** If no person is elected mayor, or if the
person elected declines, the convention shall make a record of the fact
and appoint a day for another election; and the mayor and aldermen shall
issue their precept to the selectmen of the several wards, requiring
them to call meetings of their wards on the day so appointed; and the
same proceedings shall be had from time to time until a mayor is chosen.

**Source.** 1846, 384:7. 1849, 837:2. 1855, 1699:9. GS 41:4. GL 45:4. PS
47:4. PL 51:4. RL 63:4.

Vacancy
-------

### Section 45:5

 **45:5 Temporary Chairman. –** In case a vacancy occurs in the
office of mayor of any city, by death, resignation or otherwise, the
board of aldermen shall elect one of their number chairman, who shall
have all the powers and perform all the duties of mayor until the
vacancy shall be filled by the election and qualification of a mayor.

**Source.** 1871, 23:2. GL 45:12. PS 47:12. 1895, 41:4. PL 51:5. RL
63:5.

### Section 45:6

 **45:6 Election to Fill. –** As soon as may be after such vacancy
shall occur, the board of aldermen and the common council shall meet and
respectively declare the existence of such vacancy and the cause
thereof, whereupon said board of aldermen and the common council shall
meet in convention and elect a mayor, who shall serve until the next
regular election and until his successor is duly elected and qualified.
No person who is at the time of the occurring of the vacancy a member of
either the board of aldermen or the common council shall be eligible to
election by said convention.

**Source.** 1871, 23:2. GL 45:12. PS 47:12. 1895, 41:1. PL 51:6. RL
63:6.

Powers and Duties; Salaries
---------------------------

### Section 45:7

 **45:7 Chief Executive. –** The mayor thus chosen and qualified
shall be the chief executive officer of the city, and for the
preservation of the peace shall have the powers of sheriff and
conservator of the peace, and, in case of any unlawful assembly, may
appoint as many special constables as he may think expedient, giving to
each such badge of office as the city councils have designated or as he
shall designate.

**Source.** 1846, 384:9. 1855, 1699:12. GS 41:6. GL 45:5. PS 47:5. PL
51:7. RL 63:7.

### Section 45:8

 **45:8 Supervision. –** He shall cause the laws and regulations of
the city to be executed, and shall exercise a general supervision over
the conduct of all subordinate officers and cause their violation or
neglect of duty to be punished.

**Source.** 1846, 384:9. 1855, 1699:12. GS 41:7. GL 45:6. PS 47:6. PL
51:8. RL 63:8.

### Section 45:9

 **45:9 Presiding; Veto. –** He shall preside in the board of
aldermen and in convention of city councils, and shall be ex-officio
chairman of the board of overseers of the public welfare. He shall have
a negative upon the action of the aldermen in laying out highways, and
in all other matters; but shall have no vote except in case of an equal
division; and no vote can be passed or appointment made by the board of
aldermen over his veto unless by a vote of 2/3, at least, of all the
aldermen elected.

**Source.** GS 41:8. 1871, 24:1. GL 45:7. PS 47:7. PL 51:9. RL 63:9.
1945, 176:1, eff. May 17, 1945.

### Section 45:10

 **45:10 Calling Meetings. –** He may call special meetings of the
board of aldermen and common council, or either of them, when in his
opinion the interests of the city require it, by causing a notification
to be given to, or left at the abode of, each member of the board to be
convened.

**Source.** 1846, 384:9. 1855, 1699:12. GS 41:9. GL 45:8. PS 47:8. PL
51:10. RL 63:10.

### Section 45:11

 **45:11 Messages. –** He shall from time to time communicate to the
city councils, respectively, such information, and recommend such
measures as the interests of the city shall, in his judgment, require.

**Source.** 1846, 384:9. 1855, 1699:12. GS 41:10. GL 45:9. PS 47:9. PL
51:11. RL 63:11.

### Section 45:12

 **45:12 Salary. –** He shall receive for his services such salary as
the city councils shall determine, payable at stated periods, and shall
receive no other compensation; and such salary shall not be increased or
diminished from the time of any election till the close of the term of
the mayor then elected.

**Source.** 1846, 384:9. 1855, 1699:12. GS 41:11. GL 45:10. PS 47:10. PL
51:12. RL 63:12.

Performance of Duties by Chairman of Aldermen
---------------------------------------------

### Section 45:13

 **45:13 Absence or Disability of Mayor. –** The board of aldermen
where the city government is composed of 2 bodies, or the city council
where the city government is composed of one body, may choose one of
their members to be chairman, and, whenever the mayor of any city shall
be absent or shall be disabled by sickness or otherwise, he shall have
all of the powers and perform all of the duties of the mayor during his
absence or disability.

**Source.** 1871, 23:1. GL 45:11. PS 47:11. 1911, 105:1. PL 51:13. RL
63:13.
