---
title: |
    CHAPTER 53-C FRANCHISING AND REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS BY
    CITIES AND TOWNS
---

TITLE III
                                             
TOWNS, CITIES, VILLAGE DISTRICTS, AND UNINCORPORATED PLACES
===========================================================

CHAPTER 53-C
                                             
FRANCHISING AND REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS BY CITIES AND TOWNS
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 53-C:1

 **53-C:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Cable television system'' means facilities by which television
signals are received at a central location and for consideration are
transmitted to customers or subscribers by means of cables or wires.
                                             
 II. "Company'' means any person, partnership, association, or
corporation, including a municipality, owning or operating a cable
television system, except for any nonprofit system serving fewer than
100 subscribers.
                                             
 III. "Franchise'' means an initial or renewed authorization issued
by a franchising authority to construct or operate a cable system.
                                             
 IV. "Franchising authority'' means any governmental entity empowered
by federal, state, or local law to grant a franchise.
                                             
 V. "Master antenna television system'' means a cable television
system which serves only the residents of one or more apartment
dwellings under common ownership, control or management, and any
commercial establishment located on the premises of such apartment house
and which transmits only signals broadcast over the air by stations
which may be viewed normally or heard locally without objectionable
interference, and which does not provide any additional service over its
facilities.
                                             
 VI. "Municipality'' means a city or town.
                                             
 VII. "Privately owned utility pole'' means a utility pole which is
owned by a person or entity other than a public utility or municipal
corporation providing electric or telecommunications services.

**Source.** 1974, 23:1. 1989, 338:1. 2007, 197:1, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 53-C:2

 **53-C:2 Franchise Required. –**
                                             
 I. No company shall construct, commence construction, or operate a
cable television system in any municipality without first obtaining a
written franchise from the franchising authority of each municipality in
which such system is installed or to be installed.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent municipalities from
cooperating to jointly exercise franchising authority in accordance with
RSA 53-A.

**Source.** 1974, 23:1. 1989, 338:2. 1996, 72:1, eff. July 12, 1996.

### Section 53-C:3

 **53-C:3 Authority to Grant Franchises. –** Municipalities are
hereby authorized to grant, renew, amend or rescind for cause franchises
for the installation and operation of cable television systems in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter within the geographical
limits of its respective town or city.

**Source.** 1974, 23:1. 1996, 72:2, eff. July 12, 1996.

### Section 53-C:3-a

 **53-C:3-a Franchise Applicant Considerations. –** No municipality
shall grant a franchise for cable service to a cable system within its
jurisdiction without first, at a duly noticed public hearing, having
considered:
                                             
 I. The financial ability of the franchise applicant to perform.
                                             
 II. The ability of the applicant to provide adequate and technically
sound facilities, equipment and signal quality.
                                             
 III. Adequate channel capacity and appropriate facilities for
public, educational, or governmental use, taking into account available
technology, subscriber interest, and cost.
                                             
 IV. The prohibition of discrimination among customers of basic
service.
                                             
 V. Reasonable service quality in terms of available technology,
subscriber interest, and cost.
                                             
 VI. Construction and installation which conforms to all applicable
state and federal laws and regulations and the National Electric Safety
Code.
                                             
 VII. A competent staff able to provide prompt, adequate service and
to respond comprehensively to customer complaints or problems.
                                             
 VIII. Reasonable rules and policies for line extensions and
disconnects, customer deposits, and billing practices.

**Source.** 1989, 338:3, eff. Aug. 1, 1989.

### Section 53-C:3-b

 **53-C:3-b Franchises; Administration by Municipality. –**
                                             
 I. All franchises shall be nonexclusive. No municipality shall grant
any additional franchises to cable service within its jurisdiction on
terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome than those in any
existing franchise within such municipality.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any
municipality considering the approval of an additional cable service
franchise in all or any part of the area of such municipality from
imposing additional terms and conditions upon the granting of such
franchises as such municipality shall in its sole discretion deem
necessary or appropriate.
                                             
 III. All cable service franchises in existence as of May 1, 1989,
shall remain in full force and effect according to their existing terms.

**Source.** 1989, 338:3, eff. Aug. 1, 1989.

### Section 53-C:3-c

 **53-C:3-c Credits and Refunds for Interruption of Service. –**
Every franchisee shall agree to the following:
                                             
 I. In the event its service to any subscriber is interrupted for 24
or more consecutive hours, it will, upon request, grant such subscriber
a pro rata credit or rebate.
                                             
 II. It will maintain an office which shall be open during usual
business hours, have a listed toll-free telephone number, and be capable
of receiving complaints, requests for adjustments, and service calls.

**Source.** 1989, 338:3, eff. Aug. 1, 1989.

### Section 53-C:3-d

 **53-C:3-d Notice to Subscribers Regarding Quality of Service. –**
                                             
 I. Annually, every cable television system operator shall mail to
each of its subscribers a notice which:
                                             
 (a) Informs subscribers how to communicate their views to the
cable company and to the office of the attorney general, consumer
protection and antitrust bureau;
                                             
 (b) States the responsibility of the office of the attorney
general, consumer protection and antitrust bureau to receive and act on
consumer complaints.
                                             
 II. Such notice shall be in nontechnical language, understandable by
the general public, and in a convenient format. On or before January 30
of each year, the operator shall certify to the franchising authority
and to the office of the attorney general, consumer protection and
antitrust bureau that it has distributed the notice as provided in this
section during the previous calendar year as required by this section.

**Source.** 1989, 338:3, eff. Aug. 1, 1989.

### Section 53-C:3-e

 **53-C:3-e Recording of Subscriber Complaints. –**
                                             
 I. Every cable television system operator shall keep a record or log
of all written complaints received regarding quality of service,
equipment malfunctions, billing procedure, employee relations with
customers and similar matters. Such records shall be maintained for a
period of 2 years.
                                             
 II. Such record shall contain the following information for each
complaint received:
                                             
 (a) Date, time, nature of complaint;
                                             
 (b) Name, address, telephone number of complainant;
                                             
 (c) Investigation of complaint;
                                             
 (d) Manner and time of resolution of complaint; and
                                             
 (e) If the complaint regards equipment malfunction or the quality
of reception, a report indicating corrective steps taken, with the
nature of the problem stated. Every cable television system operator
shall make the logs or records, or both, of such complaints available to
any authorized agent of the franchising authority upon request during
normal business hours for on-sight review.

**Source.** 1989, 338:3, eff. Aug. 1, 1989.

### Section 53-C:3-f

 **53-C:3-f Franchise Document Clearing House. –** Within 60 days of
the granting of an initial franchise and any renewal of such franchise,
the franchisee shall file a copy of the franchise and any Federal
Communications Commission rulings or other rulings affecting such
franchisee with the secretary of state. Within 60 days of June 2, 1989
cable system operators shall file a copy of their existing franchise
with the secretary of state. The secretary of state shall maintain a
file of all franchise documents so recorded and make copies available
upon request for the cost of reproduction and mailing, plus a reasonable
administrative fee. The filing fee for initial and renewal franchise
documents shall be 
                                             $50 per franchise or renewal of such franchise. In
years in which the filing of initial or renewal franchise documents is
not required, the franchisee shall pay to the secretary of state a fee
of 
                                             $50 for each locality served by the franchise.

**Source.** 1989, 338:3, eff. Aug. 1, 1989.

### Section 53-C:3-g

 **53-C:3-g Rights of Individuals. –** No cable television system
operator shall deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers, channel users, or any other citizens on the basis
of age, race, religion, sex, physical disability, or country of natural
origin.

**Source.** 1989, 338:3. 1990, 140:2, XI, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 53-C:4

 **53-C:4 Authority to Establish Fees and Impose Conditions. –** In
conjunction with the rights granted in said franchises, any franchising
authority may require reasonable fees payable to the municipality and
may impose conditions not inconsistent with applicable Rules and
Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, as amended from
time to time.

**Source.** 1974, 23:1, eff. April 2, 1974.

### Section 53-C:5

 **53-C:5 Existing Operations. –** Any existing contract, license,
permit, resolution or other accepted authorization for a cable
television system which is in operation as of April 2, 1974, or for a
cable television system which has substantially completed the
installation of equipment and facilities as of such date, shall be
deemed to be a franchise under the provisions of this chapter until the
earlier of the expiration of its stated term, if any, or the date of any
renewal or amendment required under applicable Rules and Regulations of
the Federal Communications Commission, as amended from time to time.

**Source.** 1974, 23:1, eff. April 2, 1974.

### Section 53-C:6

 **53-C:6 Installation of Cable Television in Manufactured Housing
Parks. –**
                                             
 I. A cable television operator who affixes or causes to be affixed
cable television facilities to the dwelling of a tenant in a
manufactured housing park shall:
                                             
 (a) Do so at no cost to the landlord of such manufactured housing
park.
                                             
 (b) Indemnify the landlord for damages, if any, arising from the
installation or the continued operation thereof or both.
                                             
 (c) Not interfere with the safety, functioning, appearance, or
use of the manufactured housing park, nor with the rules and regulations
of the owner dealing with the day-to-day operations of the property,
including the owner's reasonable access rules for soliciting business.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a landlord from
contracting with the cable television operator for work in addition to
standard installation.
                                             
 III. No cable television operator shall enter into any agreement
with persons owning, leasing, controlling, or managing a manufactured
housing park served by a cable television system or perform any act
which would directly or indirectly diminish or interfere with the rights
of any tenant to use a master or individual antenna system.
                                             
 IV. A cable television operator shall obtain the landlord's consent
to affix cable television system facilities to a privately owned utility
pole within the manufactured housing park by delivery to the owner, in
person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a copy of this
section and a signed statement that the cable television operator will
be bound by the terms of this section to the owner or lawful agent of
the property upon which the cable television system facilities are to be
affixed.
                                             
 V. The cable television operator shall present and review with the
owner prior to any installation, plans and specifications for the
installation, and shall abide by reasonable installation requests by the
owner. The cable television operator shall inspect the premises with the
owner after installation to insure conformance with the plans and
specifications. The owner may waive in writing the prior presentation of
the plans and specifications. The cable television operator shall be
responsible for the maintenance of any equipment installed on the
owner's premises and shall be entitled to reasonable access for
maintenance. The cable television operator shall also, prior to any
installation, provide, upon the request of the owner, a certificate of
insurance covering all the employees or agents of the installer or cable
television operator as well as all equipment of the operator.
                                             
 VI. If the owner of any privately owned utility pole intends to
require the payment of any sum in excess of a nominal amount, defined as
the amount paid by the cable television operator to utility companies
for installation of similar facilities on their poles, in exchange for
permitting the installation of cable television system facilities to the
privately owned utility pole, the owner shall notify the cable
television operator by certified mail, return receipt requested, within
20 days of the date on which the owner is notified that the cable
television operator intends to install cable television system
facilities on the privately owned utility pole within the manufactured
housing park. Absent such notice, it shall be conclusively presumed that
the owner shall not require payment in excess of the nominal amount
specified in this section for the connection.
                                             
 VII. If the owner gives notice, the owner shall, within 30 days
after giving notice, advise the cable television operator in writing of
the amount the owner claims as compensation for affixing cable
television system facilities to his or her privately owned utility pole.
If within 30 days after receipt of the owner's claim for compensation,
the cable television operator has not agreed to accept the owner's
demand, the owner may bring an action in the superior court for the
county in which the real estate is located to enforce the owner's claim
for compensation. The action shall be brought within 6 months of the
date on which the owner first made a demand upon the cable television
operator for compensation.
                                             
 VIII. It shall be presumed that reasonable compensation shall be the
nominal amount, but the presumption may be rebutted and overcome by
evidence that the owner has a specific alternative use for the space
occupied by cable television system facilities or equipment, the loss of
which shall result in a monetary loss to the owner, or that installation
of cable television system facilities or equipment upon the privately
owned utility pole will otherwise substantially interfere with the use
and occupancy of the pole to an extent which causes a decrease in the
resale or rental value of the real estate. In determining the damages to
any real estate injured when no part of it is being taken, consideration
is to be given only to such injury as is special and peculiar to the
real estate, and there shall be deducted therefrom the amount of any
benefit to the real estate by reason of the installation of cable
television system facilities.
                                             
 IX. The foregoing steps to claim or enforce a demand for
compensation in excess of the nominal amount shall not impair or delay
the right of the cable television operator to install, maintain, or
remove cable television system facilities to a tenant's dwelling on the
real estate. The superior court shall have original jurisdiction to
enforce the provisions of this section.
                                             
 X. In addition to other remedies allowed by law, a manufactured
housing park owner may be assessed by a district court a civil penalty
of 
                                             $500 and other reasonable damages for discriminating in rental
charges or other charges to tenants based on the tenants' subscription
to a cable television service or for demanding or accepting payment,
except as provided in this section, for the affixing of cable television
facilities to a privately owned utility pole within the manufactured
housing park.

**Source.** 2007, 197:2, eff. July 1, 2007.
