---
title: |
    CHAPTER 53-E AGGREGATION OF ELECTRIC CUSTOMERS BY MUNICIPALITIES AND
    COUNTIES
---

TITLE III
                                             
TOWNS, CITIES, VILLAGE DISTRICTS, AND UNINCORPORATED PLACES
===========================================================

CHAPTER 53-E
                                             
AGGREGATION OF ELECTRIC CUSTOMERS BY MUNICIPALITIES AND COUNTIES
----------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 53-E:1

 **53-E:1 Statement of Purpose. –** The general court finds it to be
in the public interest to allow municipalities and counties to aggregate
retail electric customers, as necessary, to provide such customers
access to competitive markets for supplies of electricity and related
energy services. The general court finds that aggregation may provide
small customers with similar opportunities to those available to larger
customers in obtaining lower electric costs, reliable service, and
secure energy supplies. The purpose of aggregation shall be to encourage
voluntary, cost effective and innovative solutions to local needs with
careful consideration of local conditions and opportunities.

**Source.** 1996, 192:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 53-E:2

 **53-E:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Aggregation'' means the grouping of retail electric customers to
broker or contract for electric power supply and energy services for
such customers.
                                             
 II. "Aggregator'' means, unless the context indicates otherwise, a
municipality or county that engages in aggregation of electric customers
within its boundaries.
                                             
 III. "Commission'' means the public utilities commission.
                                             
 IV. "Committee'' means the electric aggregation committee
established under RSA 53-E:6.
                                             
 V. "County'' means any county within the state.
                                             
 VI. "Municipality'' means any city, town, unincorporated place, or
village district within the state.

**Source.** 1996, 192:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 53-E:3

 **53-E:3 Municipal and County Authorities. –** Any municipality or
county may:
                                             
 I. Aggregate the retail electric customers within its boundaries who
consent to being included in an aggregation program.
                                             
 II. (a) Enter into agreements for:
                                             
 (1) The supply of electric power.
                                             
 (2) Demand side management.
                                             
 (3) Conservation.
                                             
 (4) Meter reading.
                                             
 (5) Customer service.
                                             
 (6) Other related services.
                                             
 (b) Such agreements may be entered into by a single municipality
or county, or by a group of such entities pursuant to RSA 53-A.

**Source.** 1996, 192:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 53-E:3-a

 **53-E:3-a Municipal Aggregators Authorized. –** Municipal
aggregators of electricity load under this chapter, and municipalities
operating municipal electric utilities under RSA 38, are expressly
authorized to aggregate other services commonly and regularly billed to
customers. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the capacity
of customers to select any service or combination of services offered by
such municipal aggregators or to limit the municipality from combining
billing for any or all utility services.

**Source.** 1997, 298:20, eff. June 20, 1997.

### Section 53-E:4

 **53-E:4 Regulation. –**
                                             
 I. An aggregator operating under the provisions of this chapter
shall not be considered a utility engaging in the wholesale purchase and
resale of electric power. Providing electric power or energy services to
aggregated customers within a municipality or county shall not be
considered a wholesale utility transaction.
                                             
 II. The provision of aggregated electric power and energy services
as authorized by this chapter shall be regulated by this chapter and any
other applicable laws governing aggregated electric power and energy
services in competitive electric markets.
                                             
 III. Transmission and distribution services shall remain with the
transmission and distribution utilities, who shall be paid for such
services according to rate schedules approved by the applicable
regulatory authority. An aggregator shall not be required to own any
utility property or equipment to provide electric power and energy
services to its customers.

**Source.** 1996, 192:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 53-E:5

 **53-E:5 Financial Responsibility. –** Retail electric customers who
choose not to participate in an aggregation program adopted under RSA
53-E:7 shall not be responsible for, and no entity may require them to
pay, any costs associated with such program, through taxes or otherwise
except for electric power supply or energy services consumed directly by
the municipality or county, or incidental costs.

**Source.** 1996, 192:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 53-E:6

 **53-E:6 Electric Aggregation Plan. –**
                                             
 I. The governing body of a municipality or county may form an
electric aggregation committee to develop a plan for an aggregation
program for its citizens. A municipality or county may join other
municipalities or counties in developing such plans.
                                             
 II. The plan shall provide universal access, reliability, and
equitable treatment of all classes of customers and shall meet, at a
minimum, the basic environmental and service standards established by
the commission and other applicable agencies and laws concerning
aggregated service.
                                             
 III. The plan shall detail:
                                             
 (a) The organizational structure of the program;
                                             
 (b) Operation and funding;
                                             
 (c) Rate setting and other costs to participants;
                                             
 (d) The methods for entering and terminating agreements with
other entities;
                                             
 (e) The rights and responsibilities of program participants; and
                                             
 (f) Termination of the program.
                                             
 IV. The committee shall approve a final plan which the committee
determines is in the best, long-term interest of the municipality or
county and the ratepayers.
                                             
 V. The committee shall solicit public input in the planning process
and shall hold public hearings.

**Source.** 1996, 192:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 53-E:7

 **53-E:7 Aggregation Program Adopted. –**
                                             
 I. The governing body of a municipality or county may submit to its
legislative body for adoption a final plan for an aggregation program,
to be approved by a majority of those present and voting.
                                             
 II. If the plan is adopted, the municipality or county shall mail
written notification to each retail electric customer within the
municipality or county. Notification shall include a description of the
aggregation program, the implications to the municipality or county, and
the rights and responsibilities that the participants will have under
the program. No retail electric customer shall be included in the
program unless the customer affirmatively responds to the notification
or requests in writing to be included in the program.
                                             
 III. Within 15 days after notification of the plan has been sent to
retail electric customers in the service area, a public information
meeting to answer questions on the program shall be held.

**Source.** 1996, 192:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 53-E:8

 **53-E:8 Other Aggregators. –** Nothing in this chapter shall
preclude private aggregators from operating in service areas served by
municipal or county aggregators.

**Source.** 1996, 192:2, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.
