---
title: CHAPTER 624 REPEALS AND REVISIONS
---

TITLE LXI
                                             
ACTS REPEALED
=============

CHAPTER 624
                                             
REPEALS AND REVISIONS
---------------------

### Section 624:1

 **624:1 Revised Statutes; Effective Date. –** All the provisions
contained in the Revised Statutes Annotated shall take effect and go
into operation on September 1, 1955, except parts thereof as to which a
different provision is expressly made therein.

**Source.** RS 230:1. CS 246:1. GS 273:1. GL 291:1. PS 288:1. PL 402:1.
RL 466:1.

### Section 624:2

 **624:2 Citation. –** This act shall not, in any citation or
enumeration of the laws, be reckoned as one of the laws of the 1955
session of the general court; but in all citations this code shall be
cited as the Revised Statutes Annotated, adding to the citation, when
necessary, the number of the chapter and section.

**Source.** RS 230:2. CS 246:2. GS 273:2. GL 291:2. PS 288:3. PL 402:2.
RL 466:2.

### Section 624:3

 **624:3 Repeal by Revision. –** All acts and parts of acts, the
subjects of which are revised and reenacted in the Revised Statutes
Annotated, or which are repugnant to the provisions therein contained,
shall be repealed on and after September 1, 1955, with the exceptions
and limitations hereinafter expressed, but this shall not be construed
to apply to any acts enacted for the benefit of particular localities,
and which are not general in their application, all of which shall be
deemed to have been enacted after the Revised Statutes Annotated, unless
they are expressly repealed by house bill no. 75 of the 1955 session of
the general court, entitled "An Act to revise and codify the Revised
Laws of the State of New Hampshire''.

**Source.** RS 230:3. CS 246:3. GS 273:3. GL 291:3. PS 288:4. PL 402:3.
RL 466:3.

### Section 624:4

 **624:4 Reservation; Rights. –** The repeal of the acts mentioned in
house bill no. 75 of the 1955 session of the general court, shall not
affect any act done or any right accruing or accrued, or acquired or
established, or any suit or proceeding had or begun in any civil case
before the time when the repeal shall take effect, but the proceedings
in every such case shall be conformed, when necessary, to the provisions
of the Revised Statutes Annotated.

**Source.** RS 230:5. CS 246:5. GS 273:5. GL 291:5. PS 288:5. PL 402:4.
RL 466:4.

### Section 624:5

 **624:5 Reservation; Penalties. –** No offense committed and no
penalty or forfeiture incurred, under any of the acts repealed by house
bill no. 75 of the 1955 session of the general court, and before the
time when such repeal shall take effect, shall be affected by the
repeal, except that when any punishment, penalty, or forfeiture shall be
mitigated by the provisions of the Revised Statutes Annotated, such
provisions may be extended and applied to any judgment to be pronounced
after such repeal.

**Source.** RS 230:6. CS 246:6. GS 273:6. GL 291:6. PS 288:6. PL 402:5.
RL 466:5.

### Section 624:6

 **624:6 Reservation; Suits. –** No suit or prosecution pending at
the time of such repeal for any offense committed or for the recovery of
any penalty or forfeiture incurred under any of the acts repealed by
house bill no. 75 of the 1955 session of the general court shall be
affected by such repeal, except that the proceedings in such suit or
prosecution shall be conformed, when necessary, to the provisions of the
Revised Statutes Annotated.

**Source.** RS 230:7. CS 246:7. GS 273:7. GL 291:7. PS 288:7. PL 402:6.
RL 466:6.

### Section 624:7

 **624:7 Reservation; Offices. –** All persons who, at the time when
the repeal shall take effect, shall hold any office under any of the
acts repealed by house bill no. 75 of the 1955 session of the general
court, shall continue to hold the same according to the tenure thereof,
except those offices which have been abolished and those as to which a
different provision shall have been made by the Revised Statutes
Annotated.

**Source.** RS 230:8. CS 246:8. GS 273:8. GL 291:8. PS 288:8. PL 402:7.
RL 466:7.

### Section 624:8

 **624:8 Term of Office. –** If the time of the beginning of a term
of office is changed by the Revised Statutes Annotated, the incumbent of
the office under the provisions of the former statute shall hold the
office until the time fixed by the Revised Statutes Annotated for the
beginning of the term, except in cases otherwise specially provided for.

**Source.** PS 288:9. PL 402:8. RL 466:8. 2007, 156:16, eff. Aug. 17,
2007.

### Section 624:9

 **624:9 No Revival by Repeal. –** No act which has been heretofore
repealed shall be revived by the repeal contained in house bill no. 75
of the 1955 session of the general court of any of the acts therein
repealed.

**Source.** RS 230:9. CS 246:9. GS 273:9. GL 291:9. PS 288:10. PL 402:9.
RL 466:9.

### Section 624:10

 **624:10 No Revival of Repealed Provisions. –** The inclusion in the
Revised Statutes Annotated of any provision which may have been
expressly repealed shall be deemed to have been through inadvertence,
and the adoption of this revision by the general court shall not be
deemed to be a reenactment of such repealed provisions.

**Source.** 1955, H.B. 75.

### Section 624:11

 **624:11 Effect of Conflicting Provisions. –** In case of the
inclusion in the Revised Statutes Annotated of conflicting provisions
carried forward from previous enactments, that provision shall prevail
which was the last expression of the will of the general court, and the
earlier conflicting provision shall be deemed to have been repealed by
implication.

**Source.** 1955, H.B. 75.

### Section 624:12

 **624:12 Implication from Repeal. –** The repeal in house bill no.
75 of the 1955 session of the general court of any statute or part of a
statute heretofore repealed shall not be construed as a declaration or
implication that such statute or part of a statute has been in force at
any time subsequent to the first repeal.

**Source.** RS 230:10. CS 246:10. GS 273:10. GL 291:10. PS 288:11. PL
402:10. RL 466:10.

### Section 624:13

 **624:13 Survival by Reference. –** When any statute not repealed in
house bill no. 75 of the 1955 session of the general court refers to and
adopts any statute or part of a statute which is repealed therein, or
any provision or rule of law which is abrogated or modified by the
Revised Statutes Annotated, such statute or part of a statute or
provision or rule of law so referred to and adopted shall not be deemed
repealed by the provisions of house bill no. 75, but shall be in force
so far only as the same shall have been so adopted, and for no other
purpose, and so far only as not repugnant to or inconsistent with the
provisions of the Revised Statutes Annotated.

**Source.** RS 230:11. CS 246:11. GS 273:11. GL 291:11. PS 288:12. PL
402:11. RL 466:11.

### Section 624:14

 **624:14 Time Limitations. –** In any case, when a limitation or
period of time prescribed in any of the acts repealed in house bill no.
75 of the 1955 session of the general court for the acquiring of any
right, for the barring of any remedy, or for any other purpose shall
have begun to run, and the same or any similar limitation is prescribed
in the Revised Statutes Annotated, the time of limitation shall continue
to run and shall have the same effect as if the whole period had begun
and ended under the operation of the Revised Statutes Annotated.

**Source.** RS 230:12. CS 246:12. GS 273:12. GL 291:12. PS 288:13. PL
402:12. RL 466:12.

### Section 624:15

 **624:15 Continuance by Reenactment. –** Where any provision of a
statute repealed by house bill no. 75 of the 1955 session of the general
court is substantially reenacted in the Revised Statutes Annotated, the
law shall be deemed to have continued in force from the first enactment
as if no reenactment and repeal had taken place.

**Source.** GS 273:13. GL 291:13. PS 288:14. PL 402:13. RL 466:13.

### Section 624:16

 **624:16 General Repeal. –** Subject to the foregoing provisions of
this chapter, all other public acts, passed since the year 1941 and
heretofore in force in this state, are hereby repealed, excepting acts
of the present session of the general court; acts or parts of acts
relating to particular places, including counties; to the construction,
maintenance, names or improvement of particular highways; to sales and
leases of land by the state; to emergencies; to state compacts,
projects, and enterprises; and to the issuance and retirement of state
bonds or other obligations; acts the provisions of which are indicated
by notes herein; and also excepting from general repeal the following
described statutes:
                                             
 I. Laws 1895, chapter 57, entitled an act to reduce the rate of
interest on certain trust funds held by the state.
                                             
 II. Laws 1899, chapter 42, entitled an act in favor of the New
Hampshire College of Agriculture and the Mechanic Arts.
                                             
 III. Laws 1901, chapter 115, entitled an act establishing the
boundary line between the State of New Hampshire and the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
                                             
 IV. Laws 1907, chapter 101, entitled an act in relation to the
Russian-Japanese gift.
                                             
 V. Laws 1909, chapter 131, entitled an act providing for the payment
of the income from the Benjamin Thompson trust fund to the New Hampshire
College of Agriculture and the Mechanic Arts.
                                             
 VI. Laws 1917, chapter 214, entitled an act in relation to the John
Nesmith trust fund.
                                             
 VII. Public Laws, chapters 253, 254, 255, and 256, relating to
street railways.
                                             
 VIII. Laws 1929, chapter 134, entitled an act accepting the
provisions of the act of Congress relating to agricultural extension
work.
                                             
 IX. Laws 1937, chapter 28, entitled an act providing for the
perambulation of the Maine and New Hampshire boundary line.
                                             
 X. Laws 1953, chapter 198, establishing a New Hampshire Tri-State
Commission.

**Source.** RS 230:13. CS 246:13. GS 273:14. GL 291:14. PS 288:15. PL
402:14. RL 466:14.

### Section 624:17

 **624:17 Amendments; Incorporation. –** House bill no. 75 of the
1955 session of the general court is enacted subject to all other acts
of the 1955 session of the general court in amendment or repeal of the
Revised Laws of 1942, or of the public acts subsequently enacted, and
for the purposes of construction, shall be deemed to have been enacted
prior to all other acts of the 1955 session of the general court. All
provisions of the statutes which were incorporated by reference in the
Revised Laws of 1942 shall be deemed to be reenacted in the Revised
Statutes Annotated.

**Source.** RL 466:15.
