---
title: CHAPTER 653 ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND DELEGATES
---

TITLE LXIII
                                             
ELECTIONS
============

CHAPTER 653
                                             
ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND DELEGATES
----------------------------------

State and County Officers to be Elected
---------------------------------------

### Section 653:1

 **653:1 Elected for 2-Year Term. –** At every state general
election, the following officers shall be elected for 2-year terms
except as otherwise provided:
                                             
 I. The governor by the voters of the state;
                                             
 II. One executive councilor by the voters in each executive
councilor district;
                                             
 III. One state senator by the voters in each senatorial district;
                                             
 IV. The number of state representatives to which a district is
entitled by the voters in such state representative district;
                                             
 V. One sheriff, one county attorney, one county treasurer, one
register of deeds, and one register of probate by the voters in each
county;
                                             
 VI. County commissioners as follows:
                                             
 (a) Grafton and Hillsborough counties--one county commissioner by
those voters in each county commissioner district in each county;
                                             
 (b) Carroll county--one county commissioner from each county
commissioner district by all the voters of the county; provided that, at
the 1994 state general election, the commissioner from district 1 shall
be elected to a 4-year term and the commissioners from districts 2 and 3
shall each be elected to a 2-year term. At each subsequent state general
election, 2 commissioners whose terms are expiring shall be elected by
all the voters of the county; and, of the commissioners so chosen, one
shall serve a 4-year term and one shall serve a 2-year term and both
shall hold their offices until their successors are chosen and
qualified. Following the 1994 state general election, the 4-year term
shall be rotated in sequence starting with district 2.
                                             
 (c) Strafford county--3 county commissioners by all the voters of
the county;
                                             
 (d) Cheshire county--one county commissioner by the voters in
each county commissioner district; provided that, at the 1980 state
general election, no commissioner from district 1 shall be elected, the
commissioner from district 2 shall be elected to a 4-year term and the
commissioner from district 3 shall be elected to a 2-year term. At each
subsequent state general election, 2 commissioners shall be chosen in
the county by the voters of the districts in which a commissioner's term
is expiring; and, of the commissioners so chosen, one shall serve a
4-year term and one shall serve a 2-year term and both shall hold their
offices until their successors are chosen and qualified. Following the
1980 state general election, the 4-year term shall be rotated in
sequence starting with district 3.
                                             
 (e) Sullivan county--one county commissioner from each county
commissioner district by all the voters of the county; provided that, at
the 1990 state general election, the commissioner from district 1 shall
be elected to a 4-year term and the commissioners from districts 2 and 3
shall each be elected to a 2-year term. At each subsequent state general
election, 2 commissioners whose terms are expiring shall be elected by
all the voters of the county; and, of the commissioners so chosen, one
shall serve a 4-year term and one shall serve a 2-year term and both
shall hold their offices until their successors are chosen and
qualified. Following the 1990 state general election, the 4-year term
shall be rotated in sequence starting with district 2.
                                             
 (f) Belknap county--one county commissioner by the voters in each
county commissioner district; provided that, at the 1992 state general
election, no commissioner from district 1 shall be elected, the
commissioner from district 2 shall be elected to a 4-year term, and the
commissioner from district 3 shall be elected to a 2-year term. At each
subsequent state general election, 2 commissioners shall be chosen in
the county by the voters of the districts in which a commissioner's term
is expiring; and, of the commissioners so chosen, one shall serve a
4-year term and one shall serve a 2-year term and both shall hold their
offices until their successors are chosen and qualified. Following the
1992 state general election, the 4-year term shall be rotated in
sequence starting with district 3.
                                             
 (g) Rockingham county--one county commissioner by the voters in
each county commissioner district; provided that, at the 1992 state
general election, the commissioner from district 1 shall be elected to a
4-year term and the commissioners from districts 2 and 3 shall be
elected to 2-year terms. At each subsequent state general election, 2
commissioners shall be chosen in the county by the voters of the
districts in which a commissioner's term is expiring; and, of the
commissioners so chosen, one shall serve a 4-year term and one shall
serve a 2-year term and both shall hold their offices until their
successors are chosen and qualified. Following the 1992 state general
election, the 4-year term shall be rotated in sequence starting with
district 2.
                                             
 (h) Merrimack county--one county commissioner by the voters in
each county commissioner district in the county; provided that, at the
1996 state general election, the commissioner from district 1 shall be
elected to a 4-year term and the commissioners from districts 2 and 3
shall be elected to 2-year terms. At each subsequent state general
election, 2 commissioners shall be chosen in the county by the voters of
the districts in the county in which a commissioner's term is expiring;
and, of the commissioners so chosen, one shall serve a 4-year term and
one shall serve a 2-year term and both shall hold their offices until
their successors are chosen and qualified. Following the 1996 state
general election, the 4-year term shall be rotated in sequence starting
with district 2.
                                             
 (i) Coos county--one county commissioner by the voters in each
county commissioner district; provided that, at the 1996 state general
election, the commissioner from district 3 shall be elected to a 4-year
term and the commissioners from districts 1 and 2 shall be elected to
2-year terms. At each subsequent state general election, 2 commissioners
shall be chosen in the county by the voters of the districts in the
county in which a commissioner's term is expiring; and, of the
commissioners so chosen, one shall serve a 4-year term and one shall
serve a 2-year term and both shall hold their offices until their
successors are chosen and qualified. Following the 1996 state general
election, the 4-year term shall be rotated in sequence starting with
district 1.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1; 451:1. 1990, 56:1, 2. 1991, 219:2. 1992, 9:1,
2. 1993, 308:1. 1995, 47:1, 2. 1996, 138:1, 2. 2003, 289:22, eff. Sept.
1, 2003.

Federal Officers to be Elected
------------------------------

### Section 653:2

 **653:2 Electors of the President and Vice-President. –** At the
state general election in 1980 and at the state general election every
fourth year thereafter, the voters of the state shall elect the number
of electors of the president and vice-president of the United States to
which the state is entitled.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 653:3


                                             


                                             [The amendment to RSA 653:3 by 1995, 108:2 is omitted in light of the
United States supreme court decision invalidating state-imposed
congressional term limits. See U.S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thornton (1995)
514 U.S. 779.
                                             ]

 **653:3 United States Senators. –**
                                             
 At the state general election in 1980 and at the state general
election every sixth year thereafter and at the state general election
in 1984 and at the state general election every sixth year thereafter,
the voters of the state shall elect one United States senator.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 653:4


                                             


                                             [The amendment to RSA 653:4 by 1995, 108:3 is omitted in light of the
United States supreme court decision invalidating state-imposed
congressional term limits. See U.S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thornton (1995)
514 U.S. 779.
                                             ]

 **653:4 United States Representatives. –**
                                             
 At every state general election, the voters of each congressional
district shall elect one United States representative.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Election of Delegates to Party Conventions
------------------------------------------

### Section 653:5

 **653:5 Delegates to National Party Conventions. –** At every
presidential primary election, the voters of the state shall vote their
preference for party candidates for president and thereby choose the
delegates to each presidential nominating convention to which the state
is entitled.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 653:6

 **653:6 Delegates to State Party Conventions. –** At every state
primary election, the voters in each state representative district shall
elect delegates to each state party convention in accordance with the
districts laid out in RSA 662:6. In order to be elected as a delegate to
a state party convention, a person shall be a registered voter of the
same party in the district from which the person is to be elected, and
shall receive either a minimum of 10 votes or 10 percent of the votes
cast in the district from which the person is to be elected, whichever
is less. A person who is entitled to serve as a delegate because he or
she has been nominated for office as provided in RSA 667:21 shall not be
entitled to serve as an elected delegate under this section, and the
next highest eligible vote-getter shall be elected.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1992, 68:1. 1995, 47:3. 2005, 5:1, eff. July 2,
2005.

Election Dates
--------------

### Section 653:7

 **653:7 State General Election. –** The state general election shall
be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November of
every even-numbered year.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 653:8

 **653:8 State Primary Election. –** The state primary election shall
be held on the second Tuesday in September of every even-numbered year.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 653:9

 **653:9 Presidential Primary Election. –** The presidential primary
election shall be held on the second Tuesday in March or on a date
selected by the secretary of state which is 7 days or more immediately
preceding the date on which any other state shall hold a similar
election, whichever is earlier, of each year when a president of the
United States is to be elected or the year previous. Said primary shall
be held in connection with the regular March town meeting or election
or, if held on any other day, at a special election called by the
secretary of state for that purpose. The purpose of this section is to
protect the tradition of the New Hampshire first-in-the-nation
presidential primary.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1995, 289:1. 1999, 161:2. 2007, 212:4. 2010,
121:1, eff. Aug. 8, 2010.

### Section 653:10

 **653:10 Assumption of Office. –** Federal officers-elect shall
assume office on the date set by the U.S. Constitution. State
officers-elect shall assume office on the date set by the New Hampshire
Constitution. County officers-elect shall assume office on the first
Wednesday after the first Tuesday in January of the year following the
state general election at which they were elected.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 426:1, eff. Aug. 23, 1983.
