---
title: CHAPTER 655 NOMINATIONS
---

TITLE LXIII
                                             
ELECTIONS
============

CHAPTER 655
                                             
NOMINATIONS
------------

General Qualifications
----------------------

### Section 655:1

 **655:1 Citizenship. –** To hold any elective office in the state, a
person must be a citizen of the United States, either by birth or by
naturalization.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 655:2

 **655:2 Domicile. –** To hold any elective office in the state, a
person must have a domicile in the state. Registration to vote or voting
in another state during the relevant time period shall create a
presumption that a person does not have a domicile in this state.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2001, 118:1, eff. Aug. 25, 2001.

Qualifications by Office
------------------------

### Section 655:3

 **655:3 United States Senator. –** To hold the office of United
States senator, a person must be qualified as provided in Article 1,
section 3 of the federal constitution.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 655:4

 **655:4 United States Representative. –** To hold the office of
United States representative, a person must be qualified as required by
Article 1, section 2 of the federal constitution.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 655:5

 **655:5 Governor. –** To hold the office of governor, a person must
be qualified as provided in Part 2, Article 42 of the state
constitution: at the time of the election, the person must have been an
inhabitant of this state for 7 years next preceding, and be of the age
of 30 years.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2003, 22:1, eff. April 24, 2003.

### Section 655:6

 **655:6 Councilor. –** To hold the office of councilor, a person
must be qualified as provided in Part 2, Article 61 of the state
constitution: the person must be of the age of 30 years, and shall have
been an inhabitant of this state for 7 years immediately preceding the
election, and at the time thereof shall be an inhabitant of the district
for which he or she shall be chosen. Should such person, after election,
cease to be an inhabitant of the district for which he or she was
chosen, he or she shall be disqualified to hold said position and a
vacancy shall be declared therein.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2003, 22:1, eff. April 24, 2003.

### Section 655:7

 **655:7 State Senator. –** To hold the office of state senator, a
person must be qualified as provided in Part 2, Article 29 of the state
constitution: the person must be of the age of 30 years, and shall have
been an inhabitant of this state for 7 years immediately preceding the
election, and at the time thereof shall be an inhabitant of the district
for which he or she shall be chosen. Should such person, after election,
cease to be an inhabitant of the district for which he or she was
chosen, he or she shall be disqualified to hold said position and a
vacancy shall be declared therein.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2003, 22:1, eff. April 24, 2003.

### Section 655:8

 **655:8 State Representative. –** To hold the office of state
representative, a person must be at least 18 years of age and must be
qualified as provided in Part 2, Article 14 of the state constitution:
for 2 years, at least, next preceding the election shall have been an
inhabitant of this state; and shall be, at the time of the election, an
inhabitant of the town, ward, place, or district he or she may be chosen
to represent, and shall cease to represent such town, ward, place, or
district immediately on his or her ceasing to be qualified as aforesaid.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2003, 22:1, eff. April 24, 2003.

### Section 655:9

 **655:9 County Officers. –** To hold the office of county
commissioner, sheriff, county attorney, county treasurer, register of
deeds, or register of probate, a person must have a domicile in the
county for which he is chosen. In addition, to hold the office of county
commissioner in the counties of Rockingham, Belknap, Grafton, Merrimack,
Hillsborough, Cheshire, Sullivan, Coos, and Carroll, a person must have
a domicile in the district from which he is elected at the time of his
election.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 655:10

 **655:10 Incompatible Offices. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall file declaration of candidacy or primary
petitions for nomination at the primary for incompatible offices. For
the purposes of this section, incompatible offices shall include the
offices of governor, United States senator, United States
representative, representative to the general court, state senator,
councilor, county commissioner, county sheriff, county attorney, county
treasurer, register of deeds, and register of probate. If any person
shall file for incompatible offices, the secretary of state shall advise
the person of the provisions hereof and said person shall then advise
the secretary of state which of said offices he or she wishes to retain
in order to seek said nomination.
                                             
 II. No person shall be nominated for incompatible offices. If a
person shall be nominated for incompatible offices, the secretary of
state shall advise the person of the provisions hereof and the person
shall then advise the secretary of state which nomination the person
wishes to retain; the secretary of state shall declare the nominations
not retained by the person vacant.
                                             
 III. A party shall not designate a person to fill a vacancy if the
person has been nominated for any incompatible office.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2003, 84:1. 2011, 150:1. 2015, 58:1, eff. Aug.
1, 2015.

### Section 655:10-a

 **655:10-a One Representative District Only. –** A person whose
domicile qualifies him or her for more than one representative district
shall choose one representative district at any election from which to
be a candidate and, for that election, shall be qualified to be a
candidate for that one district only.

**Source.** 1982, 29:4. 2003, 289:33, eff. Sept. 1, 2003.

Nominations by Primary
----------------------

### Section 655:11

 **655:11 Notice to Town and City Clerks. –** At least 100 days
before the time of holding any primary, the secretary of state shall
prepare and distribute to each town and city clerk in the state a notice
in writing designating the offices for which candidates are to be
nominated and that delegates to the state convention are to be elected.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 655:12

 **655:12 Posting Notice of Primary. –** Each city clerk shall
distribute the notices prepared under RSA 655:11 to the ward clerks in
the city. Each town and ward clerk shall, within 10 days after the
receipt of such notice, cause notice of such primary to be posted in 2
public places in the town or ward. Such notice shall prescribe the hour
the polls are to open and the hour before which they may not close as
provided in RSA 659. It shall state the offices for which candidates are
to be nominated, the delegates to be elected, and any questions to be
voted on, as well as the location of the central polling place and of
any additional polling places. It shall also state the date before which
declarations of candidacy must be filed to place names upon the ballots
to be used at such primary and the officers with whom they must be
filed.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2011, 150:2, eff. Aug. 7, 2011.

### Section 655:13

 **655:13 Forms and Directions. –** It shall be the duty of the
secretary of state to prepare all forms necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter and to furnish the same in reasonable
quantities to the proper officials. It shall also be his duty to furnish
full directions to the clerks of towns and wards when he sends them the
notice provided for in RSA 655:11 as to the posting of notices, holding
of primaries and making return thereof.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 655:14

 **655:14 Filing: General Provisions. –** The name of any person
shall not be printed upon the ballot of any party for a primary unless
he or she is a registered member of that party, he or she shall have met
the age and domicile qualifications for the office he or she seeks at
the time of the general election, he or she meets all the other
qualifications at the time of filing, and he or she shall file with the
appropriate official between the first Wednesday in June and the Friday
of the following week a declaration of candidacy as provided in RSA
655:17.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 308:7. 1985, 121:1; 129:1. 2011, 150:3,
eff. Aug. 7, 2011.

### Section 655:14-a

 **655:14-a Filing by Other Candidates. –** Every candidate for state
or federal office who intends to have his name placed on the ballot for
the state general election by means other than nomination by party
primary shall file a declaration of intent with the secretary of state
as provided in RSA 655:17-a or RSA 655:17-b during the same time period
in which party candidates file a declaration under RSA 655:14.

**Source.** 1981, 531:2. 1985, 121:2. 1991, 387:2, eff. July 2, 1991.

### Section 655:14-b

 **655:14-b Form of Candidate's Name on Ballot. –**
                                             
 I. Every candidate for state or federal office who intends to have
his or her name printed upon the ballot of any party for a primary shall
designate in the declaration of candidacy, or on the primary petitions
and assents to candidacy, the form in which the candidate's name shall
be printed on the ballot. The designated name may include the
candidate's given name or a shortened form of the candidate's given name
or a one-word nickname customarily related to the candidate, and by
which the candidate is commonly recognized. The designated name may also
include an initial for the first or middle name, or both. No candidate
may designate a nickname that implies that the candidate is some other
person, that constitutes a slogan or otherwise associates the candidate
with a cause or issue, that has an offensive or profane meaning, or that
creates a perception of a professional or vocational affiliation, such
as "Doc'' or "Coach.'' No candidate may designate a name or nickname
that includes characters other than the 26-letter English alphabet, a
dash, an apostrophe, a period, or a comma. A candidate shall include his
or her surname in the designation of the form in which the candidate's
name shall be printed on the ballot.
                                             
 II. Every candidate for state or federal office who intends to have
his or her name placed on the ballot for the state general election by
means other than nomination by party primary shall designate in the
declaration of intent the form in which the candidate's name shall be
printed on the ballot. The designated name may include the candidate's
given name or a shortened form of the candidate's given name or a
one-word nickname customarily related to the candidate, and by which the
candidate is commonly recognized. The designated name may also include
an initial for the first or middle name, or both. No candidate may
designate a nickname that implies that the candidate is some other
person, that constitutes a slogan or otherwise associates the candidate
with a cause or issue, that has an offensive or profane meaning, or that
creates a perception of a professional or vocational affiliation, such
as "Doc'' or "Coach.'' No candidate may designate a name or nickname
that includes characters other than the 26-letter English alphabet, a
dash, an apostrophe, a period, or a comma. A candidate shall include his
or her surname in the designation of the form in which the candidate's
name shall be printed on the ballot.
                                             
 III. A candidate who files more than one declaration of candidacy or
declaration of intent shall designate the same form of his or her name
to appear on each such declaration. The same form of a candidate's name
shall also appear on every primary petition and assent to candidacy.
                                             
 IV. If the appropriate official with whom the declaration of
candidacy, declaration of intent, primary petitions, or assents to
candidacy are filed does not accept them and returns them to the
candidate because in the opinion of the official they do not conform to
the provisions of this section, the candidate may appeal to the ballot
law commission as provided in RSA 665:9.
                                             
 V. Legal names shall be placed on the ballot in a manner that the
appearance of the name is consistent with the appearance of other names
on the ballot as determined by the secretary of state. A candidate may
appeal the decision of the secretary of state relative to the appearance
of the candidate's name on the ballot to the ballot law commission
within 5 days of receiving notification under RSA 664:22.

**Source.** 1989, 312:1. 2003, 151:1. 2005, 22:1. 2010, 330:7. 2014,
112:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2014. 2016, 96:1, eff. July 18, 2016.

### Section 655:14-c

 **655:14-c Change in Filing Period. –** Notwithstanding the
provisions of RSA 655:14, if the elective districts for any office in
RSA 662 have not been amended according to the most recently completed
federal decennial census before the commencement of the filing period,
the secretary of state is hereby authorized to change or extend the
filing period as necessary to implement revised elective districts.

**Source.** 2012, 42:1, eff. May 2, 2012.

### Section 655:15

 **655:15 Official With Whom to File. –** For the purposes of this
chapter, the term "appropriate official'' shall be defined as follows:
                                             
 I. For the offices of governor, United States senator,
representative in Congress, councilor, state senator and county office,
the secretary of state.
                                             
 II. For state representative in a representative district containing
one town or ward and for delegate to a state party convention, the clerk
of the town or city in which the officer is to be chosen.
                                             
 III. For state representative in a representative district
containing more than one town or ward, the clerk of the city or town in
which the person who is filing is domiciled; or, if the person is
domiciled in an unincorporated place, the town clerk of the town
designated by the secretary of state for such filing as provided in RSA
668.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 655:15-a

 **655:15-a Acceptance by the Secretary of State of Filings by
Candidates for the Office of United States Senator and United States
Representative 
                                             [Omitted.
                                             ] –**

### Section 655:16

 **655:16 Personal Filing. –** Except for those who must file with a
town or city clerk, any person who files on the last day of the filing
period must do so in person before the secretary of state; provided,
however, that this requirement shall not apply to the filling of
vacancies by party committees. If the person must file with a town or
city clerk and is filing on the last day of the filing period, he or she
shall do so in person.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2009, 214:3. 2013, 14:1, eff. July 7, 2013.

### Section 655:17

 **655:17 Declaration of Candidacy. –** Declarations of candidacy
shall be in the following form and signed by the candidate:
                                             
 I, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, declare that I am
domiciled in Ward 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, in the city (or town or unincorporated
place) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, county of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, state of New Hampshire, and am a
registered voter herein; that I am a registered member of the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ party; that I am a candidate for nomination for the
office of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (or for delegate to the state
convention) to be made at the primary election to be held on the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _; and I hereby request
that my name be printed on the official primary ballot of the party in
which I am registered as a candidate for such nomination or election. I
declare that I am not a candidate for incompatible offices as defined in
RSA 655:10, and that I am not a federal employee which makes me
ineligible to file as a candidate for this office. If I have been
convicted of a felony, I declare that I have completed my sentence as
required in RSA 607-A:2. I further declare that, if nominated as a
candidate for said office or if elected as such delegate, I will not
withdraw; and that, if elected, I will be qualified for and will assume
the duties of said office.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1991, 218:1. 2007, 15:1. 2013, 14:2. 2015,
99:2, eff. Aug. 4, 2015.

### Section 655:17-a

 **655:17-a Declaration of Intent; Other Candidates. –** Declarations
of intent for nonparty or other candidates shall be in the following
form and signed by the candidate:
                                             
 I, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, declare that I am domiciled in Ward

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, in the city (or town or unincorporated place) of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, county of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, state of New
Hampshire, and am a registered voter herein; that I intend to be a
candidate for the office of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ to be chosen at the
general election to be held on the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _; and I intend to file nomination papers by the
deadline established under RSA 655:43. I further declare that, if
qualified as a candidate for said office, I shall not withdraw; and
that, if elected, I shall be qualified for and shall assume the duties
of said office. If I have been convicted of a felony, I declare that I
have completed my sentence as required in RSA 607-A:2.

**Source.** 1981, 531:3. 1994, 381:5. 2015, 99:3, eff. Aug. 4, 2015.

### Section 655:17-b

 **655:17-b Declaration of Intent; Presidential Candidates Who File
Nomination Papers. –**
                                             
 I. Declarations of intent for each candidate for president who seeks
nomination by nomination papers shall be in the form provided in
paragraph II. Declarations of intent required by this section shall be
filed with the secretary of state, signed by the candidate, and
notarized by a notary public.
                                             
 II. I, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, swear under penalties of perjury that I
am qualified to be a candidate for president of the United States
pursuant to article II, section 1, clause 4 of the United States
Constitution, which states, "No person except a natural born citizen, or
a citizen of the United States, at the time of the adoption of this
Constitution, shall be eligible to the office of President; neither
shall any person be eligible to that office who shall not have attained
to the age of thirty-five years, and been fourteen years a resident
within the United States.'' I further declare that I am domiciled in the
city (or town or unincorporated place) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, county
of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, state of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, and am a
qualified voter therein; that I intend to be a candidate for the office
of president to be chosen at the general election to be held on the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _; and I intend to file
nomination papers by the deadline established under RSA 655:43. I
further declare that, if qualified as a candidate for said office, I
shall not withdraw; and that, if elected, I shall be qualified for and
shall assume the duties of said office.

**Source.** 1985, 121:3. 2010, 19:1, eff. July 6, 2010; 50:3, eff. July
17, 2010.

### Section 655:17-c

 **655:17-c Declaration of Intent; Political Organization. –**
                                             
 I. Declarations of intent for political organizations shall be in
the following form and signed by the chairman of the political
organization:
                                             
 I, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, chairman of the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ organization hereby declare that
the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ organization intends to file nomination
papers by the deadline established under RSA 655:43, I.
                                             
 II. At the time of filing the declaration of intent, the chairman of
the political organization shall submit a list of the offices for which
it intends to file candidates and the names of the candidates for those
offices. In addition, each candidate shall file a declaration of
candidacy. The declaration of candidacy shall be in the form provided by
RSA 655:17 with the understanding that, where the form says primary
election, it shall be construed to mean general election. If the
political organization does not obtain enough nomination papers to have
its name placed on the ballot, any declarations of candidacy filed for
that political organization shall be void.

**Source.** 2001, 142:1. 2012, 113:4, eff. May 31, 2012.

### Section 655:18

 **655:18 Forwarding Declarations of Candidacy. –** Each city or town
clerk shall forward each declaration of candidacy filed with him or her
to the secretary of state on the day of filing of the same.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2001, 231:7. 2011, 150:4, eff. Aug. 7, 2011.

### Section 655:19

 **655:19 Filing Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 150:7, I, eff. Aug. 7,
2011.
                                             ]

### Section 655:19-a

 **655:19-a Filing Fee for Presidential Candidates Who File
Nomination Papers. –** At the time of filing declarations of intent,
each candidate for president who seeks nomination by nomination papers
shall pay to the secretary of state a single fee of 
                                             $250 for himself
and his vice-presidential candidate.

**Source.** 1985, 121:5, eff. July 19, 1985.

### Section 655:19-b

 **655:19-b Waiver of Filing Fee and Primary Petitions. –**

                                             [Repealed 2011, 150:7, II, eff. Aug. 7, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 655:19-c

 **655:19-c Administrative Assessment; Primary Petitions; Nomination
Papers. –**
                                             
 I. Candidates for governor, United States senator, representative to
Congress, executive councilor, state senator, county officer, and state
representative who file declarations of candidacy shall pay the
administrative assessment in paragraph I or file primary petitions as
provided in paragraph III. Candidates for governor, United States
senator, representative to Congress, executive councilor, state senator,
county officer, and state representative who file declarations of intent
shall pay the administrative assessment in paragraph I and shall meet
the requirements of RSA 655:40 through 655:45 for nomination by
nomination papers. Neither the administrative assessment which is paid
nor the primary petitions which are filed under this section, nor the
nomination papers which must be submitted under RSA 655:41 and filed
under RSA 655:43, shall be waived or refunded for a candidate for any of
the offices listed in this section who, pursuant to RSA 664:5-a,
voluntarily accepts the expenditure limitation set forth in RSA 664:5-b.
At the time of filing declarations of candidacy or declarations of
intent, the administrative assessment shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) For governor and United States senator, 
                                             $100.
                                             
 (b) For representative to Congress, 
                                             $50.
                                             
 (c) For executive councilor, 
                                             $25.
                                             
 (d) For state senator, 
                                             $10.
                                             
 (e) For county officer, 
                                             $10.
                                             
 (f) For state representative, 
                                             $2.
                                             
 II. The administrative assessment paid to a town or city clerk by
candidates for state representative shall be forwarded to the treasurer
of the town or city and shall be for the use of the town or city. The
administrative assessment paid to the secretary of state shall be
deposited by the secretary of state into the general fund.
                                             
 III. Any person otherwise qualified to run for office who chooses
not to pay the administrative assessment as prescribed in paragraph I
may have his name printed on the primary ballot of any party by filing
with the appropriate official the requisite number of primary petitions
made by members of the party, together with one written assent to
candidacy. The number of primary petitions to be filed for each office
shall be as follows: for governor and United States senator, 200; for
representative in Congress, 100; for executive councilor and county
officer, 50; for state senator, 20; for state representative, 5.
Candidates for delegate to the state convention shall not be required to
submit any primary petitions.

**Source.** 1991, 387:5. 2003, 266:5. 2009, 144:221. 2011, 150:5, eff.
Aug. 7, 2011.

### Section 655:20

 **655:20 Primary Petitions. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 150:7, III, eff.
Aug. 7, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 655:21

 **655:21 Form. –** Primary petitions shall be made in the following
form:
                                             
 State of New Hampshire
                                             
County of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ ss.
                                             
City (Town) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
 I do hereby join in a petition for the printing on the primary
ballot of the name of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ whose domicile is in the city
(town) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (ward, street, and number, if in a city),
in the county of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, for the office of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ to be voted for on Tuesday, the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of September, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (year), and certify
that I am qualified to vote for a candidate for said office, that I am a
registered member of the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ party, and am not at this
time a signer of any other similar petition for any other candidate for
the above office; that my domicile is in the city (town) of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (ward, street, and number, if in a city), in the
county of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _. I certify that to my knowledge the
above-named candidate is not a candidate for incompatible offices as
defined in RSA 655:10, and that he or she is not a federal employee
which makes him or her ineligible to file as a candidate for this
office. I further certify that I believe the above-named person is
especially qualified to fill said office.
                                             
 I hereby swear, under the penalties for voting fraud set forth
below, that the information above is true and correct to the best of my
knowledge and belief.

     ____________________ 
     Print Voter's name
     
     ____________________ 
     Voter's Signature 


                                             
 In accordance with RSA 659:34, the penalty for knowingly or
purposefully providing false information when registering to vote or
voting is a class A misdemeanor with a maximum sentence of imprisonment
not to exceed one year and a fine not to exceed 
                                             $2,000. Fraudulently
registering to vote or voting is subject to a civil penalty not to
exceed 
                                             $5,000.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1991, 218:3. 1998, 356:2. 2003, 289:34, eff.
Sept. 1, 2003.

### Section 655:22

 **655:22 Number of Petitions. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 150:7, IV, eff.
Aug. 7, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 655:22-a

 **655:22-a Order of Petitions. –** Petitions to be filed shall be
ordered alphabetically by municipality in which the voter is domiciled.
Petitions shall be further ordered by surname of voter for any
municipality represented by more than one petition.

**Source.** 1998, 356:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.

### Section 655:23

 **655:23 Conflicting Petitions. –** Each primary petition shall be a
separate paper and shall contain the name of one signer and one
candidate only. No voter shall sign primary petitions for more than one
party, nor shall he sign more than one primary petition for the same
office unless more than one nomination is to be made; in which case, he
may sign as many primary petitions as there are nominations to be made
for the same office. In case a voter has signed 2 or more such
conflicting primary petitions, all such petitions shall be rejected.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 655:24

 **655:24 Oath on Petition "Prima Facie'' Evidence of Party
Membership. –** The oath of a voter upon a primary petition shall be
prima facie evidence that he is a member of the party stated therein.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 655:25

 **655:25 Assent to Candidacy. –** No primary petitions as provided
in RSA 655:21 shall be accepted by the official with whom they are to be
filed unless there is attached thereto an assent to candidacy in the
following form subscribed to by the person who seeks to have his name
printed upon the primary ballot:

State of New Hampshire


                                             
 I, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ in the county of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ do hereby assent to the printing of my name on the
primary ballot as requested in the attached petition. I further declare
that I am a registered member of the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ party.
                                             
(Signed) 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
State of New Hampshire
                                             
County of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
 The above-named, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, personally known to me,
appeared and made oath that the above declaration by him subscribed is
true.

  ------------
  Before me,
  ------------

  ------------------------------------------
  
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
  ------------------------------------------

  ---------------------------------------
  Justice of the Peace or Notary Public
  ---------------------------------------

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 655:26

 **655:26 Examination and Rejection. –** The officer with whom
primary petitions are filed shall immediately upon receipt thereof
examine the same and ascertain whether they conform to the law. If found
not to conform thereto or to be conflicting as provided in RSA 655:23,
he shall then endorse thereon the reason why such petition cannot be
accepted and shall, within 24 hours, return the same to the candidate in
whose behalf it was filed. In such case, the candidate may file
supplementary petitions with the official, but not later than the third
Wednesday in June.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 308:8, eff. Aug. 15, 1981.

### Section 655:27

 **655:27 Forwarding of Petitions and Assents. –** The clerks of
cities and towns shall forward all primary petitions and assents to
candidacy filed with them on the day of filing of the same to the
secretary of state who shall retain them together with all primary
petitions and assents to candidacy filed with him until January 1
following the holding of the primary at which time they may be
destroyed.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 655:28

 **655:28 Affidavit of Qualifications. –** A candidate for nomination
for the office of governor, councilor, state senator or state
representative shall swear an affidavit covering his qualifications as
to age, that the candidate is a registered voter, that his domicile is
in the district he desires to represent, that he is not a candidate for
incompatible offices as defined in RSA 655:10, and that he is not a
federal employee which he understands would make him ineligible to file
his candidacy. The secretary of state shall not print upon the primary
ballot of any party the name of any person unless there is filed with
him such an affidavit at the time his candidacy is filed.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1991, 218:4, eff. Aug. 9, 1991.

### Section 655:29

 **655:29 Qualifications of Candidates. –** The form of the affidavit
provided for in RSA 655:28 shall be the following:
                                             
 I. (For use by candidate for governor): I,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, candidate for the office of
governor, hereby swear (or affirm) that I have been domiciled in the
state of New Hampshire for at least 7 years immediately preceding the
election for which I am a candidate, that I am a registered voter, that
I will be at least 30 years of age on the day of said election, that I
am not a candidate for incompatible offices as defined in RSA 655:10,
that I am not a federal employee, and that I am not a convicted felon
who has not yet received a final discharge from sentencing.
                                             
 II. (For use by candidate for councilor): I,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, candidate for the office of
councilor from the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ district,
hereby swear (or affirm) that I have been domiciled in the state of New
Hampshire for at least 7 years immediately preceding the election for
which I am a candidate, that I am now domiciled in councilor district
no. 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ at the present time, that I will be at least 30
years of age on the day of said election, that I am not a candidate for
incompatible offices as defined in RSA 655:10, that I am not a federal
employee, and that I am not a convicted felon who has not yet received a
final discharge from sentencing.
                                             
 III. (For use by candidate for state senate): I,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, candidate for the office of senator
from the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ district, hereby swear (or affirm) that I
have been domiciled in the state of New Hampshire for at least 7 years
immediately preceding the election for which I am a candidate, that my
domicile is in senatorial district no. 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ at
the present time, that I will be at least 30 years of age on the day of
said election, that I am not a candidate for incompatible offices as
defined in RSA 655:10, that I am not a federal employee, and that I am
not a convicted felon who has not yet received a final discharge from
sentencing.
                                             
 IV. (For use by candidate for state representative): I,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, candidate for the office of
representative from district no. 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ county, hereby swear (or affirm) that I have been
domiciled in the state of New Hampshire for at least 2 years immediately
preceding the election for which I am a candidate, that I am now
domiciled in district no. 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ county, the district I seek to represent, that I
will be at least 18 years of age on the day of said election, that I am
not a candidate for incompatible offices as defined in RSA 655:10, that
I am not a federal employee, and that I am not a convicted felon who has
not yet received a final discharge from sentencing. I further recognize
that, if elected, I will serve as a delegate to the county convention.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1991, 218:5. 2002, 58:1. 2003, 289:35. 2015,
99:4, eff. Aug. 4, 2015.

Removal of Candidates
---------------------

### Section 655:30

 **655:30 Withdrawal. –** When a party candidate has duly filed
according to law for nomination at a primary election, or other
candidate has submitted nomination papers, no withdrawal or declination
of the candidate shall be accepted by the secretary of state subsequent
to the last dates for filing a declaration of candidacy or the filing of
nomination papers except as provided in RSA 655:31 and 655:34.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 531:4. 1985, 121:6, eff. July 19, 1985.

### Section 655:31

 **655:31 Straw Candidates. –** No person shall be a candidate for
nomination at any primary unless his candidacy is bona fide and is filed
for the actual purpose of personally seeking the nomination. Any
candidate for nomination whose name is to be voted upon at primary
election may, no later than the Wednesday after the last day for filing
declarations of candidacy and primary petitions, file a petition with
the ballot law commission alleging that one or more candidates for the
same nomination is not a bona fide candidate. Upon receipt of such a
petition, the commission shall notify in writing all candidates of that
party for the same nomination of the time and place for its hearing.
After such hearing, the ballot law commission shall have the power and
duty to order stricken forthwith from the primary ballot the name or
names of any candidate or candidates for said nomination if the
commission finds that such candidate or candidates is obviously not a
bona fide candidate, obviously having filed not primarily for the
purpose of seeking the nomination but primarily for the purpose of
drawing votes which might otherwise be cast for some other candidate for
the same nomination. The decision of the commission shall be final as to
questions both of law and fact, and no court shall have jurisdiction to
review such decision.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1994, 4:6, eff. May 27, 1994.

Vacancies Among Primary Candidates
----------------------------------

### Section 655:32

 **655:32 No Declaration Filed. –**
                                             
 I. In case no declaration shall be filed by a candidate for any
nomination to be voted for at a primary, the nomination may be made by
the appropriate party committee as provided in this section. The
appropriate party committee shall notify the secretary of state in
writing of a person it designates to fill the vacancy. The person so
designated may accept the nomination by, on or before the Wednesday
following the expiration of the period for filing declarations of
candidacy as provided in RSA 655:14, filing with the secretary of state
a declaration of candidacy as provided in RSA 655:17. Any candidate
accepting a nomination under this paragraph who has already filed for an
incompatible office as defined in RSA 655:10 shall withdraw the prior
filing. Any vacancy created by the withdrawal of a filing may be filled
pursuant to this section. If the candidate is designated for the office
of governor, councilor, state senator, or state representative, he or
she shall also file on or before the Wednesday following the period for
filing declarations of candidacy the appropriate affidavit as provided
in RSA 655:29. Any candidate so designated by a party committee who has
not filed all the forms required by this section within the required
period of time shall not have his or her name printed on the state
primary election ballot for that office.
                                             
 II. For the purposes of this section, the term "appropriate party
committee'' shall be as defined in RSA 655:36.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1985, 129:2. 1986, 86:1. 2008, 377:1, eff.
Sept. 9, 2008.

### Section 655:33

 **655:33 Disqualification of Candidates. –** The disqualification of
a candidate to be voted for at a primary between the date of his filing
and the day of the primary shall be dealt with as in the general
election, as provided in RSA 655:38.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 655:34

 **655:34 Death of Candidate. –** The death of a candidate to be
voted for at a primary between the date of his filing and the day of the
primary shall be dealt with as in the general election, as provided in
RSA 655:39.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Conduct of Primary
------------------

### Section 655:35

 **655:35 Same as General Election. –** The procedures for conducting
the primary shall be the same as those for the general election as
provided in RSA 656, 657, 658 and 659 unless otherwise provided therein.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 655:36

 **655:36 Definition. –** For the purposes of this chapter, the
"appropriate party committee'' shall be defined as:
                                             
 I. The state committee of that party or, if previously authorized by
the same, the executive committee thereof for the offices of United
States senator, United States representative, governor, councilor and
state senator.
                                             
 II. The county committee of that party for county offices and state
representative if from a representative district containing more than
one town, ward, or unincorporated place.
                                             
 III. The town or ward committee of that party for state
representative if the representative district contains only the town or
ward.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 655:37

 **655:37 Vacancy for Office on Party Ticket. –** If, after the
holding of a state primary election, a vacancy exists for any office on
a party ticket, such vacancy may be filled as provided in this section.
The appropriate party committee shall notify the secretary of state in
writing of a person they designate to fill the vacancy. The person so
designated shall, no later than the first Tuesday following the primary
election, file with the secretary of state a declaration of candidacy as
provided in RSA 655:17 with the understanding that, where the form says
primary election, it shall be construed to mean general election. If the
candidate is designated for the office of governor, executive councilor,
state senator, or state representative, he or she shall also file, no
later than the first Tuesday following the primary, the appropriate
affidavit as provided in RSA 655:29. Any candidate who has not filed all
the forms required by this section within the required period of time
shall not have his or her name printed on the state general election
ballot for that office.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 426:14. 1994, 4:7. 2010, 317:10. 2012,
113:5, eff. May 31, 2012.

### Section 655:38

 **655:38 Disqualification of Candidate. –** If a candidate to be
voted for at the general election shall make oath between the date of
the candidate's nomination and the day of the election that he or she
does not qualify for the public office which he or she seeks because of
age, domicile, or incapacitating physical or mental disability acquired
subsequent to the primary, the secretary of state may remove said
person's name from the ballot. Any such oath citing an incapacitating
physical or mental disability shall be accompanied by a letter from a
licensed physician confirming such a condition. A new candidate may be
substituted by the appropriate party committee by submitting the name of
the new candidate to the secretary of state within 3 days of the notice
of disqualification. The name of the substitute candidate shall be
placed on the ballots as provided in RSA 656:21.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2000, 12:1. 2009, 214:4. 2013, 228:1, eff.
Sept. 13, 2013.

### Section 655:39

 **655:39 Death of Candidate. –** If any candidate to be voted for at
the general election shall die between the date of nomination and the
day of election, a new candidate may be substituted by the appropriate
party committee by submitting the name of the new candidate to the
secretary of state within 3 days of the notice of death. The name of the
substitute candidate shall be placed on the ballots as provided in RSA
656:21.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2000, 12:2. 2009, 214:4, eff. Sept. 13, 2009.

Nomination by Nomination Papers
-------------------------------

### Section 655:40

 **655:40 General Provisions. –** As an alternative to nomination by
party primary, a candidate may have his or her name placed on the ballot
for the state general election by submitting the requisite number of
nomination papers. Such papers shall contain the name and domicile of
the candidate, the office for which the candidate is nominated, and the
political organization or principles the candidate represents.
Nomination papers shall be signed by such persons only as are registered
to vote at the state general election. No voter shall sign more than one
nomination paper for each office to be voted for, and no nomination
paper shall contain the names of more candidates than there are offices
to be filled. Each voter shall sign and date an individual nomination
paper. Nomination papers shall be dated in the year of the election.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2001, 74:1; 185:5. 2009, 214:5, eff. Sept. 13,
2009.

### Section 655:40-a

 **655:40-a Nomination of Organization. –** A political organization
may have its name placed on the ballot for the state general election by
submitting the requisite number of nomination papers, in the form
prescribed by the secretary of state, pursuant to RSA 655:42, III. Such
papers shall contain the name of the political organization and shall be
signed by such persons only as are registered to vote at the state
general election. No voter shall sign more than one nomination paper
which allows a political organization access to the state general
election ballot. Nomination papers shall be signed and dated in the year
of the election.

**Source.** 1996, 36:3. 1998, 246:1. 2001, 74:2; 185:5. 2014, 29:1, eff.
July 22, 2014.

### Section 655:40-b

 **655:40-b Filing Names of Candidates. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 113:13,
eff. May 31, 2012.
                                             ]

### Section 655:41

 **655:41 Certification. –**
                                             
 I. Each nomination paper shall be submitted to the supervisors of
the checklist of the town or ward in which the signer is domiciled or is
registered, and a majority of the supervisors shall certify whether or
not the signer is a registered voter in said town or ward. The
supervisors of the checklist shall certify nomination papers under this
section in a timely fashion, so that their certification shall be
complete for each candidate, together with any objections to the
nomination papers submitted, no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Wednesday 2
weeks before the primary. Each nomination paper shall be submitted to
the supervisors of the checklist no later than 5:00 p.m. on the
Wednesday 5 weeks before the primary.
                                             
 II. The city clerk may perform the responsibilities of the
supervisors of the checklist under this section.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1985, 121:7. 1993, 164:2. 1996, 36:4. 2001,
142:2, eff. Aug. 28, 2001.

### Section 655:42

 **655:42 Number. –**
                                             
 I. It shall require the names of 3,000 registered voters, 1,500 from
each United States congressional district in the state, to nominate by
nomination papers a candidate for president, United States senator, or
governor.
                                             
 II. It shall require the names of 1,500 voters registered in the
district to nominate by nomination papers a candidate for United States
representative; 750 to nominate a candidate for councilor or state
senator; and 150 to nominate a candidate for state representative or
county officer.
                                             
 III. It shall require the names of registered voters equaling 3
percent of the total votes cast at the previous state general election
to nominate by nomination papers a political organization.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 412:1. 1996, 36:5. 2001, 142:3; 185:3.
2009, 214:6, eff. Sept. 13, 2009.

### Section 655:43

 **655:43 Filing Deadline. –**
                                             
 I. Nomination papers shall be filed with the secretary of state no
later than 5:00 p.m. on the Wednesday one week before the primary.
Nomination papers to be filed shall be grouped by municipality. No
nomination papers shall be accepted by the secretary of state unless the
candidate shall have met the age and domicile qualifications for the
office he or she seeks at the time of the general election and meets all
the other qualifications at the time of filing; and if a candidate for
the office of governor, executive councilor, state senator, or state
representative, unless the candidate shall file with the nomination
papers an affidavit of qualifications as provided in RSA 655:28 and
655:29; and if a candidate for United States senator or United States
representative, unless the candidate shall meet the qualifications for
office under RSA 655:3 and 655:4.
                                             
 II. No candidate who intends to run for any state or federal office
in the state general election by means of nomination papers shall have
his or her name placed on the ballot unless the candidate files a
declaration of intent, as provided in RSA 655:17-a or 655:17-b, within
the filing deadline required by RSA 655:14-a. Any person who files on
the last day of the filing period must do so in person before the
secretary of state.
                                             
 III. No political organization shall have the names of its
candidates placed on the ballot unless the chairman of the organization
files a declaration of intent, as provided in RSA 655:17-c, within the
filing deadline for candidates established in RSA 655:14-a.
                                             
 IV. No person who filed as a candidate in the state primary election
shall be eligible to have his or her name placed on the ballot for the
state general election by submitting nomination papers as provided in
this subdivision.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 531:5. 1985, 121:8. 1996, 36:6. 2001,
142:4. 2009, 214:7, eff. Sept. 13, 2009.

### Section 655:44

 **655:44 Objections. –** Nomination papers made in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter shall be regarded as valid and shall be
received by the secretary of state unless objection thereto is made in
writing no later than the Monday following the last day for the filing
of such papers.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1994, 4:8, eff. May 27, 1994.

### Section 655:45

 **655:45 Nomination Papers Protected. –** No person shall falsely
make or file or knowingly deface or destroy any nomination paper, or any
part thereof, or sign any nomination paper contrary to the provisions of
law knowing the same, or any part thereof, to be falsely made or
suppress any nomination paper, or any part thereof, which has been duly
filed. Whoever knowingly violates any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person or be guilty of a
felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Withdrawal
----------

### Section 655:46

 **655:46 Withdrawal. –** Where a nomination has been made according
to this chapter, no withdrawal or declination of a candidate shall be
accepted by the secretary of state except as provided in RSA 655:38.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Presidential Nominations
------------------------

### Section 655:47

 **655:47 Declaration of Candidacy. –**
                                             
 I. The names of any persons to be voted upon as candidates for
president at the presidential primary shall be printed on the ballots
upon the filing of declarations of candidacy with the secretary of state
in the following form and signed by the candidate:
                                             
 I, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, swear under penalties of perjury
that I am qualified to be a candidate for president of the United States
pursuant to article II, section 1, clause 4 of the United States
Constitution, which states, "No person except a natural born citizen, or
a citizen of the United States, at the time of the adoption of this
Constitution, shall be eligible to the office of President; neither
shall any person be eligible to that office who shall not have attained
to the age of thirty-five years, and been fourteen years a resident
within the United States.'' I further declare that I am domiciled in

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, in the city (or town or unincorporated place) of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, county of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, state of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, that I am
a registered member of the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ party; that I am a
candidate for nomination for the office of president to be made at the
primary election to be held on the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _; and I hereby request that my name be printed on
the official primary ballot of said 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ party as a
candidate for such nomination.
                                             
 II. Declarations of candidacy shall be filed between the first
Monday in November and the third Friday in November, or during such
other time period as the secretary of state shall announce.
                                             
 III. The decision of the secretary of state as to the regularity of
declarations of candidacy filed under this section shall be final.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 298:1. 1994, 4:9. 1999, 161:3. 2006,
72:1. 2009, 33:1. 2010, 50:1, eff. July 17, 2010.

### Section 655:48

 **655:48 Fees. –**
                                             
 I. No candidate for the office of president shall have his or her
name placed on the ballot for the presidential primary unless the
candidate shall pay to the secretary of state at the time of filing the
declaration of candidacy a fee of 
                                             $1,000.
                                             
 II. Any person otherwise qualified to run for president, who is
unable to pay the filing fee as prescribed in paragraph I by reason of
indigence may, after proving such indigence, have his or her name
printed on the presidential primary ballot of any party by filing with
the secretary of state 10 primary petitions from each county of the
state signed by registered voters of the party, who are domiciled in New
Hampshire, together with one written assent to candidacy pursuant to RSA
655:25. The primary petition shall be in substantially the following
form:

State of New Hampshire


                                             
 I do hereby join in a petition for the printing on the presidential
primary ballot of the name of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ whose domicile is in
the city (town) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (street and number and
ward if in a city) 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, in the county of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, state of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, for the
office of president to be voted for on Tuesday, the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
day of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, 20
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, and certify that I am qualified
to vote for a candidate for said office, that I am a registered member
of the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ party, and am not at this time a signer of
any other similar petition for any other candidate for the above office.

    Voter's Signature ____________________ 
    Print Voter's Name ____________________ 
    Voter's Domicile ____________________ 
     street address 
     ____________________ 
     Town or City (Ward) 

    Voter's Mailing Address ____________________ 
     street 
     ____________________ 
     Town or City Zip Code 


                                             
 I certify that the signer above is a registered member of the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ party and a registered voter in the town/city of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _.
                                             
 Date of Filing 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
 Signature of Town (City) Clerk 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 298:2. 1998, 246:2. 2009, 33:2, eff. July
14, 2009.

### Section 655:49

 **655:49 Notification of Candidate. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 298:3, eff.
Aug. 17, 1983.
                                             ]

### Section 655:50

 **655:50 Selection of Delegates. –** Each presidential candidate who
has filed pursuant to RSA 655:47 shall file with the secretary of state
no later than the third Friday following the last day of the filing
period for the presidential primary the names and addresses in
alphabetical order of the delegates and their alternates, one alternate
per delegate, who shall represent the candidate as his or her delegation
to the national convention.

**Source.** 1979, 367:1; 436:1. 1983, 352:1. 1994, 4:10. 2007, 212:1,
eff. June 25, 2007.

### Section 655:51

 **655:51 Certification of Delegates Selected. –** All delegates and
their alternates selected by each candidate in the presidential primary
shall file with the secretary of state the following certification:
                                             
 I, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, certify that my domicile is in ward

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ in the city (or town) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,
county of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, state of New Hampshire, and am a
qualified voter therein; that I am a registered member of the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ party; that, if selected, I shall serve as delegate
or alternate to the national convention of the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
party next to be held for the nomination of candidates of said party for
president and vice-president of the United States. I further certify
that, if selected as delegate or alternate delegate, I will attend such
convention unless I shall be prevented by sickness or other occurrence
over which I have no control. I pledge myself, if selected as delegate
or alternate delegate to said convention, whenever I shall vote, to vote
for the nomination of (inserting the name of any person) as the
candidate for said party for president so long as he shall be a
candidate before said convention.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 655:52

 **655:52 Vacancies. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1994, 4:34, eff. May 27, 1994.
                                             ]

### Section 655:53

 **655:53 By Nomination Papers. –** Candidates for president may be
nominated by nomination papers as provided in RSA 655:40 through 655:45.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2010, 19:2, eff. July 6, 2010.

### Section 655:54

 **655:54 Nomination of Presidential Electors. –** Presidential
electors shall be nominated by state party conventions as provided in
RSA 667:21.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Nominations for Special State Elections
---------------------------------------

### Section 655:55-80

 **655:55 to 655:80 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 512:5, eff. Aug.
28, 1981.
                                             ]

### Section 655:81

 **655:81 Nomination of U.S. Representative, Executive Councilor,
State Senator and Representative to the General Court. –** The
nomination of candidates for the U.S. House of Representatives or for
the executive council or for the state senate or for representative to
the general court for special elections shall be accomplished through
the holding of special election primaries. The filing of candidates for
such primaries and all other matters connected with such primaries shall
be the same as for primaries before a state general election except
that:
                                             
 I. The special election shall be held on a Tuesday not less than 110
nor more than 124 days following the day that the governor and council
declare that there shall be a special election; provided, however, that
if one or more municipalities where a special election for state
representative will be held have a regularly-scheduled election
occurring between 80 and 180 days following the day that the governor
and council declare that there shall be a special election, the governor
and council shall set the date of the election to coincide with the
regularly-scheduled election if a majority of the towns or wards, as
represented by the city, jointly request that day; if towns or wards, as
represented by the city, request that the special election coincide with
regularly-scheduled elections occurring on different dates, the election
shall be held on a Tuesday not less than 110 nor more than 124 days
following the day that the governor and council declare that there shall
be a special election; and
                                             
 II. The filing period shall start on the Monday following the date
on which the governor and council declare that there shall be a special
election and shall end at 5:00 p.m. on the Friday of that week; and
                                             
 III. Under RSA 655:15, the official with whom state representative
candidates shall file shall be the secretary of state, except that a
state representative candidate may file with the appropriate town or
city clerk under RSA 655:15 or with the secretary of state during the
Monday and Tuesday only of the filing period in towns and cities in
which the clerk's office is open on one or both of those days, in which
case the town or city clerk shall forward each declaration of candidacy
to the secretary of state on the same day on which the declaration is
filed; and
                                             
 IV. The primary shall be held 49 days prior to the special election;
and
                                             
 V. Supplementary primary petitions may be filed as needed no later
than 5:00 p.m. on the last day of the filing period; and
                                             
 VI. The deadline for filing nomination papers shall be no later than
5:00 p.m. on the day set for the primary; and
                                             
 VII. The notice of the primary in RSA 655:11 shall be prepared by
the secretary of state and distributed to the town and city clerks as
soon as practicable after the setting of the date for the special
election; and
                                             
 VIII. Under RSA 655:12, clerks shall post notices of special
election primaries as soon as possible after they are received; and
                                             
 IX. The names of all candidates for a party nomination at a special
election primary shall be printed in alphabetical order on the ballot
according to the alphabetization procedure established in RSA 656:5-a;
and
                                             
 X. The publication of the result provided in RSA 659:89 shall not be
required; and
                                             
 XI. The deadline for any candidate to request a recount pursuant to
RSA 660:7 shall be 5:00 p.m. on the day after the election. A candidate
having requested a recount pursuant to this paragraph may, no later than
5:00 p.m. on the Monday after the primary election, withdraw the request
and receive a refund of any fees paid.

**Source.** 1981, 512:1. 1994, 381:6. 1996, 36:7. 2006, 32:1. 2010,
317:11; 330:2. 2012, 26:1, 2. 2014, 319:11, eff. Aug. 1, 2014.

### Section 655:82

 **655:82 Uncontested Primary. –** In the event that no party has
more than one candidate file and no nonparty or other candidate files a
declaration of intent, the primary election shall not be conducted. In
such a case, the special election shall be held on the day previously
fixed as the day for the holding of the special primary election.

**Source.** 1981, 512:1. 1998, 136:1. 2010, 317:12. 2012, 26:3, eff.
July 1, 2012.
