---
title: CHAPTER 656 PREPARATION OF VOTING MATERIALS
---

TITLE LXIII
                                             
ELECTIONS
============

CHAPTER 656
                                             
PREPARATION OF VOTING MATERIALS
-------------------------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 656:1

 **656:1 General Responsibility. –** Ballots for use in all state
elections shall be prepared and delivered by the secretary of state at
the expense of the state.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 656:1-a

 **656:1-a Paper Ballots. –** For purposes of facilitating the
examination and recounting of votes cast, all elections shall be
conducted using paper ballots in accordance with this title.

**Source.** 2006, 23:1, eff. May 30, 2006.

### Section 656:2

 **656:2 Prohibitions. –** No person engaged in preparing or printing
a state election ballot shall purloin, give away, or allow to be removed
any such ballot. Whoever knowingly violates this provision shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person or shall be guilty of a
felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

State General Election
----------------------

### Section 656:3

 **656:3 Preparation. –** At least 6 days before any state general
election is to be held, the official state general election ballot shall
be sent by the secretary of state to the city and town clerks.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 656:4

 **656:4 Name and Domicile. –** Every state general election ballot
shall contain the name of each candidate who has been nominated in
accordance with the election laws, except as hereinafter provided, and
shall contain no other name except party appellations. The names and
addresses of the presidential electors shall not be printed on the
ballot, but, in lieu thereof, the names of a party's candidates for
president and vice-president shall be printed thereon under the
designation for "President and Vice-President of the United States''.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1986, 126:2. 1989, 312:4. 1996, 36:8, eff. June
23, 1996.

### Section 656:4-a

 **656:4-a Candidates for the Office of United States Senator and
United States Representative 
                                             [Omitted.
                                             ] –**

### Section 656:5

 **656:5 Party Columns. –**
                                             
 I. The names of all candidates nominated in accordance with the
election laws shall be arranged upon the state general election ballot
in successive party columns. Each separate column shall contain the
names of the candidates of one party; except that, if only a part of a
full list of candidates is nominated by a political party, 2 or more
such lists may be arranged whenever practicable in the same column. The
party columns that list the names of candidates for offices that elect
more than one person shall stagger the names of the candidates so that
they do not line up evenly in a horizontal direction. The left-most
column shall begin one line below the column to its right. The secretary
of state shall determine the vertical location of any additional columns
that may appear on the ballot.
                                             
 II. The position of party columns shall be rotated on the ballots
used so that each party column shall appear thereon, to the extent
practicable, an approximately equal number of times in the first, last,
and each intermediate column position across the state, without
requiring more than one unique column order or ballot format for each
town, ward, or unincorporated place. Starting with the general election
for 2012 and following each new apportionment of representative
districts, but before the close of the period during which a person may
accept the nomination of a party committee pursuant to RSA 655:32, the
secretary of state shall develop as many generic column rotation plans
for use in general elections as he or she might reasonably expect to be
needed for different possible numbers of party columns on the general
election ballot. If the number of party columns expected on the general
election ballot changes such that one or more additional generic column
rotation plans are needed, the secretary of state shall, from time to
time, prepare such additional plans as are needed for any general
election.
                                             
 III. The generic column rotation plans shall be based on a
reasonably balanced rotation of party columns within and across all
non-floterial state representative districts, those being the smallest
representative districts to which each voting place is apportioned
pursuant to part I, article 11 of the New Hampshire constitution.
Consideration shall also be given to reasonably minimize any obvious,
substantial, and avoidable imbalances in column rotation within senate
districts. The average deviation from equal rotation for the first party
column position, measured across the state as a whole and based on
population according to the last decennial federal census, shall be as
close to 0 percent as is practicable but in no event greater than 1
percent. Once generic column rotation plans are established the
secretary of state shall publish such plans to the department's
website.
                                             
 IV. Immediately following the close of the period during which a
person may accept the nomination of a party committee pursuant to RSA
655:32, the secretary of state or designee shall publicly select by lot
the actual party columns to be positioned according to the generic
column rotation plan established pursuant to paragraphs II and III. No
party shall be assigned the same generic party column designation for 2
consecutive general elections.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1994, 309:1; 381:7. 1998, 356:3. 1999, 202:1.
2000, 226:1. 2001, 231:9. 2004, 201:1. 2007, 141:1. 2010, 330:10, eff.
Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 656:5-a

 **656:5-a Order of Candidate Names on Ballots. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever there are 2 or more candidates for the same office whose
names will appear together within the same column or list on a ballot,
the position of such names shall be determined according to this
section.
                                             
 II. Immediately following the close of the period during which a
person may accept the nomination of a party committee pursuant to RSA
655:32, the secretary of state or designee shall conduct a public random
selection of a whole number from one to the total number of candidates
for each possible list length where a group of candidates for the same
office may appear in the same list in state or local elections during
the next 2 years. For example, for a possible list of 3 candidates, the
number one, 2, or 3 shall be randomly selected. The seed number for each
possible list length shall remain in effect for the 2 years until the
next random selection of seed numbers.
                                             
 III. To determine the order of names on each ballot, the candidates
for each office in the same list shall be temporarily listed
alphabetically by surnames and the positions in such list shall be
temporarily numbered in ascending order. The candidate whose position in
the initial temporary list equals the seed number selected under
paragraph II for the appropriate list length shall appear first on the
ballot. The order of candidates after the candidate in the first
position shall follow alphabetically by surname with "a'' following
"z.''

**Source.** 2010, 330:3, eff. July 20, 2010.

### Section 656:6

 **656:6 Designation of Office. –** Immediately to the left of the
set of party columns shall be an offices column which shall list the
offices, each preceded by the word "For,'' for which the candidates
whose names are listed in the party columns have been nominated, as in
"For Governor.'' Below each such phrase shall be printed in small but
easily legible letters "Vote for not more than 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (here insert a
number designating how many persons are to be voted for).''

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1986, 126:3. 1994, 309:2; 324:1. 2004, 201:2.
2005, 62:1, eff. July 22, 2005.

### Section 656:7

 **656:7 Order of Offices. –** The order of the officers on the
ballot shall be as follows: president and vice-president of the United
States, governor, United States senator, representative in congress,
executive councilor, state senator, state representative and county
officers.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 426:3. 1986, 126:4. 1991, 117:1. 1994,
309:3, eff. June 8, 1994.

### Section 656:7-a

 **656:7-a Order of Representative Districts. –** In places which are
electing representatives to the general court from more than one
district, the order of officers on the ballot for that place shall list
the candidates for representative to the general court in the numerical
order of the districts from which they are running with the lower
numbered district being listed first.

**Source.** 1982, 29:5, eff. April 20, 1982.

### Section 656:8

 **656:8 Squares. –** Directly at the right of the name of each
candidate there shall be a square, box, oval, or other appropriate
symbol for directing voters where to make the appropriate mark; except
that, in the case of president and vice-president of the United States,
one square, box, oval, or other appropriate symbol shall suffice which
shall be placed opposite the designation "President and Vice-President
of the United States''.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1986, 126:5. 2004, 229:6, eff. Aug. 10, 2004.

### Section 656:9

 **656:9 Party Designation. –** Above each party column shall be
printed in large, plain letters the name of the political party by which
the candidates in such column were nominated.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1994, 309:4; 381:8. 2004, 201:3, eff. Jan. 1,
2005.

### Section 656:10

 **656:10 Straight Ticket Voting. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2007, 1:2, I, eff.
June 15, 2007.
                                             ]

### Section 656:11

 **656:11 Party Emblem. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2007, 1:2, II, eff. June 15,
2007.
                                             ]

### Section 656:12

 **656:12 Write-In Blanks. –** At the end of the list of candidates
for each office, there shall be left as many blank lines as there are
offices to be filled which a voter may use to write in the name of any
person for whom the voter desires to vote.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1994, 309:6. 1996, 88:1, eff. July 14, 1996.

### Section 656:13

 **656:13 Questions on the Ballot. –** Except as provided in RSA
656:14, whenever a question is submitted to voters at a state general
election as provided in RSA 663, the question shall be printed on the
state general election ballot following the offices columns. Printed
after the question there shall be 2 squares or ovals, one with the word
"yes'' beside it and another with the word "no'' beside it.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1994, 309:7; 324:2. 2010, 317:13, eff. July 18,
2010.

### Section 656:14

 **656:14 Constitutional Amendments. –** The question of whether to
approve a proposed constitutional amendment may be submitted to the vote
of the people at a state general election but may be on a special and
separate ballot as provided in RSA 663:2.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 656:15

 **656:15 Paper. –** The state general election ballot shall be
printed on plain white paper in weight not less than that of ordinary
printing paper. A constitutional question submitted on a separate ballot
shall be printed on colored paper.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 656:16

 **656:16 Uniformity; Folding. –** There shall be no impression or
mark to distinguish one general election ballot from another. The names
of all candidates shall be printed in uniform type, and the ballots for
each town and city shall be such that their width and length when folded
shall be uniform.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 656:17

 **656:17 Endorsement. –** On each state general election ballot
shall be printed the words "Official ballot for'' followed by the name
of the town for which the ballot is prepared, the date of the state
general election and a facsimile of the signature of the secretary of
state.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2010, 317:14, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 656:18

 **656:18 Sample Ballots. –** The secretary of state shall cause to
be printed for each town 10 sample ballots. Such ballots shall be
printed on tinted paper without facsimile endorsement but shall
otherwise be identical to the state general election ballot. The sample
ballots shall be forwarded as soon as printed to each town or ward clerk
who shall post one copy in 2 public places in the town or ward within
one day of their receipt and save the remainder to be posted on the day
of the election as provided in RSA 658:26.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 426:15, eff. Aug. 23, 1983.

### Section 656:19

 **656:19 Number. –** At each state general election, the secretary
of state shall furnish each town or city the state general election
ballots in a number which the secretary of state shall deem sufficient
for voting in the state general election.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 426:4. 2007, 96:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 656:20

 **656:20 Delivery of Ballots; Inspection. –**
                                             
 I. The secretary of state shall send the state general election
ballots in a sealed package to the town and city clerks so they shall
receive them no later than Tuesday immediately preceding the day of the
state general election. The package shall be marked on the outside to
clearly designate the town or city for which it is intended and the
number of ballots enclosed. The secretary of state shall keep a record
of the time when and the manner in which the packages were sent to the
clerks and a record of the number of ballots so forwarded. A town or
city clerk shall sign a receipt for the ballots received.
                                             
 II. Each town or city clerk, prior to election day, shall open the
package in which the ballots are enclosed, in the presence of at least
one other legal voter, to verify that the ballots in the package are all
the proper ballots for that town or city. The clerk and one other legal
voter shall then reseal the package with the sealing label provided by
the secretary of state.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 383:1. 1994, 4:11, eff. May 27, 1994.

### Section 656:21

 **656:21 Pasters; Substitute Candidates. –** In the event that a
candidate dies or is disqualified as provided in RSA 655:38 or 655:39,
the name of the substitute candidate shall be printed on the state
general election ballot. If the state general election ballots have
already been prepared and time will permit, the secretary of state may
authorize adhesive slips or pasters with the name of the substitute
candidate thereon to be printed and sent to the town or city clerks
representing the territory wherein the deceased or disqualified
candidate was to be voted for. Such paster shall be affixed to the
ballots as provided in RSA 658:34. The name of the substitute candidate
shall be received by the secretary of state no later than the Tuesday
prior to the election in order for a substitute name to be placed on the
ballot.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1990, 119:10, eff. June 18, 1990.

State Primary Election
----------------------

### Section 656:22

 **656:22 Preparation. –** The official state primary election
ballots shall be prepared by the secretary of state and shall be
delivered by the secretary of state to town and city clerks so that the
ballots shall be received not later than the Tuesday immediately
preceding the state primary election. Each town and city clerk, in the
presence of at least one other legal voter, shall verify the contents of
the ballot package as provided under RSA 656:20 and reseal the ballots
for use on election day.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 383:2. 1994, 4:12. 1996, 88:2, eff. July
14, 1996.

### Section 656:23

 **656:23 General Form. –** The state primary election ballot shall
be as nearly as practicable in the same form as the state general
election ballot.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1994, 309:8, eff. June 8, 1994; 324:3, eff.
June 8, 1994, at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 656:24

 **656:24 Order of Names. –** With the exception of the office of
state representative, whenever there are 2 or more candidates for
nomination to the same office, the names of such candidates shall be
alternated on the state primary election ballots used so that each name
shall appear thereon as nearly as may be an equal number of times at the
top, at the bottom, and in each intermediate place, if any, of the list
in which it belongs. Names of candidates for nomination to the office of
state representative shall be arranged in the alphabetical order of
their surnames according to the alphabetization procedure established in
RSA 656:5-a.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1994, 324:4. 1996, 88:3. 2010, 330:4, eff. July
20, 2010.

### Section 656:25

 **656:25 Color; Party Designation. –** The state primary election
ballots of all parties shall be printed upon colored paper, but no
ballots of any political party shall be printed upon paper of the same
or a closely similar color as the ballots of another political party. On
the back of each ballot shall be printed in prominent type the name of
the party.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 656:26

 **656:26 Number. –** The secretary of state shall furnish to each
town or ward clerk the state primary election ballots of each political
party in a number which the secretary of state shall deem sufficient for
voting in the state primary.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 426:5. 1989, 133:1. 1994, 4:13. 1996,
88:4, eff. July 14, 1996.

### Section 656:27

 **656:27 Number for New Party. –** For the first state primary
election at which a political party has candidates for nomination, the
secretary of state shall print for said party a sufficient number of
state primary election ballots which in the secretary of state's
discretion shall most closely approximate the figures provided in RSA
656:26.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1996, 88:4, eff. July 14, 1996.

### Section 656:28

 **656:28 Sample Ballots. –** The secretary of state shall furnish 10
sample state primary election ballots of each political party printed on
tinted paper to each town or ward clerk and, upon request, a reasonable
number of such sample ballots to each person whose name appears upon the
ballot as a candidate. Each town or ward clerk shall post one sample
ballot of each political party in each of 2 public places in the clerk's
town or ward within one day of receiving such sample ballots and save
the remainder to be posted on the day of the primary as provided in RSA
658:26.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 426:6. 1996, 88:4. 2013, 209:3, eff.
Sept. 8, 2013.

Presidential Primary Election
-----------------------------

### Section 656:29

 **656:29 Preparation. –** The official presidential primary election
ballot for each political party shall be sent by the secretary of state
so as to be received by the city and town clerks no later than the
Tuesday immediately preceding the presidential primary. Each town and
city clerk, in the presence of at least one other legal voter, shall
verify the contents of the ballot package as provided under RSA 656:20
and reseal the ballots for use on election day.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 383:3. 1994, 4:14, eff. May 27, 1994.

### Section 656:30

 **656:30 General Form. –** The presidential primary election ballot
shall be as nearly as practicable in the same form as the state primary
election ballot.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 656:31

 **656:31 Form. –** On the presidential primary election ballot of
each political party, there shall be one column for the office of
president. The column shall be headed "Candidate of the (insert name of
party) Party for President of the United States.'' Underneath this
heading there shall appear the words: "I hereby declare my preference
for candidate for the office of President of the United States to be as
follows.'' Below these words, there shall be printed "(VOTE FOR NOT MORE
THAN ONE)'' followed by the name, town or city, and state of each
candidate with boxes directly to the right. There shall always be one
blank space on the ballot below the candidates' names to allow for
writing in the name of a candidate.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1987, 284:4. 2007, 331:1. 2009, 33:3, eff. July
14, 2009.

### Section 656:32

 **656:32 Other Provisions. –** The provisions of RSA 656:24-656:28
relating to state primary election ballots shall apply to presidential
primary ballots.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2003, 319:143. 2015, 96:1, eff. July 5, 2015.

Absentee Voters
---------------

### Section 656:33

 **656:33 Official Absence, Religious Observance, and Disability
Absentee Ballots. –** Prior to any state election, the secretary of
state shall prepare, in such quantity as the secretary of state may deem
necessary, absence, religious observance, and disability absentee
ballots in the same form as nearly as practicable as the official ballot
to be used at said election. Said absentee ballots shall have the words
"absentee ballot'' printed on them and shall be similarly endorsed and
printed on paper of the same color as that used for official ballots.

**Source.** 1979, 308:1; 436:1. 1981, 392:2. 1996, 88:5, eff. July 14,
1996.

### Section 656:34

 **656:34 Federal Offices Only Absentee Ballot. –** Prior to any
federal election, the secretary of state shall prepare, in such quantity
as the secretary of state may deem necessary, federal offices only
absentee ballots in paper and electronic form, similar in form to the
official ballot to be used at said election. Said ballots shall have the
words "federal offices only absentee ballot'' on them and shall be
endorsed and the paper version shall be printed on paper of the same
color as that used for official ballots. Such ballots shall provide for
voting absentee only for candidates seeking election to federal offices
and for no other candidates.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 392:2. 1996, 88:5. 2010, 317:15, eff.
Sept. 15, 2010.

### Section 656:35

 **656:35 Absentee Ballot for Uniformed Services Voters and Voters
Temporarily Residing Outside the United States. –** Absent uniformed
services voters and voters temporarily residing outside the United
States shall be provided with the absentee ballot prepared under RSA
656:33, provided that the secretary of state shall prepare an electronic
version of such ballot for use by any absent uniformed services voter or
voter temporarily residing outside the United States who requests that
his or her absentee ballot be transmitted to the voter electronically
pursuant to RSA 657:19.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1996, 88:5. 2010, 317:16, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 656:36

 **656:36 Questions on the Ballot. –** Whenever a question to voters
is printed on an official state election ballot, the secretary of state
shall ensure that said question is also on all applicable absentee
ballots.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2010, 317:17, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 656:37

 **656:37 Constitutional Amendments. –** Whenever a question to
voters related to a proposed constitutional amendment is placed on a
separate ballot as provided in RSA 663:3, the question shall also be
placed on a separate absentee ballot to be included with each absentee
ballot other than federal offices only absentee ballots.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 392:3. 2010, 317:18, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 656:38

 **656:38 Forwarding Absentee Ballots. –** The secretary of state
shall forward absentee ballots to the town and city clerks as provided
in RSA 657:10.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Voters in Unincorporated Places
-------------------------------

### Section 656:39

 **656:39 Preparation of Special Ballots. –** The secretary of state
shall prepare special state election ballots for voters of
unincorporated places as provided in RSA 668.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2003, 289:36, eff. Sept. 1, 2003.

Electronic Ballot Counting Devices
----------------------------------

### Section 656:40

 **656:40 Adoption. –** The mayor and aldermen of any city or the
selectmen of any town, subject to the approval of the ballot law
commission, may authorize the use of one or more electronic ballot
counting devices for the counting of ballots in such city or town on a
trial basis for any regular or special election and pay the expense of
such trial from any available funds. The use of such devices so
authorized shall be valid for all purposes. Any town, or the mayor and
aldermen of any city, may vote to lease or purchase electronic ballot
counting devices for the elections held in said town or city. Any town,
or the mayor and aldermen of any city, so acting shall notify the
secretary of state of the action taken in regard to electronic ballot
counting devices; and, after said action, electronic ballot counting
devices shall be used in said town or city in accordance with said vote
or authorization. If a special state election involving a state
representative district occurs in a city or town that has adopted the
provisions of RSA 656:40, the secretary of state may prepare and issue
paper ballots which shall be used.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2009, 70:2. 2014, 65:1, eff. July 26, 2014.

### Section 656:41

 **656:41 Approval by Ballot Law Commission. –** The ballot law
commission shall act as a board to examine devices for the electronic
counting of ballots. The commission shall, whenever requested, examine
any device which may be capable of meeting the requirements for
elections held in this state. The commission shall approve such device
in its discretion, and no device shall be used in any election in this
state unless it reads the voter's choice on a paper ballot and is of a
type so approved by the ballot law commission. Any device that is
altered must be re-approved before it is used in any election in this
state. For the purposes of this section, a device shall be considered
altered if any mechanical or electronic part, hardware, software, or
programming has been altered.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1994, 118:2. 1998, 311:2. 2009, 70:2, eff. Aug.
8, 2009.

### Section 656:42

 **656:42 Rules. –**
                                             
 I. The ballot law commission shall make such rules as may be
necessary to ensure the accuracy of electronic ballot counting devices,
including rules for the testing of electronic ballot counting devices
prior to each election and the submission of testing records to the
secretary of state. The ballot law commission shall make such rules as
may be necessary in order that electronic ballot counting devices may be
used in this state in such a manner that the election laws may be
complied with as far as possible. Said commission shall have the power
and authority in making rules to declare certain laws relative to
distribution and marking of ballots and other requirements inconsistent
with the use of electronic ballot counting devices ineffective in towns
and cities adopting such a method of voting. The presiding officer at
each polling place shall enforce the rules of the ballot law commission
made under the authority of this section.
                                             
 II. Consistent with the rules of the ballot law commission the
secretary of state shall include protocols for the testing of electronic
ballot counting devices in the election manual authorized by RSA 652:22.
Each device shall be tested after installation and prior to each
election.
                                             
 III. Any company, partnership, proprietorship, or other person,
wherever located, which supplies, maintains, or programs electronic
ballot counting devices which are used in elections in New Hampshire is
subject to regulation by this state.
                                             
 IV. Each person described in paragraph III shall designate, in
writing, an agent for service of all process, including, but not limited
to summonses, writs, orders, petitions, and subpoenas, and shall agree
in writing that the attorney general, in conjunction with any election
investigation, may inspect its records, machines or other devices, and
premises.
                                             
 V. Any such person described in paragraph III who fails to properly
program and test electronic ballot counting devices shall be liable to
reimburse the state for the cost of any recount which is necessitated by
such failure.
                                             
 VI. Any person who knowingly violates the testing procedures
established under this section or the rules of the ballot law commission
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a
felony if any other person.
                                             
 VII. Each electronic ballot counting device shall have a memory
card, a metal bar covering the inserted memory card, a canvas cover
closed by 2 zippers, 2 hard shell covers on the front of the device, a
hard shell cover on the rear of the device, and 3 communication ports in
the rear of the device.
                                             
 VIII. (a) Before each election, the vendor for any electronic ballot
counting device shall provide the secretary of state with an exact
electronic record of the data written to each memory card to be used in
the election.
                                             
 (b) The town or city clerk shall preserve each memory card used
at each election until after the recounts for such election are complete
and any and all legal challenges to the outcome of that election are
adjudicated.
                                             
 (c) The town or city clerk shall securely preserve each memory
card used in any election as directed by the secretary of state.
                                             
 (d)(1) To help ensure that the counting device cannot be tampered
with or improperly accessed, the town or city clerk shall employ
electronic ballot counting device seals specified by the secretary of
state and seal the electronic ballot counting device in the following
areas:
                                             
 (A) The connection of the 2 zippers on the closed canvas
cover of the counting device.
                                             
 (B) The metal bar in front of the inserted memory card.
                                             
 (C) Electronic ballot counting device housing:
                                             
 (i) The seam connecting the 2 hard shell covers on the
front of the counting device.
                                             
 (ii) The seam connecting the hard shell cover on the
rear of the counting device.
                                             
 (iii) The 3 communication ports in the rear of the
counting device.
                                             
 (2) The town or city clerk shall update an activity log
supplied by the secretary of state to keep a record each time a counting
device seal is broken and a new one installed, and the reason for which
the seal was broken.
                                             
 (3) No person shall break a counting device seal without the
presence of 2 witnesses. Upon breaking such seal, the person responsible
shall update the activity log, obtain the signatures of each witness,
record the reason for breaking such seal, ensure that it is resealed
with a new seal immediately, and properly record the new seal number in
the activity log.
                                             
 (4) Before the moderator places into service a counting device
on election day, the moderator shall verify all counting device seals
have been maintained intact, and any seals which have been broken have
been promptly resealed and the activity log properly recorded and
signed.
                                             
 (5) If, on election day, the moderator notices that any seal
on the counting device appears tampered with or broken without an
adequate record in the activity log, the moderator shall refrain from
using the counting device in that election, and shall report the
apparent tampering to the attorney general, the secretary of state, the
town or city clerk, and the selectmen.
                                             
 (6) The counting device and the activity log shall be subject
to review by the attorney general or secretary of state at any time.
                                             
 (7) Whenever the town or city clerk receives a memory card
from the vendor, the clerk shall break the memory card seal, insert the
memory card in the electronic ballot counting device, and apply a new
seal. The clerk shall lock any memory card not inserted into an
electronic ballot counting device in a safe and record the names of
individuals that have access to such safe on the activity log.
                                             
 (8) Whenever the town or city clerk removes the memory card
from the electronic ballot counting device, the clerk shall immediately
return it to the memory card programmer and reseal the metal bar in
front of the empty memory card slot.
                                             
 (e)(1) The town or city clerk shall give public notice of the
date and time of a pre-election test of the electronic ballot counting
device and ballots.
                                             
 (2) Upon receipt of the official ballots from the secretary of
state, the town or city clerk shall remove the number of ballots needed
to test the electronic ballot counting device from among the official
ballots and keep them separate and secure from the remaining official
ballots thereafter.
                                             
 (3) The town or city clerk shall mark any ballots used for
testing with the words "TEST.''
                                             
 (4) The town or city clerk shall mark the test ballots in such
a way as to demonstrate a vote for each candidate on at least one test
ballot, as well as votes for less than and more than the number of
candidates that may be voted for an office, write-ins, multiple votes
for a candidate who appears in more than one party column for the same
office on a general election ballot, and ballots on which there are no
votes. The clerk shall mark as many as possible of the combinations of
choices that a voter may indicate on the ballot.
                                             
 (5) The town or city clerk shall run each of the test ballots
through the counting device in the following orientations: Top first
with side one face up, bottom first with side one face up, top first
with side one face down, and bottom first with side one face down.
                                             
 (6) The town or city clerk shall count the votes marked on the
test ballots run though the electronic ballot counting device and
multiply the results by 4 to account for the 4 different orientations,
and check these results against the tally from the electronic ballot
counting device.
                                             
 (7) If the electronic ballot counting device's tally does not
match the count of the town or city clerk, the clerk shall notify the
moderator, who shall order that the electronic ballot counting device
not be used at the election.
                                             
 (8) The pre-election test shall be completed no later than the
Wednesday immediately prior to the election.
                                             
 (9) The town or city clerk shall document the pre-election
test by preserving:
                                             
 (A) The test ballots.
                                             
 (B) The count of votes on the test ballots made by the town
or city clerk.
                                             
 (C) The results from the electronic ballot counting device
that was tested.
                                             
 (10) The clerk shall test all electronic ballot counting
devices and memory cards in the possession of the town or city.
                                             
 (11) Prior to placing the electronic ballot counting device or
any memory card into service in an election, the moderator shall certify
that there is evidence that pre-election testing was conducted on each
electronic ballot counting device and each memory card in the town or
city clerk's possession, and that these devices and cards have passed
the test.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1998, 311:3. 2009, 70:3. 2010, 317:70, eff.
July 18, 2010.

### Section 656:43

 **656:43 Lease or Purchase. –** Any town or city authorizing the use
of an electronic ballot counting device for the counting of ballots
shall pay the cost of lease or purchase. When such a device is purchased
by a town or city, the person from whom such device is purchased shall
give to the secretary of state a suitable bond with sufficient sureties
to keep such device in good working order for not less than 2 years at
the seller's own expense.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2009, 70:4, eff. Aug. 8, 2009.

### Section 656:43-a

 **656:43-a Replacement. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2009, 70:7, eff. Aug. 8,
2009.
                                             ]

### Section 656:44

 **656:44 Listing Names; Voting Machines. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1997, 195:2,
eff. Aug. 17, 1997.
                                             ]
