---
title: 'CHAPTER 658 PRE-ELECTION PROCEDURE'
---

TITLE LXIII
                                             
ELECTIONS
============

CHAPTER 658
                                             
PRE-ELECTION PROCEDURE
----------------------

Warrant
-------

### Section 658:1

 **658:1 General Election. –** At least 14 days before any state
general election, the selectmen shall post a warrant at all the polling
places and at the office of the town or city clerk or at the town hall.
Said warrant shall prescribe the hour the polls are to open and the hour
before which they may not close as provided in RSA 659:4 and RSA
659:4-a. It shall also state all offices and questions which are to be
voted on and the location of the central polling place and of any
additional polling places. If the selectmen neglect to issue a warrant
for the state general election, or if they neglect to cause copies of
such warrant to be posted agreeably to any vote of the town, they shall
for each offense be guilty of a violation and any fines collected shall
be remitted to the town.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1990, 119:12. 1998, 275:1, eff. Aug. 25, 1998.

Inspectors of Election
----------------------

### Section 658:2

 **658:2 Appointment. –** Each state political committee of the 2
political parties which received the largest number of votes cast for
governor at the last previous general election is authorized through
their respective chairmen to appoint between May 15 and July 15 of each
general election year 2 inspectors of election to act at each polling
place. If the number of voters qualified to vote at a polling place
shall exceed 2,000, said political committees may each appoint for such
polling place one additional inspector for each 1,500 qualified voters
or fraction thereof in excess of 2,000. By April 15 of each general
election year, the secretary of state shall provide a list to the
chairman of each such state political committee of the number of
inspectors of election that should be appointed for each town or ward.
Each such state political committee may also appoint such equal number
of additional inspectors as the moderator considers necessary for the
efficient conduct of the election. On or before July 15, the chairmen of
said political committees shall notify the appointees and the town or
ward clerk concerned as to appointments made under this authority. If
any such appointments are not made by said political committees and
proper notification thereof given on or before July 15, then the
appointments shall be made by the selectmen of the town or ward in equal
numbers from said 2 political parties.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 426:7. 2014, 27:1. 2015, 55:1, eff. Aug.
1, 2015.

### Section 658:3

 **658:3 Qualifications. –** The inspectors of election shall be
registered to vote at the polling place where they serve.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 426:8, eff. Aug. 23, 1983.

### Section 658:4

 **658:4 Oath; Term. –** Each inspector of election shall be sworn to
the faithful performance of his or her duties and shall hold office for
2 years from August 1 in the year in which he or she is appointed or
until a successor is appointed and qualified.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2014, 27:2, eff. July 22, 2014.

### Section 658:5

 **658:5 Alternates. –** In making appointments of inspectors of
elections as provided in RSA 658:2, political committees or, in the
absence of such appointments by a political committee, the town and ward
selectmen, in consultation with the moderator, may designate a list of
alternates to the list of appointed inspectors, who shall meet the same
qualifications as inspectors of elections. Alternates shall be called in
numerical order to serve in case one or more of the principal appointees
fails to accept the appointment or is otherwise unavailable to perform
his or her duties.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2015, 55:2, eff. Aug. 1, 2015.

### Section 658:6

 **658:6 Appointment by Court. –** In case any appointment shall not
be made as provided in RSA 658:2 or 658:5 or vacancies are not filled as
provided in RSA 658:22, then, on application of 6 qualified voters of
the town or ward, a justice of the municipal or district court shall
appoint the inspectors.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Assistant Election Officials
----------------------------

### Section 658:7

 **658:7 Appointment. –** For all state elections, the moderator is
authorized to appoint an assistant moderator who shall take the oath of
office in the same manner as the moderator. The moderator may also
appoint such other election officials as he or she deems necessary and
request the town clerk to appoint an assistant town clerk. The assistant
moderator, assistant town clerk, and said other election officials shall
take the oath of office and perform such duties and have such powers as
the moderator may delegate to them, except that the power of making the
declaration of the vote cast shall not be delegated to them. The
supervisors of the checklist are authorized to appoint assistant
supervisors of the checklist who shall be assistant election officials
and have the powers of supervisors for the purpose of registering voters
on election day. The provisions of this section shall apply only to the
appointment of assistant election officials to serve at the central
polling place. Appointment of officers to act at additional polling
places shall be accomplished as provided in RSA 658:14.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1990, 119:13. 2007, 331:3, eff. July 16, 2007.

### Section 658:7-a

 **658:7-a Qualifications. –** An assistant election official
appointed as provided in RSA 658:7 shall be at least 17 years of age as
of the date on which such official initiates performance of the duties
of office.

**Source.** 1997, 195:1. 2015, 5:1, eff. July 4, 2015.

### Section 658:8

 **658:8 Term. –** The term of office of each of the assistant
election officials appointed as provided in RSA 658:7 shall expire at
the termination of the proceedings at the election for which he or she
was appointed.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2007, 331:4, eff. July 16, 2007.

Preparation of Polling Place
----------------------------

### Section 658:9

 **658:9 Arrangement. –**
                                             
 I. The selectmen of each town and ward shall provide for a suitable
place in which to hold state elections and shall see that the same is
warmed, lighted, and furnished with proper supplies and conveniences.
Such supplies and conveniences shall include a ballot box and a
sufficient number of pens with machine-readable ink or soft black lead
pencils and booths with shelves to enable the voter to mark his or her
ballot screened from all observation as to the manner in which he or she
does so. Each place in which state elections are held shall be easily
accessible as provided in RSA 658:9-a to all persons including persons
with disabilities and elderly persons who are otherwise qualified to
vote in the choice of any officer or officers to be elected or upon any
question submitted at such election. The selectmen of each town and ward
shall be charged with the responsibility to see that the flag of the
United States is displayed inside and, weather conditions permitting,
flown outside the polling place on election day. A guardrail shall be so
constructed and placed so that only such persons as are inside such rail
can approach within 6 feet of the ballot box and of the voting booths.
The arrangements shall be such that the voting booths can be reached
only by passing within the guardrail.
                                             
 II. The voting booths shall be in plain view of the election
officers, and both they and the ballot box shall be in plain view of
those outside the guardrail. Each of said booths shall have 3 sides
enclosed, one side in front to open and shut by a door swinging outward
or to be enclosed with a curtain. Each side of the booths shall be not
less than 6 feet high. The booth shall be between 28 and 36 inches wide,
and between 28 and 36 inches deep. The door or curtain shall extend to
within 2 feet of the floor and shall be closed while the voter is
marking his or her ballot. Each booth shall be well lighted and shall
contain a shelf between 12 and 15 inches wide running the width of the
booth at a convenient height for writing.
                                             
 III. In addition to the voting booths described in paragraph II,
each polling place shall have at least one voting booth which is easily
accessible to elderly persons and to persons with physical disabilities.
Each booth shall have 3 sides enclosed, one side in front to open and
shut by a door swinging outward or to be enclosed with a curtain. The
entrance to the booth shall have a clear opening of at least 60 inches
and shall have clearances that comply with the New Hampshire building
code, RSA 155-A, and with standards implementing the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, 28 C.F.R. part 36. Each side of the booths
shall be not less than 6 feet high. The booth shall be at least 60
inches wide at its front, at least 60 inches deep, and at least 60
inches wide along the back wall. The door or curtain shall extend to
within 2 feet of the floor and shall be closed while the voter is
marking his or her ballot. Each booth shall be well lighted and shall
contain a shelf or table at a height of between 30 and 32 inches which
shall be convenient for writing with at least 28 inches of unobstructed
space from the floor to the bottom of the shelf. The secretary of state
shall include a diagram of an accessible booth that satisfies the
requirements of this section in the election laws and procedures manual
issued pursuant to RSA 652:22.
                                             
 IV. In addition to the voting booths described in paragraphs II and
III, each polling place shall have table-top voting screens available
for use in an election. Each voting screen shall consist of 3 panels, to
be positioned on a table or similar surface so that when a voter is
marking a ballot he or she is provided privacy. Each panel of the screen
shall be at least 17 inches high and 15 inches wide.
                                             
 V. (a) Each polling place shall have available for use in an
election at least 2 of the voting booths described in paragraph II, one
of the voting booths described in paragraph III, and 2 of the voting
screens described in paragraph IV.
                                             
 (b) The minimum number of voting booths and screens that shall be
erected for an election shall be as follows:
                                             
 (1) For a general election where votes will be cast for
president, one for every 100 voters on the checklist. This requirement
may be modified with the approval of the secretary of state and the
attorney general for specific polling places, if conditions within the
polling place will not permit the required number of voting booths.
Under no circumstances shall the required number of voting booths drop
below one booth for every 125 voters for a general election where votes
will be cast for president.
                                             
 (2) For a general election where votes will not be cast for
president, one for every 125 voters on the checklist.
                                             
 (3) For all other state elections, including the state primary
election, one for every 150 voters on the checklist.
                                             
 (4) For all city, town, school district, and village district
elections, one for every 200 voters on the checklist.
                                             
 (c) The minimum requirements established in subparagraph (b) may
be satisfied with any combination of booths or screens, provided that no
more than 50 percent of the minimum requirement is satisfied by voting
screens and that the requirements of subparagraph (a) are also met. The
moderator may require that booths or screens exceeding the minimum
number be erected or available at the polling place. This section shall
not be interpreted to mandate the erection of voting screens if there
are sufficient booths to satisfy the requirements of subparagraph V(b).
                                             
 VI. In addition to or in lieu of voting booths described in
paragraphs II, III, and IV, portable booths set up in pods of up to 4
voting stations may be used. Each pod shall meet the requirements of
paragraph II except as described in this paragraph. Each voting station
in the pod shall have 2 sides enclosed that are at least 32 inches long
and meet at a right angle. A table top shall fit into the corner of the
enclosed sides with the edges of the table top that contact the sides
being at least 14 inches deep, and the edge of the table facing the
voter no less than 25 inches in width. The third, open side of the
voting station shall be enclosed by a curtain large enough, and designed
in a way, to give the voter privacy.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1987, 210:1. 1998, 110:1. 2007, 312:1. 2008,
66:1. 2014, 105:1. 2015, 196:1, eff. July 6, 2015.

### Section 658:9-a

 **658:9-a Accessibility. –** Every polling place in which state
elections are held shall be easily accessible to all persons, including
persons with disabilities and elderly persons who are otherwise
qualified to vote in the choice of any officer or officers to be elected
or upon any question submitted at such election. In order for a polling
place to be considered accessible to elderly persons and to persons with
physical disabilities, the following conditions shall be met; provided,
however, that the provisions of paragraph I may be adopted by each
municipality on an optional basis:
                                             
 I. Where parking is provided for the polling place, there shall be
at least one van-accessible parking space that is in compliance with the
New Hampshire building code, RSA 155-A, and with standards implementing
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 28 C.F.R. part 36 and
designated with the international symbol of accessibility. The
van-accessible parking space shall be at least 8 feet wide with an
adjacent and parallel access aisle that is at least 8 feet wide and
located on a level surface as close as possible to the accessible
entrance. There shall be a clear path of travel without curbs or steps
to the accessible entrance of the polling place from the van-accessible
parking.
                                             
 II. The paths of travel to and from the polling place shall comply
with the accessible route requirements of the New Hampshire building
code, RSA 155-A, and with standards implementing the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, 28 C.F.R. part 36.
                                             
 III. If there is a curb in a path of travel to the accessible
entrance to the polling place, there shall be a curb ramp that complies
with the New Hampshire building code, RSA 155-A, and with standards
implementing the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 28 C.F.R. part
36.
                                             
 IV. Where a ramp is provided, the ramp shall comply with the New
Hampshire building code, RSA 155-A, and with standards implementing the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 28 C.F.R. part 36.
                                             
 V. Entrances, doors, and doorways shall comply with the New
Hampshire building code, RSA 155-A, with standards implementing the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 28 C.F.R. part 36, and with the
following requirements:
                                             
 (a) There shall be at least one primary entrance to the polling
place accessible to elderly persons and persons with disabilities and
clearly marked with the international symbol of accessibility.
                                             
 (b) If there are entrances that are not accessible, they shall
have signs posted directing voters to the accessible entrance.
                                             
 VI. The path of travel in the interior of the polling place shall
comply with the accessible route requirements of the New Hampshire
building code, RSA 155-A, and with standards implementing the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990, 28 C.F.R. part 36.

**Source.** 1987, 210:2. 2007, 312:2, eff. Sept. 1, 2008.

Additional Polling Places
-------------------------

### Section 658:10

 **658:10 In Towns. –** If any town shall so vote, the selectmen
shall provide one or more additional polling places in such town and
shall, at least 30 days before the next following general election,
determine the boundaries of the voting district to be served by each
such additional polling place.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 658:11

 **658:11 Central Polling Place. –** The polling place presided over
by the moderator of the town or ward shall be known as the central
polling place and all other polling places shall be known as additional
polling places.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 658:12

 **658:12 Checklist. –** Immediately after the establishment of an
additional polling place and the creation of the voting district to be
served thereby, the supervisors of the checklist shall prepare a
separate checklist of the voters entitled to vote at such a polling
place. Such separate checklist shall thereafter be posted and revised
along with the checklist for the central polling place as provided in
RSA 654. No later than the Tuesday 2 weeks before any state election,
the supervisors shall post at the town or city clerk's office or at the
town hall a true and attested copy of such list and shall, before the
election, file with the town clerk 2 copies of such list.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1990, 119:14. 1994, 4:15, eff. May 27, 1994.

### Section 658:13

 **658:13 Central Polling Place Officers. –** Election officers who
have their domicile in additional polling districts but are on duty at
the central polling place may keep their names on the central polling
place checklist by notifying the supervisors of the checklist before the
polls are opened.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 658:14

 **658:14 Officers. –** The moderator shall appoint an assistant
moderator for each additional polling place and the town clerk shall
appoint an assistant clerk for each additional polling place. Each
assistant moderator and assistant clerk shall have their domicile in the
voting district covered by the additional polling place where they will
serve. The powers and duties of the assistant moderator and the
assistant clerk shall be the same as those of the moderator and the
clerk at the central polling place except as otherwise provided in the
election laws. The inspectors of elections appointed as provided in RSA
658:2 shall be sworn in by the assistant moderator before entering upon
their duties.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 658:15

 **658:15 Equipment. –** The selectmen shall equip each additional
polling place in the same manner required for central polling places.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 658:16

 **658:16 Conduct of Elections. –** Except as otherwise provided, the
conduct of the election at the additional polling place shall be the
same as at the central polling place.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 658:17

 **658:17 Discontinuance. –** A voting district and polling place so
established shall continue to be such for successive state elections
until the town shall vote to discontinue the same, but the selectmen may
from time to time increase or diminish the boundaries thereof in order
to effectively accommodate the voters.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 658:18

 **658:18 Special Provision for Cities. –** Cities may adopt the
provisions of RSA 658:10-658:17. The city council shall create and
discontinue the voting districts in city wards, establish the additional
polling places therein, and select the election officers for the
additional polling place.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Absences Among Election Officers
--------------------------------

### Section 658:19

 **658:19 Moderator Pro Tem. –** If the moderator is absent from any
state election or is unable to perform his duties, a moderator pro
tempore shall be appointed by the moderator.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 658:20

 **658:20 Clerk Pro Tem. –** If a town or ward clerk is absent from
any state election or is unable to perform his duties and there is no
deputy clerk as provided in RSA 41:18, a town or ward clerk pro tempore
shall be appointed by the town clerk.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1990, 119:15, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 658:21

 **658:21 Supervisor Pro Tem. –** If more than one member of the
board of supervisors is absent from any state election or is unable to
perform his duties, a supervisor pro tempore shall be appointed by the
moderator.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 658:21-a

 **658:21-a Selectmen Pro Tem. –** If a selectman is absent from or
unable to perform his or her duties for all or any part of the day at
any state election, the selectman is authorized to appoint a selectman
pro tem to perform his or her duties. If one or more selectmen are
absent or unable to perform their duties and have not appointed
selectmen pro tem, or if a selectman pro tem is absent or unable to
perform his or her duties for all or any part of the day, the moderator
is authorized to appoint selectmen pro tem to perform their duties.

**Source.** 2016, 3:1, eff. Mar. 26, 2016.

### Section 658:22

 **658:22 Inspectors Pro Tem. –** If any of the appointed inspectors
of election shall be absent from any state election or unable to perform
his duties, the selectmen shall appoint some person qualified as
provided in RSA 658:3, using the list of alternate appointees provided
under RSA 658:5 unless no person on said list is available.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 658:23

 **658:23 Duties; Term. –** An election officer pro tempore as
provided for in RSA 658:19 through 658:22 shall have all the powers and
duties of the officer he replaces as provided in the election laws and
shall take the oath of office in like manner. His term of office shall
expire at the termination of the proceedings at the election for which
he was appointed.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 658:24

 **658:24 Disqualification of Certain Persons. –** Any person, other
than a moderator, clerk, selectman, inspector of election, or supervisor
of the checklist, whose name appears on a ballot for an elective
position, other than a position of an election official, shall be
disqualified from performing duties as an election official in that
election. A moderator, clerk, selectman, inspector of election, or
supervisor of the checklist whose name appears on a ballot for an
elective position, other than the position of an election official,
shall be disqualified from the handling of marked ballots and the
counting of votes.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 366:4. 1990, 119:16. 2008, 66:2, eff.
July 20, 2008. 2016, 62:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

Election Day Morning Procedures
-------------------------------

### Section 658:25

 **658:25 Designation of Ballot Clerks. –** Two of the inspectors,
one from each of the 2 political parties, shall be designated by the
moderator at the opening of the polls to act as ballot clerks. They
shall have charge of the ballots and shall furnish them to the voters.
They shall be given a duplicate copy of the checklist by the town or
ward clerk. The other inspectors shall be assigned such duties in the
polling place as the moderator may determine including, but not limited
to, the relief of the ballot clerks and the assistance of voters marking
their ballots as provided in RSA 659:20.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2009, 139:1, eff. Aug. 28, 2009.

### Section 658:26

 **658:26 Sample Ballots to be Posted. –** The town or city clerk
shall cause the sample ballots provided for in RSA 656:18 and 656:28 to
be posted outside the guardrail in the polling place. For the general
election, he shall cause 2 sample ballots to be posted. For the state
and presidential primaries, he shall cause 2 sample ballots of each
party to be posted. At least one sample ballot for the general election
and one sample ballot of each party for each of the primaries shall be
posted no higher than 48" so as to be convenient for those voters in
wheelchairs.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 426:16. 1991, 254:8, eff. Aug. 9, 1991.

### Section 658:27

 **658:27 Absentee List to be Posted. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1998, 246:6,
eff. June 25, 1998.
                                             ]

### Section 658:28

 **658:28 Voter Instruction Cards to be Posted. –** The secretary of
state shall also prepare full instructions for the guidance of voters at
such elections as to obtaining ballots, the manner of marking them, the
method of gaining assistance and obtaining new ballots in place of those
accidentally spoiled. He shall cause the same to be printed on separate
cards to be called voter instruction cards and shall furnish a suitable
number of the same to each town and ward clerk. Each town and ward clerk
shall cause one voter instruction card to be posted in each voting booth
and not less than 3 such cards to be posted immediately outside the
guardrail in the polling place.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 658:29

 **658:29 Statutes Posted. –** The secretary of state shall prepare
and distribute copies of the following RSA sections which the selectmen
shall post or cause to be posted outside the guardrail in the polling
place at all elections: RSA 654:7-a, RSA 654:7-b; RSA 659:13, RSA
659:13-b, RSA 659:27, RSA 659:30, RSA 659:31, RSA 659:32, RSA 659:34,
RSA 659:35, RSA 659:37, RSA 659:38, RSA 659:40, RSA 659:41, RSA 659:103;
RSA 666:4, RSA 666:5, RSA 666:8. In addition, the secretary of state
shall include any other statutes or regulations that are required to be
posted by state or federal law. The secretary of state may also include
statutes or regulations that, in the secretary of state's judgment,
would aid a voter in casting a vote or in contacting the appropriate
official if the voter believes that his or her voting rights are being
violated.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2003, 28:1; 151:2. 2005, 111:1. 2012, 284:5,
eff. June 27, 2012; 284:9, eff. Sept. 1, 2015.

### Section 658:29-a

 **658:29-a Proof of Voter Identity Instructions to be Posted. –**
The secretary of state shall prepare a notice explaining to voters the
photo identification requirement in RSA 659:13, including all the
permissible methods for proving identity, and directing voters to the
department of state's website or to the town or city clerk to obtain the
explanatory document described in RSA 652:26, I, for additional
information. Such notice shall also include the penalties as described
in RSA 659:34. The governing body of each town or ward shall prominently
display this notice for at least 14 days prior to each election held
after the effective date of this section. The poster shall be placed
outside the guardrail at each polling place at all elections.

**Source.** 2012, 284:10, eff. Sept. 1, 2015.

### Section 658:30

 **658:30 Delivery of Ballots to Election Officers. –** The city or
town clerk shall deliver to the election officers before the opening of
the polls on the day of the election the sealed packages of ballots in
their possession together with filament tape or other similar tape with
which to seal the ballots. Any city or town clerk who shall fail to
deliver such material to the election officers as herein provided shall
be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 658:31

 **658:31 Counting Ballots. –** At or prior to the opening of the
polls in each town or ward, the seal of the packages shall be publicly
broken by the town or ward clerk; and the ballots shall be given to the
ballot clerks and the ballots shall be examined and counted by the
election officers in the presence of the clerk, the moderator, and at
least one other legal voter. If the ballots are counted prior to the
opening of the polls, the clerk shall post, in an appropriate place and
prior to election day, notice of the time and place of the counting.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1999, 12:1, eff. June 18, 1999.

### Section 658:32

 **658:32 Moderator's Certificate. –** The secretary of state shall
prepare and distribute to each town or ward clerk 2 copies of the
moderator's certificate. When the ballots are counted, the moderator
shall certify thereon the total number of ballots received. One copy
shall be retained by the moderator for his or her records; the other
shall be certified by the clerk and forwarded to the secretary of state
with the election returns pursuant to RSA 659:75.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2011, 185:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 658:33

 **658:33 Delivery of Ballots to Additional Polling Place. –** Before
the polls are opened at the central polling place on the day of an
election, the town clerk shall seal up the 2 duplicate copies of the
checklist for each additional polling place lodged with the clerk by the
supervisors with a number of blank ballots equal to the number of voters
on such checklist and 50 additional ballots. If the moderator has
authorized the counting of votes and thereby authorized the processing
of absentee ballots at the additional polling place, the absentee
ballots of those persons qualified to vote in that additional polling
place shall be sealed up along with a list of those persons qualified to
vote at that additional polling place to whom absentee ballots have been
sent pursuant to RSA 657:15. This package shall be prepared and sealed
in the presence of the moderator and selectmen and shall be delivered
immediately to the assistant moderator of the additional polling place
by 2 election officers designated by the moderator.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 454:6. 2010, 182:11, eff. June 21, 2010.

### Section 658:34

 **658:34 Pasters. –** If pasters are to be used at the election and
have been delivered to the town or city clerk, the clerk shall deliver
the pasters to the moderator who shall cause them to be pasted in the
proper place on each ballot before it is handed to the voter.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 658:35

 **658:35 Unofficial Ballots. –** If the official ballots have not
been received at the polling place of any town or ward on the morning of
election before the opening of the polls, it shall be the duty of the
town or city clerk to cause unofficial ballots to be prepared, as far as
possible, in form of the official ballots. Upon receipt of such
unofficial ballots from a town or city clerk accompanied by a statement
under oath that the same have been so prepared and that the official
ballots have not been received, the moderator shall cause the unofficial
ballots so substituted to be used in lieu of the official ballots.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 658:36

 **658:36 Inspection of Ballot Box. –** At the opening of the polls,
the ballot box shall be publicly opened and shown to be empty; and the
election officers shall ascertain that fact by a personal examination of
the box.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.
