---
title: 'CHAPTER 660 POST-ELECTION PROCEDURE'
---

TITLE LXIII
                                             
ELECTIONS
============

CHAPTER 660
                                             
POST-ELECTION PROCEDURE
-----------------------

State General Election Recounts
-------------------------------

### Section 660:1

 **660:1 Application. –** Any candidate for whom a vote was cast for
any office at a state general election may apply for a recount, provided
that the difference between the votes cast for the applying candidate
and a candidate declared elected is less than 20 percent of the total
votes cast in the towns which comprise the office to be recounted. The
application shall be made in writing to the secretary of state and shall
be submitted no later than the Friday following the election. Each
candidate requesting a recount shall pay the secretary of state fees as
provided in RSA 660:2.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 510:1. 1983, 175:2. 1994, 4:21. 1995,
69:1. 2008, 377:2, eff. Sept. 9, 2008.

### Section 660:2

 **660:2 Fees. –**
                                             
 I. If the difference between the vote cast for the applying
candidate and a candidate declared elected shall be less than one
percent of the total votes cast in the towns which comprise the office
to be recounted, the following fees shall apply:
                                             
 (a) Candidate for president, United States senator or governor,

                                             $500.
                                             
 (b) Candidate for United States representative, 
                                             $250.
                                             
 (c) Candidate for executive councilor, 
                                             $100.
                                             
 (d) Candidate for state senator or county officer, 
                                             $50.
                                             
 (e) Candidate for state representative, 
                                             $10.
                                             
 II. If the difference between the vote cast for the applying
candidate and a candidate declared elected shall be between one percent
and 2 percent of the total votes cast in the towns which comprise the
office to be recounted, the following fees shall apply:
                                             
 (a) Candidate for president, United States senator or governor,

                                             $1,000.
                                             
 (b) Candidate for United States representative, 
                                             $500.
                                             
 (c) Candidate for executive councilor, 
                                             $200.
                                             
 (d) Candidate for state senator or county officer, 
                                             $100.
                                             
 (e) Candidate for state representative, 
                                             $20.
                                             
 III. If the difference between the vote cast for the applying
candidate and a candidate declared elected shall be between 2 percent
and 3 percent of the total votes cast in the towns which comprise the
office to be recounted, the following fees shall apply:
                                             
 (a) Candidate for president, United States senator or governor,

                                             $2,000.
                                             
 (b) Candidate for United States representative, 
                                             $1,000.
                                             
 (c) Candidate for executive councilor, 
                                             $400.
                                             
 (d) Candidate for state senator or county officer, 
                                             $200.
                                             
 (e) Candidate for state representative, 
                                             $40.
                                             
 IV. If the difference between the vote cast for the applying
candidate and a candidate declared elected shall be greater than 3
percent of the total votes cast in the towns which comprise the office
to be recounted, the candidate shall pay the fees as provided in RSA
660:2, III and shall agree in writing with the secretary of state to pay
any additional costs of the recount. The secretary of state may require
that the applying candidate pay the estimated additional costs of the
recount prior to commencing the recount.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1995, 69:2. 2008, 377:3, eff. Sept. 9, 2008.

### Section 660:3

 **660:3 Number of Recounts. –** Any candidate for whom a vote was
cast for any office at a state general election, provided that the
difference between the votes cast for the applying candidate and a
candidate declared elected is less than 20 percent of the total votes
cast in the towns which comprise the office to be recounted, shall be
entitled to apply for only one recount under this chapter, and the
declaration made by the secretary of state under RSA 660:6 shall be
final, subject to a change in the result following an appeal to the
ballot law commission, as provided in RSA 665:8, II. If more than one
candidate for the same office in the same district applies for a recount
under this chapter, and a recount is completed, such applications shall
not result in a second recount.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 175:3. 2003, 151:3. 2008, 377:4, eff.
Sept. 9, 2008.

### Section 660:4

 **660:4 Time and Notice. –** Upon satisfactory application for a
recount as provided in RSA 660:1, the secretary of state shall begin the
process of recounting the ballots on a date selected by the secretary of
state, which shall be no later than the Wednesday following the deadline
for requesting a recount. A recount shall take place at any suitable
state facility in the city of Concord as may be designated by the
secretary of state. The secretary of state shall give a reasonable
notice thereof to the applicant and to each of the opposing candidates.
The secretary of state shall also prepare and distribute to the
applicant and to each of the opposing candidates the rules and
procedures governing the recount at the same time notice of the time and
place for holding the recount is given to the applicant and to each
opposing candidate.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 175:4. 1995, 69:3. 2012, 113:10, eff. May
31, 2012.

### Section 660:5

 **660:5 Conduct of Recount. –** If directed by the secretary of
state, the state police shall collect all ballots requested from the
town or city clerks having custody of them and shall deliver them to the
public facility designated by the secretary of state. At the time and
place so appointed, the ballots cast for such office shall be counted by
the secretary of state and such assistants as the secretary of state may
require. When counting the ballots, the secretary of state or his or her
assistants shall visually inspect each ballot. No mechanical, optical,
or electronic device shall be used for the counting of ballots. The
candidates, their counsel, and assistants shall have the right to
inspect the ballots and participate in the recount under such suitable
rules as the secretary of state may adopt. If the candidate requesting
the recount cannot attend the recount, the candidate shall designate, in
writing, to the secretary of state the name of an individual who will
attend the recount and who will be authorized to make decisions on the
candidate's behalf. Each candidate or his or her counsel or designee
shall have the right to protest the counting of or failure to count any
ballot. The secretary of state shall thereupon rule on said ballot and
shall attach thereto a memorandum stating such ruling and the name of
the candidate making the protest. If, at any time during the counting of
the ballots, a discrepancy appears in any ballot for any reason, the
secretary of state shall suspend the recount until the discrepancy is
resolved, at which time the secretary of state shall continue the
recount. In no event shall a discrepancy result in a second recount for
the same candidate, as provided in RSA 660:3.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 510:4. 1983, 175:5. 2006, 41:1. 2007,
136:1, eff. Aug. 17, 2007.

### Section 660:6

 **660:6 Declaration; Certificate. –**
                                             
 I. If the recount shall show that some candidate other than the one
declared elected upon the original canvass of votes has the greatest
number of votes cast for the office, the secretary of state shall
declare said candidate to be elected; and, unless the result is changed
upon an appeal taken to the ballot law commission, as provided in RSA
665:8, II, such candidate shall be entitled to a certificate of
election.
                                             
 II. If any person who has applied for a recount is declared elected
by reason of said recount, the secretary of state shall return to the
person within 10 days of the recount all fees paid at the time of
applying.
                                             
 III. If any person who has applied for a recount loses the recount
by a margin of less than one percent of the total votes cast in the
towns which comprise the district for the office recounted, the
secretary of state shall return to the person within 10 days of the
recount any fees that were paid in excess of those required by RSA
660:2, I.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1995, 69:4. 2003, 151:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

State or Presidential Primary Recounts
--------------------------------------

### Section 660:7

 **660:7 Application. –**
                                             
 I. Any person for whom a vote was cast for any nomination of any
party at a state primary may apply for a recount, provided that the
difference between the votes cast for the applying candidate and a
candidate of that party declared nominated is less than 10 votes or less
than 1.5 percent of the total ballots cast in the primary for that party
in the towns which comprise the office to be recounted. The application
shall be made in writing to the secretary of state and shall be
submitted no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Friday after the primary
election. Each candidate requesting a recount shall pay the secretary of
state fees as provided in RSA 660:2. A candidate having requested a
recount pursuant to this paragraph may, no later than 5:00 p.m. on the
Monday after the primary election, withdraw the request and receive a
refund of any fees paid.
                                             
 II. Any person receiving at least 9 percent of the votes cast in any
party's presidential primary may apply for a recount. The application
shall be made in writing to the secretary of state and shall be
submitted no later than the Friday after the primary for a recount of
all ballots cast for such nomination. Each candidate requesting a
recount shall pay the secretary of state fees as provided in RSA 660:2.
A candidate having requested a recount pursuant to this paragraph may,
no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Monday after the primary election,
withdraw the request and receive a refund of any fees paid.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 510:2. 1983, 175:6; 426:20. 1994, 4:22.
1995, 69:5. 2008, 377:5. 2010, 317:58. 2012, 113:11. 2014, 319:12, eff.
Aug. 1, 2014.

### Section 660:8

 **660:8 Notice of Conduct. –** Notice shall be given and the recount
shall be conducted as provided for in RSA 660:4 and 660:5.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 660:9

 **660:9 Declaration of Result, State Primary. –** If the recount
after a state primary election shall show that some candidate other than
the one declared nominated upon the original canvass of votes has the
greatest number of votes cast for the nomination, such candidate shall
be declared nominated and shall be placed upon the official ballot at
the following election unless appeal is taken to the ballot law
commission in accordance with RSA 665:6, I. If the person who applied
for the recount was thereby shown to be the one chosen as the candidate
of the party, the person shall also have any fee paid returned.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 510:3. 2003, 151:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 660:9-a

 **660:9-a Declaration of Result, Presidential Primary. –** If the
recount after a presidential primary election shall show that the
applying candidate qualified under RSA 659:93 for at least one more
delegate than the original count indicated or that such candidate did
qualify for federal election funding, such candidate shall receive such
funding or shall be apportioned delegates to the national party
convention in accordance with RSA 659:93 unless appeal is taken to the
ballot law commission in accordance with RSA 665:6, I. If the person who
applied for the recount was thereby shown to be entitled to federal
funding or at least one more delegate under RSA 659:93, the person shall
also have any fee paid returned.

**Source.** 1981, 510:3. 2003, 151:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

Constitutional Amendments Recount
---------------------------------

### Section 660:10

 **660:10 Application. –** Upon receipt of petitions of 100 voters
made no later than the fourth Friday following the date of the election,
the secretary of state shall recount the ballots cast on any question to
amend the constitution if the proposal was adopted or failed by no more
than one percent of the vote cast. The recount shall take place at any
suitable state facility in the city of Concord as may be designated by
the secretary of state and under such rules of procedure as he shall
determine and at such time as he may appoint.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1994, 4:23, eff. May 27, 1994.

### Section 660:11

 **660:11 Conduct. –** The secretary of state shall request that all
town and city clerks forward ballots containing such proposed amendment
to the secretary of state forthwith, and the clerks shall immediately
forward them. At the time and place so appointed, the ballots shall be
counted by the secretary of state and such assistants as the secretary
of state may require. When counting the ballots, the secretary of state
or his or her assistants shall visually inspect each ballot. No
mechanical, optical, or electronic device shall be used for the counting
of ballots. The ballots shall be open to the inspection of the
petitioners and other interested persons under such suitable rules as
the secretary of state may prescribe. If, after the recount, it shall
appear that the result of the voting on said question is other than that
declared upon the original canvass of votes, the secretary of state
shall declare the result found upon recount which shall be final unless
the result is changed as a result of an appeal taken to the superior
court.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2006, 41:2, eff. June 17, 2006.

County Referendum
-----------------

### Section 660:12

 **660:12 County Referendum. –** The secretary of state shall recount
the ballots cast on any question which may be submitted to the voters of
a county at a state general election under the provisions hereinafter
set forth. Application for such recount shall be by written petition
signed by at least 50 legal voters of said county presented to the
secretary of state no later than the second Friday following the state
general election. The recount shall take place at any suitable state
facility in the city of Concord as may be designated by the secretary of
state at such time as the secretary of state may appoint and under such
rules of procedure as he or she shall determine. When counting the
ballots, the secretary of state or his or her assistants shall visually
inspect each ballot. No mechanical, optical, or electronic device shall
be used for the counting of ballots. The secretary of state shall
publish notice of the time and place of the recount once in a paper of
general circulation throughout the county. The fee for such a recount on
a question voted on throughout a county shall be 
                                             $25 which shall be
paid to the secretary of state by the person submitting the application.
If, after the recount, it shall appear that the result of the voting on
said question is other than that declared upon the original canvass of
votes, the secretary of state shall declare the result found upon
recount which shall be final unless the result is changed as a result of
an appeal taken to the superior court.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1994, 4:24. 2006, 41:3, eff. June 17, 2006.

Local Questions Recounts
------------------------

### Section 660:13

 **660:13 Application. –** Five legal voters of any city or town
which has voted on any question other than constitutional amendments
printed on the ballot at any state election as provided in RSA 663 may,
no later than the second Friday after the election, petition the
secretary of state for a recount of the votes cast upon said questions.
Such application shall be accompanied by a fee of 
                                             $10 for each 1,000
ballots or fraction thereof cast at the election in said town; however,
in no event, shall the fee exceed 
                                             $50. The secretary of state shall fix
a time for recount and shall notify the petitioners and the selectmen,
clerk and moderator of the town or the mayor and clerk of the city of
the time and place so fixed. He shall request the clerk having custody
of the ballots to forward them forthwith to the secretary of state, and
the clerk shall immediately forward them.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1994, 4:25, eff. May 27, 1994.

### Section 660:14

 **660:14 Conduct. –** At the time and place so appointed, the
ballots shall be counted by the secretary of state and such assistants
as the secretary of state may require. The ballots shall be open to the
inspection of the petitioners, the officials of the city or town,
counsel, if any, of the same, and other interested persons under such
suitable rules as the secretary of state shall prescribe. When counting
the ballots, the secretary of state or his or her assistants shall
visually inspect each ballot. No mechanical, optical, or electronic
device shall be used for the counting of ballots.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2006, 41:4, eff. June 17, 2006.

### Section 660:15

 **660:15 Declaration of Result. –** If after the recount it shall
appear that the result of the voting on said question is other than that
announced by the moderator at the election, the secretary of state shall
declare said result which shall be final unless the result is changed
because of an appeal taken within 10 days to the ballot law commission.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

General Provisions for Recounts
-------------------------------

### Section 660:16

 **660:16 Disposal of Ballots. –**
                                             
 I. Upon the conclusion of every recount, the secretary of state
shall replace the unprotested ballots and absentee voter envelopes in a
suitable container for storage. The secretary of state shall retain the
ballots and the absentee envelopes for at least 60 days following the
recount. Upon an order of the ballot law commission, the secretary of
state shall produce the ballots for the inspection of the commission.
Following the commission's inspection, the secretary of state shall
replace the ballots and envelopes, seal them, and certify the contents
and the date when they were examined by the commission. The envelopes
and ballots shall be subject to the order of the body to which such
person claims to be elected or of the officers required by law to
examine the records and to issue certificates of election to such office
or of any court having jurisdiction over them.
                                             
 II. Ballots, including cast, cancelled, and uncast ballots and
successfully challenged absentee ballots still contained in their
envelopes, prepared or preserved in accordance with the election laws
shall be exempt from the provisions of RSA 91-A. This exemption shall
apply to any ballots or absentee voter affidavit envelopes prepared for
or used in any election conducted by the state or any political
subdivision, including federal elections.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 454:9. 2003, 289:61, eff. Sept. 1, 2003.

### Section 660:17

 **660:17 Penalty for Violating Requirements. –** Whosoever shall
knowingly violate any of the provisions of RSA 660:1-660:16 shall be
guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Contested Elections to General Court
------------------------------------

### Section 660:18

 **660:18 Notice. –** Whenever any person intends to contest the
election of a state senator or representative, he shall send to him a
notice in writing of such contest with the reasons therefor, citing the
acts constituting the violation and, if known, the specific sections of
the law or of the constitution being violated. The notice shall be sent
by certified mail and postmarked on or before the December 15
immediately following the election. At the same time the notice is sent
to the senator or representative, a copy thereof shall be sent to the
secretary of state.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 660:19

 **660:19 Petition. –** In a contested election case, neither party
shall be entitled to a hearing before the general court unless their
remonstrance or petition shall be presented to the clerk of the senate
or house before the second Wednesday of the first session thereof.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 660:20

 **660:20 Depositions. –** In any case of contested elections,
depositions may be taken as in civil causes. The magistrate taking
depositions shall prepare captions therefor, shall seal up the
depositions and shall transmit the package to the clerk of the senate or
house, as the case may be, with a notation stating the session at which
and the case in which the depositions are to be used.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 660:21

 **660:21 Evidence. –** But for good cause shown, neither party shall
be entitled to have any evidence considered before the committee
conducting the hearing which is not in readiness to be submitted before
the third Wednesday of the first session of the general court.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 660:22

 **660:22 Compensation. –** The party failing to sustain his right to
a seat shall not be entitled to any compensation for his services or for
any expenses he may have incurred in the contest therefor. However, any
person who has received a certificate of election as representative or
senator and who has taken his seat but who is unsuccessful in retaining
it shall be paid for his mileage for the period during which he has
served.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Resolution of Ties
------------------

### Section 660:23

 **660:23 Primaries; County Offices in a General Election. –** If the
candidates having the highest number of votes for any nomination made at
a state or presidential primary or for election to county office made at
a state general election shall have an equal number, the secretary of
state shall determine the nomination by lot in the presence of the
candidates who are tied if, after notice from him, they elect to be
present.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 660:24

 **660:24 State Offices in State General Elections. –** If the
candidates having the highest number of votes for the office of
governor, councilor, state senator, or state representative shall have
an equal number, the choice shall be made as provided in the state
constitution. Such candidate chosen shall then be declared duly elected.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 660:25

 **660:25 United States Senator or Representative. –** If 2 or more
candidates for United States representative in any district or United
States senator shall receive the largest and equal number of votes in
any state general election so that no choice is made, the governor, with
advice of the council, shall cause precepts to be issued to the
selectmen of the several towns within such district for another
election, requiring them to warn meetings to be held at the time
specified in such precepts for the choice of a representative or
senator. The votes given at any such meeting shall be received, sorted,
counted, declared, recorded and certified, and the returns thereof made
out, signed, certified, sealed, directed and forwarded in the manner
prescribed by RSA 659.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1987, 276:1, eff. July 24, 1987.

### Section 660:26

 **660:26 Canvass. –** The secretary of state, as soon as may be,
shall lay all returns received pursuant to RSA 660:25 before the
governor and council, and the votes shall be examined and counted and
the election of the person having the largest number of votes declared
and certified, and the certificate thereof shall be made out and
transmitted in the manner described in RSA 659:84. If upon second
balloting 2 or more persons shall have the largest and equal number of
votes in any district, so that no choice is made therein, the same
proceedings shall be again had as are provided in RSA 660:25; and so
from time to time, so long as may be necessary, until some one shall
have the largest number of votes.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1987, 276:1, eff. July 24, 1987.

Meetings of Presidential Electors
---------------------------------

### Section 660:27

 **660:27 Time. –** The electors of the president and vice-president
shall meet in the state house in Concord on the day fixed by law and, by
12 o'clock at midday, shall give notice to the governor and council of
the number of electors present who accept the office.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 660:28

 **660:28 Vacancies. –** If the requisite number of electors are not
present or do not accept, or if the requisite number of electors shall
not be chosen by reason of 2 or more persons having an equal number of
votes, the electors present who do accept, in the presence of the
governor and council, shall forthwith choose by ballot the number
needed.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 660:29

 **660:29 Conduct. –** The electors shall give their votes for
president and vice-president of the United States in Concord on said day
and shall proceed according to law.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 660:30

 **660:30 Compensation. –** Each elector shall be paid 
                                             $3; and each
shall receive 
                                             $.10 a mile for their travel to and from Concord. Also,
the electors shall be allowed a reasonable sum, not to exceed 
                                             $25, to
pay for the services of a secretary.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Recount Administrative and Fee Account
--------------------------------------

### Section 660:31

 **660:31 Depositing Fees and Assessments. –** There is established
in the state treasury a separate nonlapsing account to be known as the
recount administrative account. The account shall be used by the
secretary of state for the administration of recounts under RSA 660.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all fees which are paid to
the secretary of state under RSA 660:1 shall be credited to this
account. All fees which are credited to this account shall be
continually appropriated to the secretary of state.

**Source.** 1992, 267:4. 2005, 118:9. 2010, 180:8, eff. June 21, 2010.
