---
title: CHAPTER 661 VACANCIES AMONG PUBLIC OFFICERS ELECTED AT STATE ELECTIONS
---

TITLE LXIII
                                             
ELECTIONS
============

CHAPTER 661
                                             
VACANCIES AMONG PUBLIC OFFICERS ELECTED AT STATE ELECTIONS
----------------------------------------------------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 661:1

 **661:1 Vacancies Generally. –** Any vacancy as defined in RSA
652:12 in a public office voted for at any state election shall be
filled according to the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 661:2

 **661:2 Determination of Vacancy. –** The officer having the
authority to make an appointment or arrange for an election to fill a
vacancy in a public office shall determine whether a vacancy exists in
that office; provided that the secretary of state shall determine
whether a vacancy exists under the election laws among officers-elect.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 661:3

 **661:3 Duties; Privileges. –** A person appointed or elected to
fill a vacancy in a public office shall, during the unexpired term,
perform the same duties as did his predecessor, be subject to the same
requirements as was his predecessor and be entitled to the same
privileges and emoluments as was his predecessor.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 661:4

 **661:4 Qualifications. –** A person appointed or elected to fill a
vacancy in a public office shall meet the qualifications of the office
as provided in RSA 655:3-10 at the time of his election or appointment.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

By Office
---------

### Section 661:5

 **661:5 United States Senator. –** If a vacancy occurs in the office
of United States senator, the governor shall fill the vacancy by
temporary appointment until the next state general election, when a
senator shall be elected for the unexpired term.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 661:6

 **661:6 United States Representative. –** If a vacancy occurs in the
office of United States representative, the governor with advice of
council shall, as soon as practicable, have precepts issued to the
selectmen of the towns and cities in the district where the vacancy
exists directing them to call a special state general election on the
day he designates to fill the vacancy. Such election shall be conducted
as provided in RSA 661:11 and shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired
term.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 661:7

 **661:7 Governor. –** If a vacancy occurs in the office of governor,
the vacancy shall be filled as provided in Part II, Article 49 of the
state constitution.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 661:8

 **661:8 Executive Councilor; State Senator; State Representative.
–**
                                             
 I. If a vacancy occurs in the office of executive councilor or state
senator, it shall be filled as provided in Part II, Articles 34 and 62
of the state constitution.
                                             
 II. If a vacancy occurs in the office of state representative from a
single town or ward district, the vacancy may be filled following the
provisions of RSA 655:81 and RSA 655:82 in the same manner as a state
general election is held. In a multi-town or multi-ward district, a
vacancy in the office of state representative shall be filled following
the provisions of RSA 655:81 and RSA 655:82 by a special election if the
selectmen of any town or the city for any ward in said district so
request of the governor or council.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph II, if a vacancy
occurs in the office of state representative in a district comprised of
a city ward or wards, a request to hold the primary and special
elections on the same dates as the city's biennial primary and regular
elections may be submitted to the governor and council by the governing
body of the city. If so requested, the governor and council shall
declare the vacancy not less than 56 days prior to the date of the
city's primary election. The filing period shall start on the Monday
following the date on which the governor and council declare that there
shall be a special election and shall end at 5:00 p.m. on the Friday of
that week. The provisions of RSA 655:81, III, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, and
XI shall apply to elections held pursuant to this paragraph.
                                             
 IV. Within 21 days after proof of a vacancy or a request that a
vacancy be filled, the governor, in the case of an executive council
vacancy, or the governor and council, in the case of any other vacancy,
shall declare that there shall be a special election which shall be held
as provided in RSA 655:81 and 82 or as provided in RSA 661:8, III.
                                             
 V. No special election shall be held after March 15 of the second
year of the biennium, as determined by RSA 655:81, I.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 512:2. 1998, 136:2. 2001, 231:11. 2005,
25:1. 2006, 32:2. 2010, 317:59. 2012, 26:4. 2014, 319:17, eff. Aug. 1,
2014.

### Section 661:9

 **661:9 County Officers. –**
                                             
 I. If a vacancy for a period of one year or longer occurs in the
office of county sheriff, county attorney, register of deeds, or county
treasurer, the members of the county convention shall fill the vacancy
for the unexpired term by majority vote. If a vacancy for a period of
less than a year occurs in any such office, the members of the county
convention shall, by majority vote of the county convention, vote to
either fill the vacancy or to leave the office vacant.
                                             
 II. (a) If a vacancy occurs in the office of a county commissioner,
the members of the county convention shall fill the vacancy by majority
vote until the next biennial election of county officers. If the term
filled is less than the unexpired term, then notwithstanding any
provisions of RSA 653:1, VI, the commissioner district filled pursuant
to this paragraph shall be added to the next biennial election ballot to
be chosen by the voters of the county for a 2-year term.
                                             
 (b) The provisions of subparagraph (a) shall apply only where the
vacancy occurred no later than 30 days preceding the printing of the
ballots for the primary election.
                                             
 (c) The provisions of RSA 655:32 and RSA 655:37 relating to
nominations by appropriate party committees for vacancies in an office
on a primary or general election ballot, respectively, shall apply to
vacancies to be filled under this paragraph.
                                             
 III. If any person holding a county office enumerated in paragraph I
or II becomes temporarily absent or incapacitated, the county convention
may, upon application of the county attorney or county commissioners,
declare a temporary absence and fill the same for a limited period of
time expressed in the appointment.
                                             
 IV. Any officer of a county, including the register of probate, may
be removed by the county convention for official misconduct. Any removal
under this paragraph shall be initiated by petition of a majority of the
county commissioners, of the county attorney, or of a superior court
judge. No officer of a county may be removed without notice of the
allegations supporting the petition for removal and an opportunity to be
heard by the county convention.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1987, 2:1. 1995, 277:22. 1998, 342:1. 1999,
174:1. 2003, 3:2; 289:42. 2011, 92:1, eff. May 27, 2011. 2016, 178:1,
eff. Aug. 2, 2016.

### Section 661:9-a

 **661:9-a Register of Probate. –** If a vacancy occurs in the office
of register of probate, the probate court shall appoint a commissioner
to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. If any register of probate
becomes temporarily absent or incapacitated, the probate court may, in
its discretion, declare a temporary absence and fill the same for a
limited period of time, but in any event, not to exceed the unexpired
term.

**Source.** 1995, 277:23, eff. Aug. 19, 1995.

### Section 661:10

 **661:10 Delegate to State Party Convention. –** If a vacancy occurs
in the office of delegate to a state party convention, the vacancy shall
not be filled.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Conduct of Special State General Elections to Fill Vacancies
------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 661:11

 **661:11 Nomination and Conduct. –** Where a vacancy as described in
this chapter is to be filled by a special state general election,
nominations shall be made in accordance with RSA 655:81 and 655:82. The
general election shall be conducted in as nearly as practicable the same
manner as are regular state general elections except that the deadline
for requesting a recount pursuant to RSA 660:1 shall be 2 days following
the day of the election.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1981, 512:3, eff. Aug. 28, 1981.
