---
title: CHAPTER 666 PROVISIONS FOR PURITY OF ELECTIONS
---

TITLE LXIII
                                             
ELECTIONS
============

CHAPTER 666
                                             
PROVISIONS FOR PURITY OF ELECTIONS
----------------------------------

General
-------

### Section 666:1

 **666:1 General Penalty. –** Any person guilty of an offense against
any provision of the laws relating to elections for which no penalty is
specified shall be guilty of a violation if a natural person or guilty
of a misdemeanor if any other person.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 666:2

 **666:2 Official Malfeasance. –** A moderator, supervisor of the
checklist, selectman or town clerk shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if
at any election:
                                             
 I. He shall knowingly receive and count any illegal vote; or
                                             
 II. He shall knowingly omit to receive and count any legal vote; or
                                             
 III. He shall knowingly remove any vote from the number of legal
votes cast; or
                                             
 IV. He shall knowingly add any illegal vote to the number of legal
votes cast; or
                                             
 V. He shall receive or count any vote given at such election by
proxy, that is, without the personal delivery of such vote by the person
entitled to give the same; or
                                             
 VI. He shall fraudulently declare the state of the vote in the
election of any officer.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 666:3

 **666:3 Official Misconduct. –** Any public officer upon whom a duty
relating to elections is imposed who shall knowingly fail to perform
such duty or who shall knowingly perform it in such a way as to hinder
the objects thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if no other penalty
is provided by law.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Challengers
-----------

### Section 666:4

 **666:4 Challengers Appointed by Party Committee. –** The state
committee of a political party may appoint a person to act as challenger
of voters at any polling place in the state at a state election. A city
or town committee of such a party may appoint a person to act as such
challenger at any polling place in such city or town at a town election,
business meeting, or city election. A statement signed by the chairman
of the committee appointing him shall be sufficient evidence of the
authority of any such challenger. He may be reasonably compensated for
his services by the political party whose committee appointed him. He
shall be assigned by the moderator or other election officer presiding
at the polling place to such position within the polling place as will
enable him to see and hear each voter as he offers to vote. Nothing
herein contained shall deprive any other person of the right to
challenge a voter as provided by law.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 666:5

 **666:5 Challengers Appointed by Attorney General. –** The attorney
general may appoint a person to act as challenger of voters at any
polling place in the state at a state election. A statement signed by
the attorney general appointing him shall be sufficient evidence of the
authority of any such challenger. He shall be assigned by the moderator
or other election officer presiding at the polling place to such
position or positions within the polling place as will enable him to see
and hear each voter as he offers to vote. Nothing herein contained shall
deprive any other person of the right to challenge a voter as provided
by law.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Illegal Influence
-----------------

### Section 666:6

 **666:6 False Documents, Names or Endorsement. –** Any person who
shall, without authority, sign the name of any other person to any
letter or other document, or falsely represent that any other has
written such letter or document, knowing such representation to be
false, for the purpose of influencing votes, or who shall by false
representation, use, employ or assign the name of any other person, or a
fictitious name on a radio or television broadcast or other means of
communication, to signify endorsement of a political party, candidates
or programs, or, for the purpose of influencing votes, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 666:7

 **666:7 Publication of Forged Document. –** Whoever publishes any
such forged letter or document, knowing the same to be forged, with like
intent, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person and shall
be guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 666:7-a

 **666:7-a Impersonation of Candidates. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who places a telephone call during which the person
falsely represents himself or herself as a candidate for office shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. (a) Whoever violates paragraph I shall be subject to a civil
penalty not to exceed 
                                             $1,000.
                                             
 (b) The court, upon petition of the attorney general, may levy
upon any person who violates the provisions of RSA 666:7-a a civil
penalty in an amount not to exceed 
                                             $1,000 per violation. All penalties
assessed under this paragraph shall be paid to the secretary of state
for deposit into the general fund.
                                             
 (c) The attorney general shall have authority to notify suspected
violators of this section of the state's intention to seek a civil
penalty, to negotiate, and to settle with such suspected violators
without court action, provided any civil penalty paid as settlement
shall be paid to the secretary of state for deposit into the general
fund.

**Source.** 2003, 93:1. 2004, 50:4. 2009, 144:228, eff. July 1, 2009.

Enforcement of the Election Laws
--------------------------------

### Section 666:8

 **666:8 Attorney General. –** The attorney general shall be
responsible for the enforcement of the election laws as provided in RSA
7:6-c.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 666:9-11

 **666:9 to 666:11 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1997, 152:1, eff. Jan. 1,
1998.
                                             ]

### Section 666:12

 **666:12 Testimonial Privilege. –** No witness in any proceeding for
the violation of election laws shall be excused from giving his
testimony upon the ground that such testimony would incriminate him; but
no such testimony shall be used against him at any time or in any
prosecution. Any person who voluntarily discloses the facts to the
proper authorities and procures a conviction in any such proceeding
shall not be prosecuted for his connection with the bribery or attempted
bribery.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 666:13

 **666:13 Impounding Ballots. –** If directed by the attorney general
as part of his enforcement of the election laws, the state police which
he designates shall collect all ballots requested from the town and city
clerks who have custody of the ballots. The state police shall deliver
the ballots to the public facility which is designated by the attorney
general.

**Source.** 1983, 426:21, eff. Aug. 23, 1983.

Administrative Complaint Procedures
-----------------------------------

### Section 666:14

 **666:14 Administrative Complaint Procedures. –** The attorney
general may establish an administrative complaint procedure for the
resolution of complaints of federal voting law violations, pursuant to
the Help America Vote Act of 2002, Public Law 107-252. The attorney
general may adopt administrative rules under RSA 541-A to implement the
complaint resolution procedures. The ballot law commission is hereby
designated as the body providing alternative dispute resolution as
required by section 402(a)(2)(I) of the Help America Vote Act of 2002,
Public Law 107-252.

**Source.** 2003, 266:9, eff. July 15, 2003.
