---
title: CHAPTER 667 CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTIONS AND STATE PARTY CONVENTIONS
---

TITLE LXIII
                                             
ELECTIONS
============

CHAPTER 667
                                             
CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTIONS AND STATE PARTY CONVENTIONS
------------------------------------------------------

General Provisions: Constitutional Conventions
----------------------------------------------

### Section 667:1

 **667:1 Election of Delegates. –** Whenever the qualified voters of
the state under the provisions of the constitution shall determine that
there is necessity for the calling of a convention to revise the
constitution, the general court shall, as is required by the
constitution, call such convention and shall set the day for the
election of delegates and the day and time for the assembly of said
delegates in the capitol at Concord.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 667:2

 **667:2 Number. –** Representation in the convention is on the basis
of representative districts of the state. Representative districts are
entitled to the same number of delegates to the convention as they are
entitled to representatives to the general court.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 667:3

 **667:3 Organization. –** The delegates shall assemble in convention
in Concord on the day and time specified in the call by the general
court and shall proceed to organize by choosing one of their number by
ballot to serve as president. They shall also choose such other officers
as they deem necessary. They shall be the judges of election and returns
of their own members. The delegates may establish rules of proceedings
and proceed to recommend constitutional amendments.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 667:4

 **667:4 Books and Papers Furnished. –** The secretary of state shall
furnish to the convention such books, papers, stationery, and printing
as the convention shall require or order.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 667:5

 **667:5 Compensation. –** Each delegate shall receive 
                                             $3 per day
for his attendance at the convention and the same allowance for mileage
as is provided for members of the general court.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 667:6

 **667:6 Amendments. –** The amendments to the constitution as are
agreed to by such convention shall be submitted so that they can be
voted on by the qualified voters either separately or by groups as the
convention may determine. The convention shall provide for ascertaining
the voters' decisions and the publication of the same by executive
proclamation which shall be the effective date unless otherwise
determined by the convention, and may do any and all other things
necessary to carry out the purposes of the convention.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 469:124, eff. July 1, 1983.

Filing: Constitutional Conventions
----------------------------------

### Section 667:7

 **667:7 Eligibility. –** Any person who by the laws of this state is
a qualified voter in the town, ward, or unincorporated place from which
he may be elected is eligible to be a delegate to the constitutional
convention.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 667:8

 **667:8 Date for Filing. –** A declaration of candidacy shall be
filed with the town or city clerk on or before a date 36 days before the
date of the election. All declarations shall be forwarded by the town or
city clerk to the secretary of state for preparation of the ballots at
least 35 days before the date of the election.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 667:9

 **667:9 Fee. –** At the time of filing a declaration of candidacy,
each candidate shall pay to the town or city clerk a filing fee of 
                                             $2
for the use of the town or city.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 667:10

 **667:10 Declaration of Candidacy. –** On or before the closing date
for filing declarations of candidacy with the town or city clerk as
provided by RSA 667:8, any candidate for delegate shall file with the
town or city clerk a declaration of candidacy in substantially the
following form, which shall be prepared and furnished by the secretary
of state:
                                             
 I, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, candidate for office of
delegate to the constitutional convention from District No.

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ county hereby certify that
I am at least 18 years of age; that I am domiciled in ward

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ of the city of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
(or town or unincorporated place of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _) county of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ state of New Hampshire; that I am a voter
in District No. 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ county.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2003, 289:43, eff. Sept. 1, 2003.

Ballots: Constitutional Conventions
-----------------------------------

### Section 667:11

 **667:11 Printing. –** The secretary of state shall prepare and
cause to be printed ballots for all elections under this chapter. He
shall also prepare all necessary forms for declarations of candidacy and
furnish the same in reasonable quantities to the town clerks. Said
ballots and forms shall be printed and delivered at the expense of the
state.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 667:12

 **667:12 Form. –** Every ballot for the election shall contain the
name and domicile of each candidate who has filed a declaration of
candidacy for delegate. The names of candidates upon the ballot shall be
arranged in perpendicular columns under the title "For Delegate to the
Constitutional Convention.'' Below the title shall be printed in easily
legible type the words "Vote for'' followed by a spelled number
designating the number of persons to be elected to such office. At the
right of the name of each candidate and on the same line, there shall be
a square. Following the names there shall be as many blank lines as
there are persons to be elected. Whenever there are 2 or more
candidates, the names shall be printed upon the ballot in alphabetical
order of their surnames according to the alphabetization procedure
established in RSA 656:5-a.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2010, 330:5, eff. July 20, 2010.

### Section 667:13

 **667:13 Paper. –** The ballots shall be printed on plain paper in
weight not less than that of ordinary printing paper. The secretary of
state shall determine the color of the paper.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 667:14

 **667:14 Uniformity. –** There shall be no impression or mark to
distinguish one ballot from another.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 667:15

 **667:15 Endorsement. –** Upon the back of each ballot shall be
printed the words "Official Ballot for Dist. No. 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, County of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, For Delegate to the Constitutional Convention'',
the date of the election and a facsimile of the signature of the
secretary of state.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 667:16

 **667:16 Other Materials. –** The secretary of state shall prepare
and furnish to the districts the necessary material, including
certificates of election, for a record of the choice of all delegates.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Election Procedure: Constitutional Conventions
----------------------------------------------

### Section 667:17

 **667:17 Plurality; Ties. –** In all elections hereunder, a
plurality shall elect; and, in case of a tie vote, the tie shall be
determined by lot by the secretary of state in the presence of the
candidates who are tied if, upon notice from him, they elect to be
present.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Vacancies: Constitutional Conventions
-------------------------------------

### Section 667:18

 **667:18 Resignation, Death, or Removal. –** A delegate to a
constitutional convention may resign his or her office as such by filing
his or her intention of resignation in writing with the secretary of
state. The resignation shall become effective when approved in writing
by the president of the constitutional convention. Whenever a delegate
to a constitutional convention dies or moves from the district, town, or
ward in which he or she was elected, the clerk of the town or of the
city in which the delegate is a voter, or if the delegate is from an
unincorporated place the clerk of the town in which he or she is
registered, shall notify the secretary of state of the death or removal.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 2003, 289:44, eff. Sept. 1, 2003.

### Section 667:19

 **667:19 Filling Vacancies. –** A vacancy caused by the death,
resignation or removal from a district of a delegate may be filled by a
special election held in the district. The special election may be held
on the same day on which another meeting of the town or ward is held or
at a different time. However, if the special election is held in a
representative district having more than one town, ward or
unincorporated place, the election must be held on the same day
throughout the district. An article for the election of a delegate shall
be inserted in the warrants calling the meeting. All laws relating to
the election of representatives to the general court, so far as they are
applicable, apply to the special election to fill the vacancy in the
office of delegate.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Application of Laws
-------------------

### Section 667:20

 **667:20 Application of Laws. –** The provisions of RSA 659 insofar
as consistent herewith shall apply to elections under the provisions of
this chapter.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

State Party Conventions
-----------------------

### Section 667:21

 **667:21 Date, Call and Purposes. –**
                                             
 I. Not earlier than the third Tuesday of September following any
primary, and not later than the last Tuesday of October, upon the call
of the chairman of the state committee of the party, the nominees of
each party for the offices of governor, United States senator, United
States representative, executive councilors, state senators, county
officers, representatives, state delegates elected, the incumbent United
States senator or senators and the incumbent county commissioners
serving 4-year terms, if any, whose term or terms shall not expire
during the January following that year's general election, shall meet in
state convention for the purpose of adopting the platform of their
party, nominating presidential electors and effecting an organization
for the following 2 years. The names and domiciles of the presidential
electors nominated by such convention shall be forthwith certified to
the secretary of state by the chairman and the clerk of the convention.
Upon receipt of the foregoing certifications, the secretary of state
shall publish in some paper of general circulation the names of the
persons found by him to have been chosen as candidates for presidential
electors by the several parties.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph I, a political party
may, in accordance with the provisions of the party's constitution or
bylaws, provide for an alternative method of determining the date, call
and purpose of the party's state convention and the selection of
delegates and composition of such convention. If a party decides to hold
a convention for the purpose of adopting a platform of the party,
nominating presidential electors, effecting an organization for the
following 2-year period and other party business as the political party
determines, the convention shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements
of the party under this section.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 168:1. 1987, 73:1. 1992, 183:11. 2001,
37:1, eff. Aug. 7, 2001.

### Section 667:22

 **667:22 Party Organization. –** The nominees from a party, state
delegates of each county, the incumbent United States senator or
senators and the incumbent county commissioners serving 4-year terms, if
any, if they have met the requirements of RSA 667:21, shall determine
the membership of a county committee for their party either in said
state convention or in county convention upon call of the chairman of
the state committee. The county committee shall consist of such number
of persons as the nominees from a party, the state delegates of each
county, the incumbent United States senator or senators and the
incumbent county commissioners serving 4-year terms, if any, if they
have met the requirements of RSA 667:21, shall determine to apportion to
each county. The members of several committees thus chosen shall
constitute the state committee of the party. Resignations from the state
committee shall be received by the state committee and the state
committee shall set a place and time and manner for filling such
vacancies. A state committee may choose as its officers persons not
members of the committee and such officers shall be ex officio members
of the committee. The party members in each town, ward or city may
effect such an organization as they may deem expedient for advancing the
purposes of their party.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 168:2. 1987, 73:1. 2001, 37:2, eff. Aug.
7, 2001.

### Section 667:23

 **667:23 Roll. –** Upon application of the chairman of the state
committee of any political party, the secretary of state shall deliver
to him a duly certified roll of the nominees of his party for the
several offices named in RSA 667:21. None but such nominees and state
delegates shall take part in such state convention.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1, eff. July 1, 1979.
