---
title: CHAPTER 668 PROVISIONS FOR UNINCORPORATED PLACES
---

TITLE LXIII
                                             
ELECTIONS
============

CHAPTER 668
                                             
PROVISIONS FOR UNINCORPORATED PLACES
------------------------------------

Organized Places
----------------

### Section 668:1

 **668:1 Organization for Voting. –** The offices for which the
voters of an unincorporated place are entitled to vote shall include:
President and Vice-President of the United States, United States
senator, United States representative, governor, executive councilor,
state senator, state representative, and county offices. The provisions
of the election laws relating to town meetings for the choice of
election officers and the conduct of state elections shall apply to
unincorporated places organized as provided by RSA 53:1.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1994, 381:3. 2003, 289:45, eff. Sept. 1, 2003.

Unincorporated Places
---------------------

### Section 668:2

 **668:2 Designation of Towns. –** If an unincorporated place is not
organized for voting, the secretary of state shall designate a town in
the same representative district where all persons domiciled in the
unincorporated place may register, vote, file for office, and exercise
all other procedures to which they are entitled under the election laws.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1997, 289:2. 2003, 289:46, eff. Sept. 1, 2003.

### Section 668:3

 **668:3 Registration and Checklists. –** The procedure for
registration by persons domiciled in an unincorporated place in a town
designated pursuant to RSA 668:2 shall be the same as provided in RSA
654, except that a separate checklist shall be maintained for the voters
of each unincorporated place. The supervisors shall prepare, revise, and
post said checklist along with the checklist for the town as provided in
RSA 654.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1997, 289:3. 2003, 289:46, eff. Sept. 1, 2003.

### Section 668:4

 **668:4 Offices Voted for. –** The offices for which voters of
unincorporated places are entitled to vote shall include: President and
Vice-President of the United States, United States senator, United
States representative, governor, executive councilor, state senator,
state representative, and county offices. The voters of the
unincorporated places are not entitled to vote for any town or ward
offices or on any questions concerning the towns in which they vote.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1983, 426:13. 1994, 381:4. 1997, 289:4. 2003,
289:46, eff. Sept. 1, 2003.

### Section 668:5

 **668:5 Preparation of Special Ballots. –** For any state election,
the secretary of state shall prepare special ballots for the voters of
all unincorporated places. For purposes of this section, "special
ballots'' shall mean the ballots to be used by all unincorporated places
in the same state representative district as opposed to separate ballots
for each unincorporated place. These special ballots shall have no
location printed on them, but shall have a space where the name of an
unincorporated place shall be entered by the town clerk of the
designated town. The secretary of state shall print only the names of
candidates for offices for which the voters of the unincorporated place
are entitled to vote, as provided in RSA 668:4. It shall be the duty of
the town clerk to make ready in advance a sufficient number of ballots
for each person on the official checklist of the unincorporated places.
If it is necessary because of election day registrations, extra ballots
shall be prepared and the number attested to at the end of the voting.
In all other respects, such special ballots shall be printed and
forwarded to the town clerk in the same manner as the other ballots for
the designated town.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1997, 289:5. 2003, 289:46, eff. Sept. 1, 2003.

### Section 668:6

 **668:6 Establishing Procedures for Voting. –** The secretary of
state shall issue regulations within the scope of the election laws to
establish the procedures for voting and filing for office by voters of
unincorporated places. The regulations so issued shall have the force of
law.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1997, 289:6. 2003, 289:46, eff. Sept. 1, 2003.

### Section 668:7

 **668:7 Return of Votes Cast. –** The town clerk of the town
designated pursuant to RSA 668:2 shall make a return of the votes cast
in his town by the voters of each unincorporated place in the same
manner as provided for in RSA 659.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1987, 276:5. 1997, 289:7. 2003, 289:46, eff.
Sept. 1, 2003.

### Section 668:8

 **668:8 Service to Unincorporated Places. –**
                                             
 I. For services to unincorporated places during any state general
election as directed by this chapter, the town clerk of the town
designated pursuant to RSA 668:2 shall be paid the sum of 
                                             $50. Said
payment shall be a charge against the appropriation for elections for
the office of secretary of state.
                                             
 II. If an unincorporated place exceeds 10 voters, and has not
organized pursuant to RSA 53:1, the county in which the unincorporated
place is located shall pay the town designated pursuant to RSA 668:2 for
costs it incurs in conducting a primary or general election for the
unincorporated place. The county shall assess the cost of conducting an
election under this paragraph to the unincorporated place.

**Source.** 1979, 436:1. 1987, 276:5. 1997, 289:8. 2011, 22:1, eff. June
27, 2011.
