---
title: CHAPTER 669 TOWN ELECTIONS
---

TITLE LXIII
                                             
ELECTIONS
============

CHAPTER 669
                                             
TOWN ELECTIONS
--------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 669:1

 **669:1 Election Dates. –**
                                             
 I. All towns shall hold an election annually for the election of
town officers on the second Tuesday in March, except those towns which
have adopted an alternative date under RSA 40:14 or those towns which
have adopted the provisions of RSA 31:94-a and have, by majority vote at
a previous town meeting, decided to elect officers on the second Tuesday
in May.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph I of this section,
any town which has adopted a municipal charter under the provisions of
RSA 49-B:1-6 may establish the second Tuesday in March, the second
Tuesday in May, or the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November
in odd-numbered years as the date for the election of town officers.
                                             
 III. No town election shall be held in conjunction with the biennial
election.
                                             
 IV. Any local political subdivision which has not adopted RSA 40:13,
the official ballot referendum form of meeting, but whose voting
checklist comprises all or part of the checklist for a school district
which has adopted an April or May election date under RSA 40:14, may, by
vote of the legislative body, vote to coordinate its elections with the
school district's elections and to hold its elections on the same April
or May date as the school district. Such local political subdivision
may, in addition, vote to hold the second session of its annual meeting,
for transacting all business not required to be voted on by official
ballot, within 2 weeks of the election date at a time and date
determined by the governing body. The joint elections shall be held at a
time and place determined by, and shall be supervised by, the election
officials of the local political subdivision, coordinated as set forth
in RSA 671:25 and RSA 671:26, with costs allocated in the same manner as
in previous years or as may be mutually agreed upon by the governing
bodies. A vote under this paragraph may be rescinded by the local
political subdivision in like manner. No vote under this section shall
take effect until the annual election next following such vote.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1987, 299:6. 1988, 223:12. 1991, 370:7. 2000,
16:9, 10, eff. April 30, 2000.

### Section 669:2

 **669:2 Warrant. –** The selectmen shall include as part of the
warrant for the annual town meeting a warrant for each annual town
election which shall prescribe the place, day and hour of the election,
the officers to be elected, and the questions to be submitted to the
voters. In a town which has adopted an official ballot system for the
election of town officers, the warrant shall specify the time the polls
are open and the hour before which the polls may not close. The warrant
shall clearly specify which items shall be voted on by ballot at the
town election and which items shall be considered at the town business
meeting. In a town which has not adopted an official ballot system, it
shall be sufficient for a town meeting warrant to list items to be taken
up at the town business meeting, including the election of town
officers.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:3

 **669:3 Town Meeting Provisions Applicable. –** All appropriate
provisions of RSA 39 relative to warning the town meeting and posting
the town meeting warrant shall apply to the town election.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:4

 **669:4 Qualifications of Voters. –** Any person having his or her
domicile within the town and qualified to vote under RSA 654:1 through
654:6 and who is on the town checklist shall be qualified to vote in
town elections.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 2010, 317:61, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 669:5

 **669:5 Voters and Checklists. –** An updated checklist shall be
used at all town meetings and elections for the same purposes a
checklist is used at a state election and to insure that only qualified
voters participate in town meeting discussions and votes, by voice or
otherwise. The supervisors shall prepare, post, and revise the checklist
for a town meeting or election in the same manner as for a state
election as provided in RSA 654:25-654:31, provided, however, that the
session for correction shall be held on Saturday 6 to 13 days prior to
the election. The supervisors shall also hold one session for correction
of the checklist on the day immediately prior to the first day of the
filing period for candidates for town office, as provided in RSA 669:19
or 669:42, as applicable, from 7:00 p.m. to 7:30 p.m. and at the
discretion of the supervisors for extended hours.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1981, 571:1. 1987, 219:2. 1996, 36:11. 1998,
194:4. 2001, 272:3. 2003, 27:5, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 669:6

 **669:6 Qualification of Officers. –** Unless otherwise provided by
law, no person shall hold an elective town office who does not have his
domicile within the town.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:7

 **669:7 Incompatibility of Offices. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall at the same time hold any 2 of the following
offices: selectman, treasurer, moderator, trustee of trust funds,
collector of taxes, auditor and highway agent. No person shall at the
same time hold any 2 of the following offices: town treasurer,
moderator, trustee of trust funds, selectman and head of the town's
police department on full-time duty. No person shall at the same time
hold the offices of town treasurer and town clerk. No full-time town
employee shall at the same time hold the office of selectman. No
official handling funds of a town shall at the same time hold the office
of auditor. No selectman, moderator, town clerk or inspector of
elections shall at the same time serve as a supervisor of the checklist.
No selectman, town manager, school board member except a cooperative
school board member, full-time town, village district, school district
except a cooperative school district, or other associated agency
employee or village district commissioner shall at the same time serve
as a budget committee member-at-large under RSA 32.
                                             
 I-a. No person shall at the same time file a declaration of
candidacy for any 2 or more elected offices that are incompatible under
paragraph I.
                                             
 II. The provisions of paragraph I refer to the actual holding of
office, and are not to be construed to prevent the transfer between
offices of information obtained in the regular conduct of business nor
to prevent the personnel in any office from furnishing clerical
assistance to any other office.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1981, 282:3. 1983, 132:1. 1993, 123:1. 2000,
308:3. 2014, 99:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2014.

### Section 669:8

 **669:8 Incompatibility of Offices; Town Manager. –** The town
manager, during the time that he or she holds such appointment, may be
manager of a district or precinct located wholly or mainly within the
same town and may be elected or appointed to any municipal office in
such town or included district or precinct that would be subject to his
or her supervision if occupied by another incumbent; but he or she shall
hold no other elected or appointed public office of the town except
justice of the peace or notary public except as provided in RSA 37:9 and
RSA 37:16.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 2004, 55:2, eff. July 2, 2004.

### Section 669:9

 **669:9 Oaths of Town Officers. –** All town officers elected as
provided in this chapter shall take an oath of office as provided in RSA
42 before qualifying for office.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:10

 **669:10 Term of Office. –**
                                             
 I. Except as otherwise provided, the term of office of any officer
elected under this chapter shall begin upon his election and
qualification for office and shall end upon the election and
qualification of his successor.
                                             
 II. No person shall assume a town office until after the time period
for requesting a recount is over. If a recount is requested for a town
office, no person shall assume that office until after the recount is
completed.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1989, 116:1, eff. July 7, 1989.

Ballot Systems
--------------

### Section 669:11

 **669:11 Unofficial Ballot System. –** If a town has not voted at a
previous town meeting to adopt an official ballot system as provided in
RSA 669:12 or 669:13 or if a town has voted to rescind such adoption,
such town shall elect its officers by means of the unofficial ballot
system as provided in RSA 669:54-669:60. A majority vote shall be
required to elect using unofficial ballots.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:12

 **669:12 Partisan Official Ballot System. –** Any town may vote to
adopt the partisan official ballot system for election of town officers
under an article in the warrant for any town meeting, and may rescind
such action in like manner. The partisan ballot system shall not be in
effect until the town election first following the town meeting at which
such system is adopted. A plurality shall elect in towns using the
partisan ballot system.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:13

 **669:13 Non-Partisan Official Ballot System. –** A town may vote to
adopt the non-partisan official ballot system for election of town
officers under an article in the warrant for any town meeting, and may
rescind such action in like manner. In any town in which the partisan
ballot system is in effect, and which has a population, according to
most recent federal census, of 4,500 or more, adoption of the
non-partisan ballot system shall be by ballot. Whenever in such town
there shall appear in the warrant for any town meeting an article
relating to the adoption of the non-partisan ballot system, the town
clerk shall cause to be printed on the official ballot, if any,
otherwise upon a ballot specially prepared for the purpose, the
question, "Shall the non-partisan ballot system for the election of town
officers be adopted by this town?'', which question shall be followed by
boxes in which the voter may indicate "Yes'' or "No''. If the majority
of the qualified voters present and voting at such meeting shall answer
said question in the affirmative, the non-partisan ballot system shall
be deemed to have been adopted by said town. In all towns, the
non-partisan ballot system shall not be in effect until the town
election first following the meeting at which such system is adopted. A
plurality shall elect in towns using the non-partisan ballot system.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Officers Elected
----------------

### Section 669:14

 **669:14 Use of Ballot. –** Town officers who are to be elected by
ballot as provided in RSA 669:15 and all other officers that a town has
voted at some previous meeting to elect by ballot shall be elected by
means of the partisan or non-partisan official ballot systems if such an
official ballot system shall be in effect in a town. In towns where no
such official ballot system is in effect, town officers who are to be
elected by ballot as provided in RSA 669:15 and such other officers as
the town votes to elect by ballot shall be elected by unofficial ballot
at the town business meeting pursuant to RSA 669:54-669:60.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:15

 **669:15 Officers Who Shall be Elected; Election by Ballot. –** The
town officers specified in this section shall be elected at a town
election by the voters of the town, and the election of such officers
shall be by ballot as specified by the RSA section indicated:
                                             
 I. Selectmen (RSA 41:8 through 8-e).
                                             
 II. Moderator (RSA 40:1).
                                             
 III. Supervisors of the checklist (RSA 41:46-a).
                                             
 IV. Town clerk (RSA 41:16 through 16-b).
                                             
 V. Town treasurer (RSA 41:26 through 26-b), unless provision has
been made for appointment pursuant to RSA 41:26-e.
                                             
 VI. Highway agents, unless provision has been made for their
appointment (RSA 231:62 through 62-b).

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1983, 164:3. 2007, 35:7, eff. July 13, 2007.

### Section 669:16

 **669:16 Optional Officers to be Elected by Ballot: Interim
Officers. –** The town offices specified in this section shall, if
established by a town, be filled by an election by ballot. Such an
officer may not be elected by official ballot until the annual town
election first following the establishment of the office. However,
whenever a town votes to establish such an optional office, the town may
also then vote to elect by unofficial ballot at the same meeting an
officer to serve until the next annual town election. If a town then
fails to elect such an officer by unofficial ballot, the office shall be
deemed vacant and shall be filled as provided in RSA 669:61-669:75. This
section applies to the following offices:
                                             
 I. Town clerk-tax collector (RSA 41:45-a).
                                             
 II. Constables or police officers for full-time duty (RSA 41:47).
                                             
 III. Trustees of trust fund (RSA 31:19-23).
                                             
 IV. Sewer commissioners (RSA 149-I:19).
                                             
 V. Tax collector for a 3-year term (RSA 41:2-b).
                                             
 VI. Town auditors (RSA 41:32-a).
                                             
 VI-a. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VII. Library trustees (RSA 202-A:6).

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1991, 269:13. 2011, 4:2, eff. Apr. 25, 2011.

### Section 669:17

 **669:17 Officers Who May be Elected; Election by Ballot or Other
Means. –** The town officers specified in this section may be elected by
ballot or by other means at annual town elections or meetings by the
voters of the town as determined by said voters. Such an officer may not
be elected by official ballot until the annual town election first
following the establishment of the office. When a town votes to
establish such an optional office, the town may also then vote to elect
by any means at the same meeting an officer to serve until the next
annual town election or meeting or may vote to authorize the officer
with the power to fill a vacancy in the office as provided in RSA
669:61-669:75 to appoint someone until the next annual town election or
meeting. This section applies to the following offices:
                                             
 I. Town assessors (RSA 41:2-c through 2-i).
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. Overseers of public welfare (RSA 41:2).
                                             
 IV. Constables or police officers, other than those elected under
RSA 41:47 (RSA 41:2).
                                             
 V. Elected planning board members (RSA 673:2).
                                             
 V-a. Elected zoning board of adjustment members (RSA 673:3).
                                             
 VI. Elected budget committee members (RSA 32:15).
                                             
 VII. Tax collector for a 1-year term (RSA 41:2).
                                             
 VIII. Fire chief or firewards for a term of one or more years, as
determined by the local legislative body under RSA 154:1 through RSA
154:1-c.
                                             
 IX. Any other officers the town may judge necessary for managing its
affairs under RSA 41:2.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1983, 164:4. 1990, 71:2. 1993, 28:9, eff. Jan.
1, 1994; 332:5, eff. Aug. 28, 1993.

### Section 669:17-a

 **669:17-a Filing Candidacy. –** No person shall file as a candidate
for a town officer under the provisions of RSA 669:19 or RSA 669:42 for
more than one seat on the same town or school district board,
commission, committee, or council.

**Source.** 1992, 96:5. 2008, 148:1, eff. Aug. 5, 2008.

### Section 669:17-b

 **669:17-b Discontinuing Optional Elected Office. –** When a town
votes to discontinue any optional elected office, whether or not such
office is to be succeeded by an appointed office, the person holding the
elected office at the time of the vote to discontinue it shall continue
to hold office until the annual town election first following the
discontinuance of the office, at which time the elected office shall
terminate irrespective of the length of that officer's term. This
section shall apply to the elective offices of tax collector, highway
agent, constable or police officer, overseer of public welfare, auditor,
and any other optional town elected office not governed by another
statute.

**Source.** 1994, 112:1, eff. July 10, 1994.

### Section 669:17-c

 **669:17-c Candidate Notification to Selectmen. –** Any person who
has been removed from any position in the state which requires bonding
and who subsequently becomes a candidate for any elected office that
requires bonding under RSA 41:6, shall inform the governing body in that
town of all facts relevant to the removal from office no later than the
last day of the filing period for candidates. The board of selectmen
shall then inform the town's bonding agent who shall determine the
candidate's ability to be bonded under RSA 41:6.

**Source.** 2004, 184:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2005.

### Section 669:17-d

 **669:17-d Discontinuing Office of Elected Treasurer. –** When a
town votes to discontinue an elected treasurer office, the person
holding the elected office of treasurer at the time of the vote to
discontinue it shall continue to hold office until the annual town
election first following the discontinuance of the office, at which time
the elected office of treasurer shall terminate irrespective of the
length of that officer's term.

**Source.** 2007, 35:8, eff. July 13, 2007.

By Official Ballot
------------------

### Section 669:18

 **669:18 Nominations; Partisan Ballot System. –** In a town which
has adopted the partisan ballot system as provided in RSA 669:12,
nominations shall be made by caucus as provided in RSA 669:37-669:53.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:19

 **669:19 Nominations; Nonpartisan Ballot System. –** In a town which
has adopted the nonpartisan ballot system as provided in RSA 669:13, all
candidates shall file a declaration of candidacy with the town clerk
during the filing period for town candidates. All candidates who file on
the last day of the filing period shall do so in person before the town
clerk. The filing period shall begin on the seventh Wednesday and end on
the Friday of the following week before the town election. Such
declaration of candidacy shall be prepared by the town clerk in
substantially the following form: I,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, declare that I am domiciled in
the town of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, and that I am a registered
voter therein; that I am a candidate for the office of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ and hereby request that my name be
printed on the official nonpartisan ballot of the town of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1983, 154:1. 1987, 299:4. 1988, 126:2. 1994,
4:31. 2008, 148:2. 2011, 40:1, eff. July 8, 2011.

### Section 669:20

 **669:20 Nomination Petitions. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008, 148:4, I, eff.
Aug. 5, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 669:21

 **669:21 Number of Petitions. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008, 148:4, II, eff.
Aug. 5, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 669:22

 **669:22 Withdrawal. –** Where a candidate had duly filed according
to RSA 669:19 for a non-partisan town election or where a party nominee
has been certified to the clerk as provided in RSA 669:50 for a partisan
town election, no withdrawal or declination of a candidate shall be
accepted by the town clerk subsequent to the last dates for filing
except if the candidate dies or shall make oath that he does not qualify
for the public office for which he or she is filed because of age,
domicile, or incapacitating physical disability acquired subsequent to
his or her filing. If a candidate dies or withdraws as provided in this
section, the town clerk shall not print the name of that candidate on
the ballot. If the ballots have been printed, the clerk shall remove
that name using pasters.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1987, 276:6. 2008, 148:3, eff. Aug. 5, 2008.

### Section 669:23

 **669:23 Preparation of Voting Materials. –** The town clerk shall
prepare the official ballots for the town and shall arrange the names of
candidates upon said ballots in parallel columns. Immediately above the
names of each block of candidates shall be printed the title of the
office for which they are candidates, such as "For Selectman.'' Below
the title of each office shall be printed in small but easily legible
type the words "Vote for not more than (here insert a number designating
how many persons are to be voted for).'' Directly to the right of the
name of each candidate there shall be a square. Whenever there are 2 or
more candidates for the same office the names shall be printed upon the
ballot in the alphabetical order of their surnames according to the
alphabetization procedure established in RSA 656:5-a. Following the
names printed on the ballot under the title of each office, there shall
be as many blank lines as there are persons to be elected to that
office.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 2001, 80:1. 2010, 330:6, eff. July 20, 2010.

### Section 669:24

 **669:24 Paper, Uniformity, Endorsement. –** The ballots shall be
printed on plain white paper, in weight not less than that of ordinary
printing paper; provided, however, that if more than one ballot is used
during any town election, each ballot shall be of a different color than
any other ballot used at the election. There shall be no impression or
mark to distinguish one ballot from another. The names of all candidates
shall be printed in uniform type and the ballots shall be folded so that
their width and length when folded shall be uniform. On the back, or at
the top of the face, of each ballot shall be printed the words "Official
Ballot for the Town of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,'' the date of the election,
and a facsimile of the signature of the town clerk who prepared the
ballot. For ballots transmitted electronically, the words "Official
Ballot for the Town of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _'' shall be located at the
top of the face of the ballot.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1991, 370:2. 2010, 317:62, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 669:25

 **669:25 Conduct. –** In towns which have adopted an official ballot
system, the town election shall be conducted in the same manner as a
state general election as provided in RSA 658 and 659, except that RSA
659:77, III-V, 659:78, and 659:98, II and III shall not apply, and
except that all duties required to be performed by the secretary of
state under those chapters shall be performed by the town clerk, and
except that no copy of marked or unmarked checklists need be forwarded
to the state archives or federal district court as provided in RSA
659:102. Polling hours for a town meeting or election shall be set by
the selectmen or by a vote of the town.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1981, 454:10. 2010, 317:63, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 669:26

 **669:26 Absentee Voting. –** Every town which has adopted an
official ballot system for town elections as provided in RSA 669:12 or
669:13 shall provide for absentee voting. Any eligible voter who is
absent from such a town on the day of a town election, or who cannot
appear in public on election day because of his or her observance of a
religious commitment, or who, by reason of physical disability, is
unable to vote in person may vote at a town election in accordance with
the provisions of this section and RSA 669:27-669:29. A person who is
unable to appear at any time during polling hours at his or her polling
place because of an employment obligation shall be considered absent for
purposes of this section and RSA 669:27-669:29. For the purposes of this
section, the term "employment'' shall include the care of children and
infirm adults, with or without compensation.

**Source.** 1979, 308:7; 410:1. 1981, 454:11. 2006, 136:3. 2010, 317:64,
eff. July 18, 2010. 2016, 130:4, eff. May 27, 2016.

### Section 669:27

 **669:27 Forms. –** Prior to each such election, the clerk shall
prepare in such quantities as he may deem necessary the following
forms:
                                             
 I. Official absentee voting ballots, with the words "absentee
ballot'' printed on them, similar in form to the official ballot to be
used at said election, and similarly endorsed and printed on paper of
the same color as that used for official ballots;
                                             
 II. Blank forms of application for absentee ballots worded similar
in form to those required by RSA 657:4.
                                             
 III. Envelopes of sufficient size to contain the ballots specified
in paragraph I, on which shall be printed an affidavit similar in form
to that required by RSA 657:7 or 657:8, as applicable.

**Source.** 1979, 308:8; 410:1. 1981, 392:4. 1987, 276:7. 2003, 289:47.
2006, 136:4. 2010, 317:65, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 669:28

 **669:28 Instructions; Information. –** The secretary of state shall
prepare for the use of the clerks such printed information and
instructions, subject to the approval of the attorney general, as he
shall deem appropriate to carry into effect the purposes hereof. The
secretary of state shall furnish such material to the clerks of all
towns, cities, village districts and school districts.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:29

 **669:29 Application of Statutes. –** The procedure for absentee
voting in town elections shall be the same as in state elections as
provided in RSA 657:2, 657:6, 657:7, 657:8, 657:12, and 657:14 through
657:24. With respect to the provisions of RSA 657:19, absentee ballots
shall not be required to be sent to absent uniformed services voters or
absent voters temporarily residing outside the United States at least 45
days prior to town elections, but shall be sent by the clerk as long
before election day as is practical.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1981, 169:2; 454:12. 2010, 317:66, eff. July
18, 2010.

Recounts
--------

### Section 669:30

 **669:30 Recounts; Application. –** Any person for whom a vote was
cast and recorded for any office at a town election may, no later than
the Friday following the election, apply in writing to the town clerk
for a recount of the ballots cast for such office, the clerk shall
appoint a time for the recount not earlier than 5 days nor later than 10
days after the receipt of said application.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1981, 454:13. 1994, 4:32, eff. May 27, 1994.

### Section 669:31

 **669:31 Notice; Fee. –**
                                             
 I. The clerk shall notify each of the candidates for the office for
which there is to be a recount at least 3 days prior to the day
appointed for the recount of ballots. No other notice shall be
required.
                                             
 II. The applicant shall pay to the town clerk, for the use of the
town, the following fee:
                                             
 (a) If the difference between the vote cast for the applying
candidate and a candidate declared elected is less than one percent of
the total votes cast, the fee shall be 
                                             $10.
                                             
 (b) If the difference between the vote cast for the applying
candidate and a candidate declared elected is between one percent and 2
percent of the total votes cast, the fee shall be 
                                             $20.
                                             
 (c) If the difference between the vote cast for the applying
candidate and a candidate declared elected is between 2 percent and 3
percent of the total votes cast, the fee shall be 
                                             $40.
                                             
 (d) If the difference between the vote cast for the applying
candidate and a candidate declared elected is greater than 3 percent of
the total votes cast, the candidate shall pay the fee as provided in RSA
669:31, II(c) and shall agree in writing with the town clerk to pay any
additional costs of the recount.
                                             
 III. If any person who has applied for a recount is declared elected
by reason of the recount, the town clerk shall return to the person
within 10 days of the recount all fees paid at the time of applying.
                                             
 IV. If any person who has applied for a recount loses the recount by
a margin of less than one percent of the total votes cast, the town
clerk shall return to the person within 10 days of the recount any fees
that were paid in excess of those required by subparagraph II(a).

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1981, 454:14. 2003, 34:1, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 669:32

 **669:32 Board of Recount. –** At the time and place so appointed
and notified, the clerk shall publicly break the seal of and open the
package in which the ballots of said election are kept; and, thereupon,
said ballots shall be recounted by the clerk, the moderator, and the
selectmen of said town who shall constitute the board of recount. When
counting the ballots, the board of recount or their assistants shall
visually inspect each ballot. No mechanical, optical, or electronic
device shall be used for the counting of ballots. Any member of the
board of recount who is one of the candidates for the office being
recounted shall disqualify himself or herself from the board of recount
for all official duties of said board. The moderator shall appoint an
assistant who shall take the same oath as, serve in the same capacity
as, and have all the powers of the recount official whom he or she has
replaced.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1981, 454:15. 2006, 41:5, eff. June 17, 2006.

### Section 669:33

 **669:33 Preservation of Ballots After Recount. –**
                                             
 I. Upon the conclusion of the recount, the clerk shall place the
ballots and all envelopes or wrappers which had previously contained
them in a suitable container showing the contents and the date when and
the reason why it was opened; and said clerk shall retain said ballots
until the expiration of 60 days from the date of the recount unless some
action is pending which makes their further preservation necessary or
unless enjoined by action brought before the superior court.
                                             
 II. Ballots, including cast, cancelled, and uncast ballots and
successfully challenged absentee ballots still contained in their
envelopes, prepared or preserved in accordance with the election laws
shall be exempt from the provisions of RSA 91-A. This exemption shall
apply to any ballots or absentee voter affidavit envelopes prepared for
or used in any election conducted by the state or any political
subdivision, including federal elections.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1981, 454:16. 2003, 289:62, eff. Sept. 1, 2003.

### Section 669:34

 **669:34 Declaration of Results. –**
                                             
 I. Upon completion of the recount, the board of recount shall
publicly declare the results and certify such declaration to the town
clerk.
                                             
 II. The town clerk shall record the certificate received under
paragraph I; and the person so declared to have been elected shall,
unless the result is changed upon appeal to the superior court, be the
duly elected officer of such town.
                                             
 III. A person declared elected at the election whose election is
affirmed by the recount may take the oath of office and assume office at
any time following declaration of the results of the recount, provided
the oath is taken by the deadline established by RSA 42:6.
                                             
 IV. When a different person is declared elected following the
recount, if no appeal is taken that person may take the oath of office
and assume office on the sixth day following the date of the recount,
provided that the oath is taken by the deadline established by RSA
42:6.
                                             
 V. If a different person is declared elected following the recount,
and an appeal is taken, that person may not assume office until the
superior court has issued a final ruling on the appeal. The person
holding the office prior to the election shall continue to hold the
office until a successor is declared elected by the superior court and
the person declared elected by the court takes the oath of office.
                                             
 VI. When an appeal involves a multi-seat office, every declared
candidate for that office and any write-in candidate who received 5
percent or more of the votes cast shall be entitled to notice of the
appeal and may choose to become a party to the appeal. When ruling on an
appeal involving an election where voters elected more than one person
to a multi-seat office, the court may remove from office any person who
was declared elected at the election and at the recount who has already
taken the oath of office and assumed office if the court determines that
it is more likely than not that a different person was elected to that
seat. The validity of any actions taken by a person who assumes office
pursuant to this section and is later removed as a result of an appeal
may not be challenged on the basis that the person was subsequently
removed as a result of the appeal.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 2008, 280:2, eff. Aug. 26, 2008.

### Section 669:35

 **669:35 Appeal From Recount. –** Any person aggrieved by a ruling
of the board of recount with respect to any ballot may, within 5 days
thereafter, appeal to the superior court for the county in which such
town is located; and such court shall have jurisdiction in equity to
hear and determine the question presented. The person shall also file a
copy of the appeal with the town clerk by 5:00 p.m. on the fifth day
following the date of the recount.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 2008, 280:3, eff. Aug. 26, 2008.

Tie Vote
--------

### Section 669:36

 **669:36 Tie Vote. –** In case of a tie vote at any town election,
except as provided for unofficial ballots in RSA 669:60, the winner
shall be determined by lot by the town clerk in the presence of the
candidates who are tied if, upon notice from him, they elect to be
present.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Special Provisions for Partisan Ballot System
---------------------------------------------

### Section 669:37

 **669:37 Nomination by Caucus. –** In a town which has adopted the
partisan ballot system under RSA 669:12, nominations may be made by any
caucus of legal voters representing a political party which at the state
election next preceding polled at least 3 percent of the entire vote
cast in the state for the office of governor.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:38

 **669:38 Party Regulations. –** Any party qualified to hold a caucus
may, in convention or by its recognized political committee, make
regulations concerning the manner of holding the caucus consistent with
the provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:39

 **669:39 When Held. –** Any caucus held for the nomination of
candidates for town officers shall be held not later than the sixth
Friday before the town election at which such officers are to be
elected.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1987, 299:5, eff. July 24, 1987.

### Section 669:40

 **669:40 Notice. –** All town caucuses shall be called by a notice
posted in 4 conspicuous places in the town and published in some
newspaper, if there be any published in the town, 10 days or more before
the day of the caucus. Such notice shall specify the place, day and hour
of meeting, and the time during which the polls shall be open for the
reception of ballots.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:41

 **669:41 Checklists. –** The checklist for use at any caucus shall
be prepared by the local executive committee of the party holding the
caucus. Notice of the times when, and places where, the executive
committee shall meet for the purpose of receiving evidence and
suggestions as to the make-up of the checklist shall be included in the
notice of the caucus.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:42

 **669:42 Filing. –** A candidate for nomination for office shall
file his name, and a declaration of the office for which he is filing,
with the clerk of the political party holding the caucus at least 5 days
before the date of the caucus. The clerk shall prepare the ballots to be
used for said caucus and no other ballots shall be used at said caucus.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:43

 **669:43 Ballots. –** Voting at the caucus shall be by ballot. The
committee shall have full power to regulate the form, size and character
of the ballots to be used.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:44

 **669:44 Additional Polling Place. –** Any caucus held under the
provisions of this subdivision in a town which has voted to adopt the
provisions for an additional polling place may be held at the central
polling place in said town and also at said additional polling place.
The local executive committee of the party holding the caucus shall
prepare a checklist for each polling place. The polls at the additional
polling place shall close one hour prior to the closing of polls at the
central polling place and the ballot boxes from the additional polling
place shall be taken to the central polling place where they shall be
opened and counted.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:45

 **669:45 Hours of Polling. –** The time the polls shall be open at
caucuses shall be fixed by the executive committee of the party in the
town holding the caucus. In towns and wards having not more than 2,000
inhabitants, according to the last preceding national census, the polls
shall be open not less than 2 hours, and, in those having more than
2,000 inhabitants according to such census, not less than 3 hours.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:46

 **669:46 Additions. –** No name shall be placed on the checklist
after the hour for opening the caucus has arrived except the name of a
person whose right to vote in the caucus is well known to the executive
committee.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:47

 **669:47 Challenge. –** When the right of any person to vote in a
caucus is challenged, he shall subscribe to the following oath or
affirmation before his vote shall be received: I, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,
do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am a legal voter in

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, and that I intend to vote the ticket of the party
holding this caucus at the next election.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:48

 **669:48 Prohibited Acts. –** No person shall vote in any caucus
unless his name is on the checklist used by said caucus except as
provided in RSA 669:46. No person shall vote using the name of any other
person; and no person shall vote in the caucus of more than one
political party, or, having voted in the caucus of a political party,
sign the nomination papers of any other political party for that
election. No person shall vote in any caucus unless he intends to
support the ticket of the party holding the caucus at the next election.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:49

 **669:49 Plurality; Certificates of Nomination. –** A plurality of
votes shall be sufficient to nominate a candidate for town office by
caucus. After the caucus, certificates of nomination shall be made and
shall indicate the name and domicile of each candidate, the office for
which he is nominated and the political principles or party he
represents, and shall be signed by the chairman and clerk of the caucus
or convention; and, when practicable, such certificates of nomination
shall be signed by each candidate; but the absence of the signature of
the candidate shall not invalidate a certificate of nomination.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:50

 **669:50 Filing Nominations; Certificate of Regularity. –** In
filing nominations with the town clerk, the presiding officer of the
caucus shall certify that the caucus was called and conducted according
to the provisions of this subdivision. If nominations are not
accompanied by such certificate, they shall not be placed upon the
official ballot.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:51

 **669:51 Filing Checklists. –** Within 48 hours after the close of
any caucus, the presiding officer shall file with the town clerk the
checklist used in the caucus; and the clerk shall keep the same for 60
days thereafter, in his office, open to the inspection of every citizen
of such town, and shall not make nor permit to be made upon such
checklist any mark whatever.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:52

 **669:52 Nomination by Nomination Papers. –** As an alternative to
nomination by party caucus, a candidate may have his name placed on a
partisan town election ballot by submitting nomination papers. All the
provisions of RSA 655:40-45 shall apply except that the duties performed
by the secretary of state shall be performed by the town clerk. Fifty
nomination papers shall be required for each town office for which a
person files.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:53

 **669:53 Penalty for Violations. –** Any person who shall violate
any of the provisions of this subdivision shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Any person who shall swear falsely in making oath under the
provisions of this subdivision shall be guilty of perjury and punished
accordingly.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

By Unofficial Ballot
--------------------

### Section 669:54

 **669:54 Nominations. –** In the election of officers by unofficial
ballot, nominations of candidates for office shall be by motion at the
town meeting.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:55

 **669:55 Ballots. –** In the election of officers by unofficial
ballot, the town clerk shall prepare and provide to the moderator pieces
of white paper of uniform size and weight to be used as ballots;
provided, however, that if more than one ballot is used during any town
election, each ballot shall be of a different color than any other
ballot used at the election. The ballots may, at the discretion of the
clerk, have printed on them the names of the offices to be elected, such
as "For Selectman,'' or "For Town Treasurer.'' However, no names of
candidates shall be printed on the unofficial ballots.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1991, 370:3, eff. Aug. 31, 1991.

### Section 669:56

 **669:56 Ballot Boxes. –** A suitable box shall be provided by the
selectmen, at the expense of the town, in which to receive the ballots
of the voters.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:57

 **669:57 Conduct. –** Upon receipt of his ballot from the moderator,
each voter shall write thereon the name of every person for whom he
desires to vote. Each voter shall deliver his ballot to the moderator in
open meeting; and the moderator, on receiving the ballot, shall direct
the town clerk to check the name of the voter on the checklist, and
shall, without inspecting the name of any person voted for, examine the
ballot so far only as to determine whether the same contains more than
one ballot; if it does not, he shall place the ballot in the ballot box;
but if it does, he shall make it manifest to the meeting and reject the
same unless the voter shall correct his ballot.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:58

 **669:58 Counting. –** When all votes have been cast, the moderator
shall, in the open meeting, sort and count the votes. The selectmen and
town clerk shall assist in sorting and counting the votes; but no other
person shall in any manner interfere therewith. After the counting, the
moderator shall make a public declaration of the number of ballots cast,
with the name of every person voted for and the number of votes for
each; and the town clerk shall make a fair record thereof in the books
of the town. No ballot shall be received and counted after the votes
have been declared.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:59

 **669:59 Blank Votes. –** If several offices are to be voted for
upon the ballot, no person shall be required to vote for all. Any ballot
which does not contain at least one voter for each office shall be
regarded as a blank for the office omitted. Blank pieces of paper shall
not be counted as ballots.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:60

 **669:60 Majority to Elect; Tie Vote. –** In determining the results
of any election by unofficial ballot, the whole number of persons voting
for any office shall first be ascertained and then the vote for each
candidate seeking said office. In order to win an office by unofficial
ballot, a candidate must receive a majority of the votes cast for a
certain office. In the case that more than one candidate receives a
majority, the candidates with the largest majority of votes for the
positions available shall be declared elected. In the event that 2
candidates receive an equal number of votes such that a winner cannot be
determined, another balloting shall be taken.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

Filling of Vacancies
--------------------

### Section 669:61

 **669:61 Vacancies in Town Offices. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever a vacancy as defined in RSA 652:12 occurs in any
elective town office or whenever a town neglects or refuses to fill an
elective town office, said vacancy shall be filled by the action of that
body or person authorized by law to appoint or elect such officer for a
term ending upon the election and qualification of his successor, unless
otherwise provided. Unless otherwise provided, at said next annual town
election, the voters of the town shall then elect an officer for the
full term provided by law or the balance of an unexpired term provided
by law, as the case may be. If a town then refuses or neglects to fill
said office, a vacancy shall be deemed again to exist.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to empower a town to
find that a vacancy exists, in the case of a contested election or
recount, until the rendering of a final judgment by a court of competent
jurisdiction or by the ballot law commission as to such contested
election in accordance with RSA 652:12, V, or until the recount has been
concluded.
                                             
 III. For the purposes of paragraph I, and with respect to those
offices elected by official, non-partisan ballot, the term "next annual
town election'' shall mean the next annual town election for which the
nomination filing period, as set forth in RSA 669:19, begins subsequent
to the occurrence of the vacancy. Any vacancy which occurs between the
beginning of the filing period and the town election shall not be filled
by official ballot until the annual town election the following year.
                                             
 IV. The legislative body of a town may adopt or rescind the optional
procedure in this paragraph for filling vacancies in elective town
offices. If the authorized person or body does not make an appointment
to fill the vacancy pursuant to paragraph I within 45 days after at
least one legally-qualified person has applied in writing for such
appointment, then upon the filing of a petition with the selectmen
signed by the number of voters required under RSA 39:3 for the warning
of a special town meeting, presented not less than 90 days before the
next annual town meeting, the selectmen shall call a special election to
fill the vacancy. The special election shall be subject to the
provisions of RSA 39:3 and other applicable provisions governing town
elections. The person elected at the special election shall serve for a
term ending upon the election and qualification of his or her successor.
Unless otherwise provided, at the next annual town election, the voters
of the town shall elect an officer for the full term provided by law or
the balance of an unexpired term provided by law, as the case may be. If
the town then refuses or neglects to fill the office, a vacancy shall be
deemed again to exist.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1981, 520:4. 1994, 112:2. 2008, 267:1, eff.
Aug. 25, 2008.

### Section 669:62

 **669:62 Moderator. –** Vacancies in the office of town moderator
shall be filled by appointment made by the supervisors of the checklist
of said town, or by the town selectmen, where no board of supervisors
exists.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:63

 **669:63 Selectmen. –** Vacancies in the board of selectmen shall be
filled by appointment made by the remaining selectmen. Whenever the
selectmen fail to make such appointment, the superior court or any
justice thereof, on petition of any citizen of the town, and after such
notice as the court shall deem reasonable, may appoint a suitable person
to fill the vacancy; provided, however, that if the town has adopted the
provisions of RSA 669:61, IV, and a petition thereunder is submitted
before the submission of a petition under this section, the provisions
of RSA 669:61, IV shall apply.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 2008, 267:2, eff. Aug. 25, 2008.

### Section 669:64

 **669:64 Supervisors of the Checklist. –** Vacancies in the board of
supervisors shall be filled by appointment made by the remaining
supervisors. If there is only one member of the board, or if the whole
board shall be vacant, the moderator shall make the appointments. If a
town elects supervisors by means of the partisan ballot system, any such
appointee shall be of the same political party as the supervisor whose
place he is filling.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:65

 **669:65 Town Clerk. –** Vacancies in the office of town clerk shall
be filled by appointment made by the selectmen except in towns in which
pursuant to RSA 41:18 the selectmen have previously appointed a deputy
town clerk, in which case the deputy shall serve as town clerk until the
next annual town election, unless the deputy does not have his or her
domicile in the town, in which case the vacancy shall be filled by
appointment made by the selectmen.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 2000, 308:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2002 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 669:65-a

 **669:65-a Towns With Non-Domiciled Deputy Town Clerk. –**

                                             [Repealed 2000, 308:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.
                                             ]

### Section 669:66

 **669:66 Town Clerk--Tax Collector. –** If a vacancy in the office
of town clerk--tax collector occurs, the deputy provided for in RSA
41:45-c shall discharge the duties of the town clerk--tax collector
until the selectmen fill the position of town clerk--tax collector
within 30 days.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1983, 30:5, eff. July 11, 1983.

### Section 669:67

 **669:67 Tax Collector. –** If a vacancy in the office of tax
collector occurs before the incumbent thereof has completed the
collection of the taxes committed to him, or if the collector is removed
from office pursuant to RSA 41:40, the deputy tax collector provided for
in RSA 41:38 shall discharge the duties of the tax collector until the
selectmen fill the position of tax collector within 30 days.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1983, 30:3, eff. July 11, 1983.

### Section 669:68

 **669:68 Town Auditors. –** Vacancies in the office of town auditor
shall be filled by appointment made by the supervisors of the checklist.
If a supervisor is also the town treasurer, he shall abstain from the
decision on the appointment, and the other supervisors shall make the
appointment.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1987, 276:8, eff. July 24, 1987.

### Section 669:69

 **669:69 Town Treasurer. –** Vacancies in the office of town
treasurer shall be filled by appointment made by the selectmen except in
towns in which, pursuant to RSA 41:29-a, the treasurer has appointed a
deputy treasurer, in which case the deputy shall serve as town treasurer
until the next annual town election.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:70

 **669:70 Municipal Planning Boards. –** Vacancies in the membership
and alternates of a town's municipal planning board shall be filled as
provided in RSA 673:11 and 673:12.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:71

 **669:71 Municipal Budget Committee. –** Vacancies on the municipal
budget committee shall be filled in accordance with RSA 32:15, VII.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1993, 332:6, eff. Aug. 28, 1993.

### Section 669:72

 **669:72 Municipal Utility Commissioners. –** Vacancies on a board
of municipal utility commissioners shall be filled by the remaining
members.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:73

 **669:73 Trustee of the Trust Fund. –** Vacancies in the office of
trustee of the trust fund shall be filled by appointment made by the
board of selectmen for the remainder of the unexpired term.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:74

 **669:74 Highway Agents. –** Vacancies in the office of elected
highway agents shall be filled by appointment made by the board of
selectmen for the remainder of the unexpired term.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 669:75

 **669:75 Vacancies in Other Offices. –** Vacancies in the offices of
constable, sewer commissioner, town assessor, overseers of public
welfare, library trustee, and any other optional offices where no other
method of filling a vacancy shall be provided by vote of the town shall
be filled by appointment made by the board of selectmen.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.
