---
title: CHAPTER 670 VILLAGE DISTRICT ELECTIONS
---

TITLE LXIII
                                             
ELECTIONS
============

CHAPTER 670
                                             
VILLAGE DISTRICT ELECTIONS
--------------------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 670:1

 **670:1 Election Dates. –** The election of village district
officers shall be conducted at the annual meeting of the village
district which shall be held between January 1 and May 1 of each year.
In the case of a district formed for the purpose of impoundment of
water, such annual meeting may be held at another time if so voted at a
previous meeting.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1981, 375:3, eff. Aug. 22, 1981.

### Section 670:2

 **670:2 Officers Elected. –** The voters of each village district
shall, at each annual village district election, elect a moderator, a
clerk, 3 commissioners, a treasurer, and such other officers as may be
directed by law or as the voters thereof may judge necessary for
managing the district's affairs. Any village district voting to do so
may elect one commissioner to serve for one year, one to serve for 2
years and one to serve for 3 years and, at every annual meeting
thereafter, elect one commissioner to serve for 3 years. A village
district officer shall assume office upon his election and qualification
for office, and shall serve until the election and qualification of his
successor.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 670:2-a

 **670:2-a Optional Election of Commissioners in Districts Within the
Towns of Merrimack and Hooksett. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 670:2, any village district
within the town of Merrimack or the town of Hooksett may at any annual
meeting under an article in the warrant for the meeting elect 5 rather
than 3 commissioners by a majority vote of the legal voters present and
voting at the annual meeting in the manner provided in paragraph II.
                                             
 II. Upon written petition of 25 voters qualified to vote in a
village district election and whose names are on the village district
checklist, or 2 percent of such voters, whichever number is fewer,
addressed and delivered to the commissioners not later than 35 days
before any annual meeting, the following question shall be submitted to
the voters at the meeting: "Are you in favor of increasing the number of
commissioners from 3 to 5?'' In districts having an official ballot, the
question shall appear upon the ballot pursuant to RSA 670:7. In
districts where no official ballot is used, the vote on this question
shall be by special ballot. After the question, squares with the words
"yes'' and "no'' shall be printed on the ballot in which the voter may
mark his choice pursuant to RSA 670:7.
                                             
 III. A village district which votes to increase the number of
commissioners as provided in paragraph II may rescind its action in the
same manner, except that the question shall read: "Are you in favor of
decreasing the number of commissioners from 5 to 3 members?''
                                             
 IV. If a district votes to increase or to decrease the number of
commissioners, the change shall not take effect in either case until the
first annual meeting following the meeting at which the question was
acted upon.
                                             
 (a) If the village district votes to increase the number of
commissioners to 5, and its commissioners serve 3-year terms, at the
first annual meeting following the vote the village district shall elect
2 commissioners for 3-year terms, and one commissioner for a one-year
term. At the next annual meeting, the village district shall elect 2
commissioners for 3-year terms.
                                             
 (b) If the village district votes to increase the number of
commissioners to 5 and its commissioners serve one-year terms, at the
first annual meeting following the vote, the village district shall
elect 5 commissioners for one-year terms.
                                             
 (c) At succeeding annual elections the village district shall
fill commissioner vacancies as they regularly occur.
                                             
 (d) If a village district votes to decrease its commissioners to
3, at the annual meeting following the vote, the terms of office of all
the commissioners shall end and the village district shall elect 3
commissioners, as provided in RSA 670:2.

**Source.** 1986, 13:1, eff. June 17, 1986.

### Section 670:3

 **670:3 Voters and Checklists. –** Any person having his or her
domicile within the village district and qualified to vote as provided
in RSA 654:1 through 654:6 and whose name is on the village district
checklist shall be entitled to vote in any village district election. An
updated checklist shall be used at all village district elections and
meetings for the same purposes as checklists are used by towns as
provided in RSA 669:5. Such checklist or checklists, if the district is
located in more than one town, shall be used in the election of district
officers.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1985, 120:1. 1993, 163:1. 1994, 218:5. 2010,
317:67, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 670:4

 **670:4 Nominations. –** To become a candidate for any village
district office, a person must have a domicile in the village district.
In any village district which has voted to elect district officers by
non-partisan official ballot as provided in RSA 669:13, all candidates
shall file a declaration of candidacy with the village district clerk,
in the same manner as with the town clerk in town elections as provided
in RSA 669:19-669:22.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1991, 254:11, eff. Aug. 9, 1991.

### Section 670:4-a

 **670:4-a Filing Candidacy. –** No person shall file as a candidate
for a village district office for more than one seat on the same village
district or school district board, commission, committee, or council.

**Source.** 1992, 96:6, eff. April 24, 1992.

Election Procedure
------------------

### Section 670:5

 **670:5 Warrant. –** Village district elections shall be warned by
the commissioners in the same manner as town elections are warned by the
selectmen as provided in RSA 669:2 and RSA 39. The commissioners shall
give the supervisors of the checklist 60 days notice of any village
district election.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979. 2016, 116:1, eff. July 19,
2016.

### Section 670:6

 **670:6 Absentee Voting. –** A village district which has voted to
elect officers by non-partisan official ballot as provided in RSA 670:7
shall provide for absentee voting in the same manner as in town
elections as provided in RSA 669:26-669:29 except that all duties
performed therein by the town clerk shall be performed by the village
district clerk.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 670:7

 **670:7 Ballot Systems. –** A village district may vote to adopt the
non-partisan official ballot system for the election of district
officers in the same manner as towns, as provided in RSA 669:13 in which
case it shall be subject to the provisions of RSA 669:13 and
669:19-669:24. A village district which has not adopted the non-partisan
ballot system but which votes to elect district officers by ballot shall
be subject to the provisions of RSA 669:54-669:60 for the unofficial
ballot system in towns. No village district may vote to adopt a partisan
ballot system.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1987, 276:9, eff. July 24, 1987.

### Section 670:8

 **670:8 Non-Ballot Voting. –** A village district may vote to elect
district officers by ballot or other means at the village district
election or meeting in the same manner as towns as provided in RSA
669:17.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1. 1987, 276:9, eff. July 24, 1987.

Post-Election Procedure
-----------------------

### Section 670:9

 **670:9 Report to Commissioner of Revenue Administration. –** After
the village district election, the clerk of a village district shall
forthwith report the names and post office addresses of all village
district officers to the commissioner of revenue administration. If any
village district officer has not been elected or appointed at the time
of the election, the village district clerk shall inform the
commissioner of revenue administration of the name and mailing address
of the person chosen to fill the position.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 670:10

 **670:10 Tie Votes. –** If the 2 candidates having the highest
number of votes for a village district office shall have an equal
number, the successful candidate shall be chosen in the same manner as
is provided for resolving tie votes under RSA 669:36 or 60.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 670:11

 **670:11 Recounts. –** Recounts of village district elections shall
be conducted in the same manner as in town elections as provided in RSA
669:30-669:35 except that the board of recount shall be composed of the
village district clerk, moderator and commissioners, each of whom shall
perform the duties of the corresponding officer in the town.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.

### Section 670:12

 **670:12 Vacancies. –** The commissioners shall make appointments to
fill vacancies in the offices of village district clerk, moderator, and
treasurer, and their own board. In the case of a vacancy in the office
of commissioner with a 2- or 3-year term, the remaining commissioners
shall make an appointment to fill said vacancy until the next annual
meeting of the district, at which time a commissioner shall be elected
to fill the unexpired term.

**Source.** 1979, 410:1, eff. July 1, 1979.
