---
title: 'CHAPTER 361-C ATTORNEY''S FEES IN CONSUMER CASES'
---

TITLE XXXIII-A
                                             
RETAIL INSTALLMENT SALES
========================

CHAPTER 361-C
                                             
ATTORNEY'S FEES IN CONSUMER CASES
---------------------------------

### Section 361-C:1

 **361-C:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter, "retail installment
contract or evidence of indebtedness'' means any contract or evidence of
indebtedness arising out of:
                                             
 I. A retail installment sale in which the goods purchased are used
primarily for personal, household or family purposes; or
                                             
 II. A loan or extension of credit payable in installments, or for
which a finance charge is or may be imposed, in which the proceeds of
the loan or extension of credit are used primarily for personal,
household or family purposes.

**Source.** 1975, 123:1, eff. July 5, 1975.

### Section 361-C:2

 **361-C:2 Attorney's Fees for Consumer. –** If a retail installment
contract or evidence of indebtedness provides for attorney's fees to be
awarded to the retail seller, lender or creditor in any action, suit or
proceeding against the retail buyer, borrower or debtor involving the
sale, loan or extension of credit, such contract or evidence of
indebtedness shall also provide that:
                                             
 I. Reasonable attorney's fees shall be awarded to the buyer,
borrower or debtor if he prevails in
                                             
 (a) Any action, suit or proceeding brought by the retail seller,
lender or creditor; or
                                             
 (b) An action brought by the buyer, borrower or debtor; and
                                             
 II. If a buyer, borrower or debtor successfully asserts a partial
defense or set-off, recoupment or counterclaim to an action brought by
the retail seller, lender or creditor, the court may withhold from the
retail seller, lender or creditor the entire amount or such portion of
the attorney fees as the court considers equitable.

**Source.** 1975, 123:1, eff. July 5, 1975.

### Section 361-C:3

 **361-C:3 Waiver Prohibited. –** No contract or evidence of
indebtedness shall contain any provision whereby the buyer, borrower or
debtor waives any of his rights under this chapter, and any such waiver
shall be deemed against public policy and shall be unenforceable and
void.

**Source.** 1975, 123:1, eff. July 5, 1975.

### Section 361-C:4

 **361-C:4 Prospective Effect. –** This chapter shall not apply to
any contract or agreement entered into prior to July 5, 1975.

**Source.** 1975, 123:1, eff. July 5, 1975.
