---
title: CHAPTER 206 FISH AND GAME COMMISSION
---

TITLE XVIII
                                             
FISH AND GAME
=============

CHAPTER 206
                                             
FISH AND GAME COMMISSION
------------------------

Commission
----------

### Section 206:1

 **206:1 Commission Created; Name of Department. –** There shall be
an agency of the state to be known hereafter as the fish and game
department under a commission to be known as the fish and game
commission.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:1. 2000, 42:2, eff. June 6, 2000.

### Section 206:1-a

 **206:1-a Commission to Study Opportunities and Options to Improve
the Sustainability of the Fish and Game Department. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2013,
241:8, eff. Nov. 1, 2013.
                                             ]

### Section 206:1-b

 **206:1-b Divisions Within the Department. –** There are established
the following divisions, as defined in RSA 21-G:5, within the fish and
game department:
                                             
 I. The division of marine fisheries, under RSA 211:65.
                                             
 II. The fisheries division.
                                             
 III. The wildlife division.
                                             
 IV. The business division.
                                             
 V. The facilities and lands division.
                                             
 VI. The law enforcement division.
                                             
 VII. The public affairs division.
                                             
 VIII. The office of the executive director.

**Source.** 2013, 144:75, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 206:1-c

 **206:1-c Commission to Study Opportunities and Options to Improve
the Sustainability of the Fish and Game Department. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2014,
230:4, eff. Nov. 1, 2014.
                                             ]

### Section 206:2

 **206:2 Appointment of Commission. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall consist of 11 members, each qualified
pursuant to RSA 206:2-a, appointed by the governor and council. Whenever
an appointment is to be made to the commission, the governor shall cause
to be published the name of the nominee in a newspaper of statewide
daily circulation. The council may not consent to an appointment under
this section sooner than 30 days after the name of the nominee is
submitted to the council.
                                             
 II. Sporting clubs in each county may form a county sporting club
board. Whenever an appointment is to be made to the commission, each
board may nominate one to 3 persons and submit such recommendations to
the governor for the governor's consideration. Whenever an appointment
is to be made to the commission from the tidewater towns, the advisory
committee on marine fisheries may nominate one to 3 persons and submit
such recommendations to the governor for the governor's consideration.
                                             
 III. For the purposes of this section "sporting clubs'' means:
                                             
 (a) An organization which has specific interests in hunting,
fishing, trapping, wildlife and habitat conservation and which has been
registered with the department of state for at least 2 consecutive
years.
                                             
 (b) An organization which acknowledges in its permanent bylaws,
the promotion and protection of hunting, fishing or trapping and which
accepts scientific wildlife management methods and tools.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:2. RSA 206:2. 1955, 251:1. 1977, 560:1.
1993, 100:1. 1998, 252:1. 2004, 166:7, eff. May 24, 2004.

### Section 206:2-a

 **206:2-a Qualifications of Commissioners. –**
                                             
 I. Each member of the commission shall be a resident of a different
county in the state except that one commission member shall be a
resident of one of the tidewater towns of Portsmouth, Seabrook, Rye,
Hampton, Hampton Falls, North Hampton, Newington, Greenland, Stratham,
Exeter, Newfields, Newmarket, Durham, Madbury, Dover, Rollinsford or New
Castle, and not more than 6 commissioners shall be members of the same
political party.
                                             
 II. Each member shall also be qualified in the following manner:
                                             
 (a) Well informed on the subject of fish and wildlife
conservation and restoration;
                                             
 (b) Dedicated to the conservation and protection of the state's
fish and wildlife resources and of an environment conducive to the
welfare of the same;
                                             
 (c) Committed to a fish and game program providing reasonable
balance between research, habitat management and law enforcement;
                                             
 (d) An active outdoorsman holding a resident fishing, hunting, or
trapping license in at least 5 of the 10 years preceding the
appointment;
                                             
 (e) A personal record free of convictions of violation of fish
and game laws and regulations of this state or any other jurisdiction
within 5 years, preceding his appointment; and
                                             
 (f) At least 5 years' experience in one or a combination of the
following fields:
                                             
 (1) Forestry
                                             
 (2) Agriculture
                                             
 (3) Management of wild lands
                                             
 (4) Soils conservation
                                             
 (5) Conservation of water resources
                                             
 (6) Fish and game management or propagation
                                             
 (7) Conservation engineering
                                             
 (8) Conservation law
                                             
 (9) Wildlife education
                                             
 (10) Active membership in a conservation or sportsmen's
organization in this state.
                                             
 (g) In the case of the coastal commission member, a general
knowledge of all crustaceans and bivalves in coastal waters and salt
water fishing in general.
                                             
 III. Upon nomination by the governor, each nominee shall forthwith
file with the secretary of state an affidavit, duly signed and sworn to,
setting forth in detail how he complies with the qualifications cited in
paragraph II and affirming his belief in the aims of subparagraphs (b)
and (c) of paragraph II. His appointment shall not be confirmed by the
council until such affidavit has been examined by them and such
appointee has been found qualified pursuant to this section.

**Source.** 1977, 560:1. 1981, 2:1. 1990, 78:1. 1998, 252:2, eff. Aug.
24, 1998.

### Section 206:3

 **206:3 Terms. –** The members shall hold office for a term of 5
years, and each shall continue in office until his successor is
appointed and qualified. Each year at least 2 members shall be
appointed. Vacancies in the commission shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the same manner as the original appointment.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:3. RSA 206:3. 1955, 251:2. 1977, 560:2.
1992, 225:1, eff. July 12, 1992.

### Section 206:4

 **206:4 Removal. –** The governor, with the advice of the council,
may remove a commissioner for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or
misconduct in office, delivering to him a copy of the charges and
affording him an opportunity of being publicly heard in person or by
counsel in his own defense, upon not less than 10 days' notice. If such
commissioner shall be removed, the governor shall file in the office of
the secretary of state a complete statement of all charges made against
such commissioner and his findings thereon, together with a complete
record of the proceedings.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:4.

### Section 206:4-a

 **206:4-a Duties. –** In addition to other duties provided by law,
it shall be the duty of the fish and game commissioners, as the
citizens' representatives, to be the stewards of the fish, wildlife, and
marine resources of the state of New Hampshire and to set general policy
in the following areas:
                                             
 I. Conservation, protection, and management of wildlife populations
and habitats, the collection of necessary scientific information, and
the enforcement of fish and game laws for the purpose of sustaining
healthy populations of fish, wildlife, and marine resources;
                                             
 II. Development, funding, and implementation of a long-range
strategic plan to direct the operation of the fish and game department;
                                             
 III. Acquisition, development, and maintenance of public access to
lands and waters for recreational use consistent with New Hampshire
law;
                                             
 IV. Public education and building support for department programs
and objectives; and
                                             
 V. Establishment of positions on proposed legislation that affects
fish, wildlife, and marine resources and the overall management of the
fish and game department.

**Source.** 2004, 70:1, eff. July 6, 2004.

### Section 206:4-b

 **206:4-b Prohibited Acts; Complaint. –**
                                             
 I. No member of the fish and game commission may be engaged or
involved in any personnel matters of the department, including the
hiring, disciplining, firing, promoting, evaluating, transferring, and
any other matters associated with the classified employees of the
department.
                                             
 II. If a complaint is made by any person against a commissioner for
violation of paragraph I, the complaint shall be filed with the chair.
If the complaint is against the chair, it shall be filed with the
vice-chair. The commission shall hold a hearing on the complaint. All
hearings, deliberations, and votes by the commission under this
paragraph shall be made with a quorum of members present and shall be in
public session, provided that the member who is the subject of the
complaint shall not participate. Upon a finding of a violation of
paragraph I, the commission shall make a recommendation to governor and
council for appropriate disciplinary action. The commission may also,
upon a determination that a violation does not rise to a level requiring
such a recommendation to governor and council, issue a public reprimand
detailing the commission's findings.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a commissioner from
forwarding a citizen complaint or commendation relative to a classified
employee to the executive director and the chairman of the commission.

**Source.** 2004, 70:1, eff. July 6, 2004.

### Section 206:5

 **206:5 Reimbursement for Expenses. –** The members shall receive no
compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for actual and
necessary travelling and other expenses, and disbursements incurred or
made by them in the discharge of their official duties.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:5.

### Section 206:6

 **206:6 Quorum. –** A majority of the members shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of any business, for the performance of any
duty, or for the exercise of any power, except that in any action upon
the appointment or removal of the executive director, a majority of the
commission must act affirmatively. At least 10 days' notice in writing
shall be given to all members of any meeting.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:6.

### Section 206:7

 **206:7 Chairman; Meetings. –** The members of the commission shall
elect from their membership a chairman and a secretary. Regular meetings
shall be held by the commission at its offices quarterly, and at such
other times and places within the state as the commission shall select,
for the transaction of business.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:7.

Executive Director
------------------

### Section 206:8

 **206:8 How Chosen; Term; Compensation, and Duties Generally. –**
                                             
 I. The commission, following a comprehensive and equitable search,
shall nominate, and the governor and council shall appoint, an executive
director of the fish and game department. If the governor and council
fail to appoint the nominee, the commission shall nominate another
person. Each nominee shall be a person with knowledge of, and experience
in, the requirements for the protection, conservation and restoration of
the wildlife resources of the state and shall be a competent
administrator. The executive director shall hold office for a term of 4
years from the date of appointment. A vacancy in such office shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. The governor and council
shall have the authority to remove the executive director at any time,
but only for just cause pursuant to RSA 4:1. In such case, the governor
and council shall deliver to the executive director a copy of the
charges and afford an opportunity of being heard publicly in person or
by counsel after being given not less than 15 days notice. The executive
director shall not hold any other public office, and shall be entirely
devoted to the service of the state in the discharge of the official
duties of the position. The executive director shall receive the
compensation prescribed in RSA 94:1-4, and shall be reimbursed for all
actual and necessary traveling and other expenses incurred in the
discharge of official duties. Before entering upon the duties of the
office, the executive director shall take the oath prescribed by the
constitution, and shall, in addition thereto, swear that no other public
office is held nor any position under any political committee or party
is held. Such oath shall be filed with the secretary of state. The
executive director shall have general supervision and control of all
activities, functions, and employees of the fish and game department,
and shall enforce all the provisions of the laws of this state relating
to fish, wildlife resources, and marine species, and shall exercise all
necessary powers incident thereto.
                                             
 I-a. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. Whenever reference is made in the Revised Statutes Annotated or
in any other state statute to the director of fish and game department,
it shall be construed to mean the executive director of the fish and
game department.
                                             
 III. The commission shall have the authority to appoint an acting
director in the event that the executive director's position becomes
vacant during the term of office due to retirement, resignation, or
prolonged illness, death, or for any other just cause, until the
governor and council appoint a new executive director as provided in
paragraph I.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:8. 1950, 5, part 24:13. 1953, 265:1. RSA
206:8. 1975, 340:1. 1977, 560:4. 1985, 388:3. 1986, 174:2, 3. 1992,
225:2. 1994, 36:1, II. 1998, 252:3, 4. 2007, 156:6, eff. Aug. 17, 2007.

### Section 206:8-a

 **206:8-a Retirement System. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 226:4, I, eff.
June 16, 2012.
                                             ]

### Section 206:9

 **206:9 Investigation and Research. –** The executive director shall
make adequate investigation of the supply of wildlife in the state,
shall authorize such scientific and other studies as may be deemed
necessary to his work, and shall collect, classify, and disseminate such
statistics, data, and information as in his discretion will tend to
promote the objects of the department.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:9.

### Section 206:9-a

 **206:9-a Biennial Report to General Court. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director of the fish and game department shall,
within its biennial report pursuant to RSA 20:7, submit a report to the
governor and council and to the general court to include: a summary
report of department proceedings; a description of the license fee
reductions, waivers, and promotion activities pursuant to RSA 214:9-f;
and recommendations for changes in the fee structure for all licenses
and permits issued by the department. This report shall include
consideration of:
                                             
 (a) License fees in contiguous states.
                                             
 (b) Inflation rates on department operations.
                                             
 (c) Previous license fee increases.
                                             
 (d) Budget demands.
                                             
 (e) Intensive analysis and justification for any general fund
support for fish and game department programs.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1987, 412:3. 1999, 26:1. 2009, 7:2, 4, I, eff. June 16,
2009. 2015, 259:27, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 206:9-b

 **206:9-b Annual Report; Moose and Bear Management Funds. –**

                                             [Repealed 2007, 220:7, V, eff. July 1, 2007, as amended by 2007,
263:58.
                                             ]

### Section 206:10

 **206:10 Powers and Duties. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be the duty of the executive director to function as the
chief administrator of the commission and to protect, propagate and
preserve the fish, game, and wildlife resources of the state and to
protect and conserve nongame birds of the state. The executive director
shall, subject to the limitations hereinafter set forth, have the power
and authority to adopt and enforce rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, for the
adequate and effective control, management, restoration, conservation,
and regulation of the fish, game, bird, and wildlife resources of the
state, including rules designed to prohibit or otherwise regulate
nonagricultural activities which may cause the introduction or spread of
infectious disease in the state's wildlife resources. Such power and
authority shall include: (a) the right, after consultation with the
commission, to set and charge fees adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A, (b)
the right to open and close the season for taking fish, game, birds, and
wildlife, and (c) the right to fix the size, number and weight limits,
and other conditions governing the method and manner of taking the same.
Such power and authority may be exercised with reference to the state as
a whole, or for any specified county or part thereof, or for any lake,
pond, stream, or part thereof.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. The executive director of the fish and game department, after
notice and hearing pursuant to RSA 541-A, may impose an administrative
fine not to exceed 
                                             $2,000 for each offense upon any person who violates
any provision of this title, any rule adopted under this title, or the
terms or conditions of any permit or contract entered into under the
authority of this title. Rehearings and appeals from a decision of the
executive director under this paragraph shall be in accordance with RSA
541. Any administrative fine imposed under this section shall not
preclude the imposition of further penalties under this title. The
proceeds of administrative fines levied pursuant to this paragraph shall
be deposited into the fish and game reserve fund. The executive director
shall adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (a) A schedule of administrative fines which may be imposed under
this paragraph for violation of this title; and
                                             
 (b) Procedures for notice and hearing prior to the imposition of
an administrative fine consistent with RSA 541-A:16-21.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. 1937, 188:1. 1941, 49:1. RL 240:10. RSA 206:10.
1975, 124:1. 1977, 111:3. 1978, 40:3, II. 1979, 6:1; 104:2. 1981, 108:2;
568:130, I. 1985, 291:26. 1986, 214:18. 1993, 235:1. 1994, 62:1. 1998,
252:6, 9. 2003, 66:1. 2006, 14:4, eff. July 1, 2006. 2015, 186:2, eff.
July 1, 2015.

### Section 206:10-a

 **206:10-a Records of Violations. –** The executive director shall
remove and destroy records retained by the department concerning
convictions for offenses of fish and game laws, provided that the
offense was a violation and no subsequent conviction of the same person
could result in an enhanced penalty, and provided the department
retained the record of the violation for not more than 7 years from the
final disposition of the matter.

**Source.** 2004, 32:1, eff. June 22, 2004.

### Section 206:11

 **206:11 Hearings to Receive Suggestions From the Public. –** Once
each biennium, in the odd-numbered year, the executive director shall
hold public hearings to hear suggestions from the public on changes in
the fishing rules or on any other subject with respect to his duties.
Such hearing shall be held in Concord and in Lancaster. Public notice of
said hearings shall be published at least twice in 2 newspapers having
general circulation throughout the state, and in such other newspapers,
magazines, or circulars as the executive director may deem desirable. It
shall be the duty of the members of the commission to be in attendance
at such hearings. The executive director may in his discretion conduct
other public or private hearings throughout the year upon petition of
interested parties. At the biennial hearings held at Concord and
Lancaster and at other public hearings that the executive director shall
hold in accordance with the provisions of this section, any person
having any testimony to present which bears upon the power and authority
of the executive director under the provisions of this title shall be
given full opportunity to be heard, and the executive director shall
cause a complete record to be kept of all testimony taken.

**Source.** 1941, 49:2. RL 240:11. RSA 206:11. 1955, 32:1. 1967, 16:1.
1969, 66:1. 1971, 30:1. 1975, 124:4. 1981, 148:2. 1990, 31:1, eff. May
22, 1990.

### Section 206:12

 **206:12 Rules and Regulations. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1975, 124:2, I, eff.
July 5, 1975.
                                             ]

### Section 206:13

 **206:13 Effective Date. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1975, 124:2, II, eff. July
5, 1975.
                                             ]

### Section 206:14

 **206:14 Severability. –** The rules and regulations of the
executive director promulgated under the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed to be severable and if any provision or the application
thereof shall be held invalid, the remainder shall not be affected
thereby.

**Source.** 1941, 49:2. RL 240:15.

### Section 206:14-a

 **206:14-a Delegation. –** At the discretion of the executive
director of the fish and game department, the chief of game management
and research shall be empowered to perform all the duties and exercise
all the powers conferred upon said executive director as an ex officio
member of the pesticide control board.

**Source.** 1973, 42:2, eff. July 1, 1973.

### Section 206:15

 **206:15 Areas Closed Temporarily to Hunting. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1959,
180:2, eff. Sept. 7, 1959.
                                             ]

### Section 206:15-a

 **206:15-a Areas Closed Temporarily to Hunting and Fishing. –**
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, the executive
director shall have the power and authority to close to hunting or
fishing, or both, any area in which there is in his opinion foreseeable
harm to property or it is in his opinion dangerous to human life to hunt
or fish thereon, and he shall have the power and authority to close any
season for the taking of fish in any area for not over 60 days for
stocking or conservation purposes and 90 days to reclaim ponds in any
calendar year when in his opinion such action shall be necessary for the
protection or preservation of the fish in such area. Any rule,
regulation or order of the executive director issued pursuant to this
section shall take effect at such time as shall be stated therein and
shall be given such publication as the executive director may in his
discretion deem proper to fairly acquaint the residents of the locality
affected thereby of the provisions thereof.

**Source.** 1959, 180:2, eff. Sept. 7, 1959.

### Section 206:15-b

 **206:15-b Power of Executive Director. –** Notwithstanding the
provisions of this chapter, the executive director, with the consent of
the commission, shall have the power and authority to extend any season
on fish, game, and game birds, including migratory birds and fur-bearing
animals, when a season has been closed by an act of fire ban or other
proclamation or any unpredictable cause. Such extension shall not exceed
the total number of days permitted under the regular statutory season.

**Source.** 1965, 290:2, eff. Sept. 5, 1965.

### Section 206:15-c

 **206:15-c Opening Closed Smelt Brooks to Persons With Disabilities.
–** Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter or fishing
regulations established under this chapter the executive director may
open to smelt fishing by any person with a disability and an assistant,
for a period not to exceed 60 days, any smelt brook where he has
determined the smelt population is at a near peak level and said opening
will be unlikely to result in harm to the smelt population or damage to
the surrounding property.

**Source.** 1977, 58:1. 1990, 140:2, II, III, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 206:15-d

 **206:15-d Definition. –** For the purposes of RSA 206:15-c, "person
with a disability'' means a person who by reason of a physical defect or
infirmity permanently requires the use of special aids to enable him to
propel himself.

**Source.** 1977, 58:1. 1990, 140:2, II, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 206:16

 **206:16 Closing Waters to Taking of Crayfish. –** The executive
director shall have the power and authority to close any body of water
to the taking of crayfish, for any length of time he may deem necessary,
and when in his opinion such action may be necessary for the protection
of the crayfish population in such body of water.

**Source.** 1953, 177:3, eff. May 21, 1953.

### Section 206:17

 **206:17 Penalties as Applicable to Altered Provisions. –** Whenever
the executive director shall by rule or regulation, pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, alter existing provisions of law, the
penalties applicable in cases of violation of such provisions of law as
shall be changed by such action of the executive director, shall apply
to violations of the rules and regulations of the executive director
amendatory to or substituted for such changed provisions of law.

**Source.** 1941, 49:2. RL 240:16.

### Section 206:18

 **206:18 Release of Information. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director of fish and game may, at any time he or
she deems advisable, release any information related to the stocking of
fish to include but not be limited to: the species, number, size of
fish, or the name of the stream, pond, or lake stocked, but in no
instance shall any employee of the fish and game department, except for
a designee of the executive director, disclose where or when they were
or will be stocked. The executive director may penalize any employee who
violates the provisions of this section as he or she deems reasonable
and just.
                                             
 II. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the release of
information to persons or organizations assisting or cooperating with
the fish and game department and its personnel in the stocking of such
fish pursuant to agreements authorized by the executive director of the
fish and game department.
                                             
 III. The state of New Hampshire, the fish and game department, and
their agents and employees are hereby released from any liability,
claims, or demands relating to any loss, damage, or injury, however
extreme, resulting from or incidental to such stocking.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. 1941, 49:3. RL 240:17. RSA 206:18. 1967, 226:1.
1977, 298:1. 2004, 37:1, eff. April 23, 2004.

### Section 206:18-a

 **206:18-a Exception. –** The provisions of RSA 206:18 shall not
apply to the stocking of any species of fish, for which species there is
no open season authorized at the time of stocking, and which species
shall remain continuously protected for at least one year thereafter.

**Source.** 1969, 146:2, eff. July 1, 1969.

### Section 206:19

 **206:19 Penalty for Violation of Rules and Regulations. –** Whoever
violates any rule, regulation or order of the executive director issued
pursuant to the authority contained in the preceding sections of this
subdivision, for which violation no specific penalty is provided, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. 1941, 49:4. RL 240:18. RSA 206:19. 1973,
528:110, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 206:19-a

 **206:19-a General Penalty. –** Unless otherwise herein provided,
any person convicted of a violation of any provision of Title XVIII, or
of any rule or regulation made under authority thereof, shall be guilty
of a violation for the first offense. For any subsequent offense
committed during the same calendar year he shall be guilty of a
violation if a natural person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other
person.

**Source.** 1977, 450:2, eff. June 12, 1977.

### Section 206:20

 **206:20 Continuation of Laws. –** Laws relating to the opening and
closing of seasons for taking fish, the size, number and weight limits
of fish, and other conditions governing the method and manner of taking
fish, shall be continued in full force and effect until altered by rule
or regulation of the executive director as provided in this subdivision.

**Source.** 1941, 49:5. RL 240:19.

### Section 206:21

 **206:21 Reports. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2009, 7:4, II, eff. June 16,
2009.
                                             ]

### Section 206:22

 **206:22 Printing and Supplies. –** The executive director shall
have authority to have printed the biennial report and such bulletins,
literature, posters, and other printing as may be necessary to the work
of the department, he to purchase all supplies and equipment subject to
the provisions of RSA 8:14-32.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:21.

### Section 206:22-a

 **206:22-a Publications, Specialty Items and Fund Raising Revolving
Fund. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a revolving fund to be known as the
publications, specialty items and fund raising revolving fund in the
fish and game department. The revolving fund shall be used for the
purpose of producing, purchasing or marketing publications and specialty
items which shall be offered to the public at a reasonable charge. All
income from the sale of such publications and items shall be deposited
into the special fund.
                                             
 II. (a) The fish and game department may promote, market or
otherwise engage in fund raising activities for any special account
including, but not limited to, the endangered and nongame species
management programs established in RSA 212-A and RSA 212-B,
respectively, and any other program intended to educate, protect,
restore, enhance or promote department responsibilities.
                                             
 (b) The proceeds from such fund raising activities shall be
deposited to the respective special accounts of the programs listed in
subparagraph (a), or any other such programs established after July 1,
1992.
                                             
 (c) The executive director may transfer funds from any of the
respective accounts of the programs listed in subparagraph (a) or any
other such programs established after July 1, 1992. The transfer of such
funds for the purposes of this paragraph shall be authorized
notwithstanding any exclusive use or dedicated purpose stated in the
subaccount of any such program. The respective subaccounts are hereby
appropriated for such purpose.
                                             
 III. The amount in the publications, specialty items and fund
raising revolving fund shall not exceed 
                                             $100,000 and any amounts in
excess of 
                                             $100,000 shall be deposited in the fish and game fund. Any
moneys in the fund not in excess of 
                                             $100,000 shall not lapse.
                                             
 IV. The executive director may use moneys in the fund to purchase
certain merchandise, supplies, and materials, as provided in RSA
206:22-b.

**Source.** 1983, 65:1. 1989, 408:97. 1992, 58:1. 1994, 246:1. 2003,
60:1. 2007, 220:4, eff. July 1, 2007. 2013, 144:72, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 206:22-b

 **206:22-b Purchases. –** The executive director may purchase such
merchandise for resale and such operating supplies and materials as may
be necessary for the operation of the department. Items for resale may
be purchased in accordance with RSA 21-I:18, I(k). All operating
supplies and materials shall be purchased through the department of
administrative services, division of procurement and support services.
Such purchases shall be a charge upon the revolving fund established in
RSA 206:22-a

**Source.** 1994, 246:2, eff. June 2, 1994. 2014, 327:55, eff. Aug. 2,
2014.

### Section 206:23

 **206:23 Cooperation. –** The executive director shall enter into
cooperation with the departments of the federal government and of this
and all other states, for the protection, propagation and preservation
of all wildlife in this state, and shall execute all matters pertaining
thereto, including a biological survey of the state.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:22. RSA 206:23. 1975, 340:2. 1995, 51:1,
eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 206:23-a

 **206:23-a Cooperation With Private Parties. –** The executive
director, with the consent of the commission, shall have the power and
authority to enter into agreements with individuals, partnerships and
corporations whether resident or nonresident for the purpose of
implementing fishways or fish ladders and any other matters relative to
the protection, propagation and preservation of fish, game and
fur-bearing animals of this state.

**Source.** 1973, 67:1, eff. June 1, 1973.

### Section 206:23-b

 **206:23-b Fish and Game Statutes. –** The executive director of the
department of fish and game shall annually provide copies of current
fish and game statutes, if available as a single publication from a
commercial publisher, without charge only upon request of the members of
the house wildlife and marine resources committee and the senate fish
and game/recreation committee.

**Source.** 1996, 97:1, eff. July 14, 1996.

### Section 206:23-c

 **206:23-c Wildlife Population Reductions; Long Island, Town of
Moultonborough. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director, with the approval of the commission, may
conduct wildlife population reductions and initiate management actions
necessary to protect against disease, genetic, ecological,
environmental, health, safety, or welfare risks to persons or wildlife.
The executive director may exercise such authority only on Long Island,
town of Moultonborough; and to the species, sex, age, number, and timing
of the population reduction or management action.
                                             
 II. The executive director may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
necessary to conduct an orderly and efficient wildlife population
reduction or management action, including, but not limited to:
                                             
 (a) The method and manner of taking.
                                             
 (b) Participation in the reduction or management action.
                                             
 (c) Inspection, possession, processing, sale, transportation, or
releases of wildlife.
                                             
 (d) Permits, including application or permit fees for residents
or nonresidents, to undertake wildlife reduction or management actions
under terms and conditions established in the permit issued by the
executive director.
                                             
 III. The executive director may enter into agreements with
individuals, partnerships, and corporations, whether resident or
nonresident, for the purpose of implementing population reductions or
management actions as specified in this section.

**Source.** 1996, 259:1, eff. Aug. 9, 1996.

Conservation Officers, Superintendents of Hatcheries,
                                             
and Other Employees
                                             
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 206:24

 **206:24 Number, Etc. –** Subject to regulations of the state
personnel commission, the executive director shall determine the number
of conservation officers and superintendents of hatcheries, shall
appoint and remove all conservation officers and superintendents of
hatcheries, and shall hire such experts and office assistants as in his
judgment are necessary for the proper execution of his duties. A copy of
the appointment of each conservation officer shall be filed in the
office of the executive director.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:23. 1949, 288:1.

### Section 206:24-a

 **206:24-a Conservation Officers Work and Pay Schedule. –**

                                             [Repealed 1986, 135:1, VIII, eff. May 27, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 206:25

 **206:25 Reports. –** Each conservation officer shall keep a record
of his official acts, receipts, and expenditures and, when requested by
the executive director, shall make such report and in such form as the
executive director may prescribe.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:24.

### Section 206:26

 **206:26 Powers. –** The executive director, if certified as a
police officer in accordance with RSA 188-F:26, IV, and each
conservation officer, shall have the power:
                                             
 I. To enforce all laws, rules and regulations relating to all
wildlife, and to go upon any property outside of buildings, posted or
otherwise, in the performance of their duties;
                                             
 II. To execute all warrants and search warrants, based on probable
cause, for the violation of laws, rules and regulations relating to all
wildlife;
                                             
 III. To serve subpoenas issued for the trial of all offenses against
the laws, rules and regulations relating to all wildlife;
                                             
 IV. To carry firearms or other weapons, concealed or otherwise, in
the performance of their duties;
                                             
 V. To arrest without warrant, but based on probable cause, and on
view any person found violating any law, rule or regulation relating to
all wildlife, take such person before a court having jurisdiction for
trial, and detain such person in custody at the expense of the state
until trial;
                                             
 VI. To stop and to search without a warrant and to examine in the
field, in the highway, at an airbase or on the stream, any person, or
any boat, conveyance, aircraft, vehicle, gamebag, game coat, creel,
crate, box, locker or other receptacle, in the presence of the owner if
reasonably possible, or any so-called fish house or bob-house, in the
presence of the occupant, for all wildlife, when there is reasonable and
articulable suspicion to believe that any wildlife, or any illegal
apparatus subject to forfeiture, is concealed thereon or therein;
                                             
 VII. To secure and execute search warrants, based on probable cause,
and in pursuance thereof, to enter any building, enclosure, vehicle or
car, and to break open any apartment, chest, locker, box, trunk, crate,
basket, bag, package or container, and to examine the contents thereof;
                                             
 VIII. To seize and take possession of all wildlife, which has been
caught, taken or killed, or had in possession, or under control, or
which has been shipped or is about to be shipped, at any time, in any
manner, or for any purpose, contrary to the laws of this state and to
dispose of all wildlife which has been confiscated, seized or picked up
for any reason, in a manner prescribed by the executive director, unless
otherwise authorized by the court exercising proper jurisdiction;
                                             
 IX. To seize all fishing tackle, guns, shooting and hunting
paraphernalia, hunting or fishing licenses, traps, boats, decoys or
other appliances used in violation of any law or rule relating to all
wildlife when making an arrest, or found in the execution of a search
warrant, and hold the same at the owner's expense until the fine and
costs imposed for the violation have been paid in full;
                                             
 X. To caution persons of the danger from fires in the forests and to
extinguish a fire left burning, to give notice to the forest fire warden
and interested parties of fires threatening to extend beyond control,
and assume all lawful powers of a fire warden pending the fire warden's
arrival;
                                             
 XI. To enforce the laws relating to snowmobiles, all terrain
vehicles, trespass on posted lands, motor vehicles blocking private
ways, vandalism and malicious damage to property and livestock, use and
transportation of firearms for hunting, bob houses, boats, dogs at
large, breaking and entering and larceny in remote areas, protection of
the environment, littering and dumping;
                                             
 XII. To conduct search and rescue operations in woodlands and inland
waters and to provide security at the sites thereof, and to enforce
recovery of expenses under RSA 206:26-bb;
                                             
 XIII. In emergencies upon their requests, to cooperate with other
law enforcement agencies;
                                             
 XIV. To have and exercise the powers and privileges granted by RSA
594 as to matters within their jurisdiction under this section; and
                                             
 XV. To enforce all provisions of RSA title XXI relative to motor
vehicle laws, absent any violation or suspected violation of fish and
game laws, with the same authority and powers as any other certified law
enforcement officer in the state.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. 1937, 188:2. 1941, 126:1. RL 240:25. 1947,
165:1. 1949, 52:1. 1951, 48:1. RSA 206:26. 1971, 139:1. 1975, 340:3.
1977, 64:1. 1994, 142:1. 1995, 51:2. 1998, 252:7. 2008, 167:1, eff. June
6, 2008. 2012, 209:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2013. 2014, 249:1, 2, eff. Sept. 19,
2014.

### Section 206:26-a

 **206:26-a Interference With Conservation Officer. –** It is
unlawful to resist or attempt to resist arrest by a conservation
officer, or to obstruct or attempt to obstruct, or to intimidate or
interfere with a conservation officer in the performance of his duty.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1965, 96:1. 1973, 528:111, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 206:26-b

 **206:26-b Authority and Duties of Executive Director and
Conservation Officers. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director and each conservation officer shall:
                                             
 (a) Be ex officio constables throughout the state;
                                             
 (b) Have general power to enforce all criminal laws of the state
and to serve criminal processes and make arrests, under proper warrants,
in all counties; and
                                             
 (c) Have general power to enforce any provision of RSA title XXI
relative to the operation of OHRVs, snowmobiles, watercraft, or boats.
                                             
 II. The executive director and each conservation officer shall not:
                                             
 (a) Serve civil processes; or
                                             
 (b) Act or be used or called upon for service within any town in
any industrial dispute unless actual violence has occurred, and then
only upon order of the governor.
                                             
 III. When the executive director or any conservation officer shall
apprehend any person who has committed or attempted to commit a felony,
the executive director shall immediately make a report to the county
attorney and the sheriff of the county in which the offense was, or was
suspected of being, committed and such cases shall be investigated and
prosecuted by said county official with the cooperation of the executive
director or conservation officer.
                                             
 IV. The provisions of paragraphs I, II and III as they pertain to
the executive director shall not apply to any executive director who has
not been certified as a police officer in accordance with RSA 188-F:26,
IV.
                                             
 V. Each fish and game conservation officer shall be required to
maintain training and certification for wilderness first responder,
basic life support and cardiopulmonary resuscitation but shall not be
required to obtain licensure under RSA 153-A.

**Source.** 1975, 410:1. 1986, 174:1. 2006, 260:36, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.
2013, 190:3, eff. Aug. 31, 2013. 2014, 249:3, eff. Sept. 19, 2014.

### Section 206:26-bb

 **206:26-bb Search and Rescue Response Expenses; Recovery. –**
                                             
 I. Any person determined by the department to have acted negligently
in requiring a search and rescue response by the department shall be
liable to the department for the reasonable cost of the department's
expenses for such search and rescue response, unless the person shows
proof of possessing a current version of any of the following:
                                             
 (a) A hunting or fishing license issued by this state under title
XVIII.
                                             
 (b) An OHRV registration under RSA 215-A, a snowmobile
registration under RSA 215-C, or a vessel registration under RSA 270-E.
                                             
 (c) A voluntary hike safe card. The executive director shall
adopt rules under RSA 541-A for the issuance to purchasers on the
department's Internet site, and subsequent annual renewals, of a hike
safe card prior to a person's need for a search and rescue response. The
annual fee for a hike safe card shall be 
                                             $25 for an individual or 
                                             $35
for a family. A "family'' shall consist of the purchaser, the
purchaser's spouse, and the purchaser's minor children or stepchildren.
In addition, if the purchaser or the purchaser's spouse has been
appointed as a family guardian for an individual under RSA 464-A, that
individual shall be considered part of the purchaser's family. A
transaction fee determined by the department shall be for the Internet
license agent as provided in RSA 214-A:2. The executive director shall
forward to the state treasurer the sum collected from each individual
hike safe card purchased and each family hike safe card purchased, less
the amount of such transaction fee, for deposit in the fish and game
search and rescue fund under RSA 206:42.
                                             
 I-a. The executive director shall bill the responsible person for
such costs. Payment shall be made to the department within 30 days after
the receipt of the bill, or by some other date determined by the
executive director. If any person shall fail or refuse to pay the costs
by the required date, the department may pursue payment by legal action,
or by settlement or compromise, and the responsible person shall be
liable for interest from the date that the bill is due and for legal
fees and costs incurred by the department in obtaining and enforcing
judgment under this paragraph. All amounts recovered, less the costs of
collection and any percentage due pursuant to RSA 7:15-a, IV(b), shall
be paid into the fish and game search and rescue fund established in RSA
206:42.
                                             
 II. If any person fails to make payment under paragraph I, the
executive director of the fish and game department may:
                                             
 (a) Order any license, permit, or tag issued by the fish and game
department to be suspended or revoked, after due hearing.
                                             
 (b) Notify the commissioner of the department of health and human
services of such nonpayment. The nonpayment shall constitute cause for
revocation of any license or certification issued by the commissioner
pursuant to RSA 126-A:20 and RSA 151:7.
                                             
 (c) Notify the director of motor vehicles of such nonpayment and
request suspension of the person's driver's license pursuant to RSA
263:56.
                                             
 III. Regardless of a person's possession of a document satisfying
subparagraph I(a), (b), or (c), a person shall be liable to the
department for search and rescue response expenses if the person is
judged to have done any of the actions listed in RSA 153-A:24, I.

**Source.** 2008, 167:2, eff. June 6, 2008. 2014, 230:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2015. 2016, 165:1, eff. June 3, 2016; 166:1, 2, eff. June 3, 2016.

### Section 206:26-c

 **206:26-c Compensation for Injuries in Line of Duty. –** Any
injury, which is due to a hostile or overt act or an act caused by
another during the performance of duties which are considered dangerous
in nature, received by the executive director, any conservation officer,
or any deputy conservation officer while on assignment, patrol, or
official active duty which requires that the officer or executive
director be hospitalized, or to the extent that the officer or executive
director is unable to perform normal or routine duties, shall not be
charged against annual leave or sick leave for the time lost due to the
injury. During such time the officer or executive director shall remain
on the active payroll. The fish and game commission shall make any
determination as to whether an injury is in the line of duty and due to
a hostile or overt act or an act caused by another during the
performance of duties which are considered dangerous in nature, and,
after approval by governor and council, the determination shall be
final.

**Source.** 2001, 291:3, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 206:27

 **206:27 Reciprocal Agreements. –**
                                             
 I. Any game protector, fish and game warden, conservation officer,
or other person, who is authorized to make arrests for violations of the
conservation or fish laws of the state of Maine or of the commonwealth
of Massachusetts shall have power and authority to make arrest of any
person fishing, in violation of the fish laws of such state or states,
on any part of any waters or portion thereof lying between either of
said states and the state of New Hampshire or on the shores thereof and
to take the person so arrested for trial to the state in which the
violation was committed and there to prosecute such person according to
the laws of such state. This section shall be effective as to the state
of Maine or the commonwealth of Massachusetts or both, when said state
or states shall enact a similar law giving similar authority to the fish
and game conservation officers of this state to make arrests on said
boundary waters between either of said states, or both, and this state.
                                             
 II. The secretary of state shall notify the secretary of the state
of Maine and the secretary of the commonwealth of Massachusetts of the
passage of this provision.
                                             
 III. Subject to the provisions relative to reciprocal laws by the
state of Maine or the commonwealth of Massachusetts, this section shall
take effect upon its passage.

**Source.** 1943, 16:1, 2, 3, eff. Feb. 16, 1943.

Deputy Conservation Officers
----------------------------

### Section 206:27-a

 **206:27-a Deputy Conservation Officers. –** The executive director
is authorized to recruit, train and organize a deputy conservation
officer force for the purpose of assisting conservation officers in the
enforcement of fish and game laws and augmenting the conservation
officer force in such manner as the executive director may deem
appropriate. The executive director may appoint such deputy conservation
officers from retired conservation officers, hatchery personnel,
bio-aides and other departmental personnel and any other persons he
deems necessary as deputy conservation officers. Such deputy
conservation officers shall at all times be under the direction, control
and supervision of the executive director or his agent and shall be
subject to the rules and regulations promulgated by the executive
director and shall serve at the pleasure of the executive director.

**Source.** 1977, 255:1. 1979, 240:1, eff. Aug. 14, 1979.

### Section 206:27-b

 **206:27-b Appointment and Qualifications. –** Members of the deputy
conservation officer force shall be appointed by the executive director.
Each member of the force shall be:
                                             
 I. A citizen of the United States;
                                             
 II. A resident of the state of N.H.;
                                             
 III. Free from conviction of a felony in this state or any other
state;
                                             
 IV. At least 21 years of age;
                                             
 V. Meet any other qualifications as the executive director shall
deem appropriate.

**Source.** 1977, 255:1. 1979, 240:2. 2000, 149:1, eff. July 22, 2000.

### Section 206:27-c

 **206:27-c Powers. –** All members of the deputy conservation
officer force shall have all powers set forth in 206:26, 206:26-a and
206:26-b; but such powers shall extend only during the period when such
member is on official active duty under the direction of the executive
director or his agent.

**Source.** 1977, 255:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1977.

### Section 206:27-d

 **206:27-d Workers' Compensation. –** All deputy conservation
officers who are engaged in official duties shall be considered state
employees for the purpose of the workers' compensation for state
employees under RSA 8:60 and 61. The coverage shall include those deputy
conservation officers engaged in official duties who may not be
compensated at the time of their mishap or injury.

**Source.** 1977, 255:1. 1979, 240:4, eff. Aug. 14, 1979.

### Section 206:27-e

 **206:27-e Removal. –** Any member of the deputy conservation
officer force may be suspended or discharged at the discretion of the
executive director.

**Source.** 1977, 255:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1977.

### Section 206:27-f

 **206:27-f Retirement Benefits. –** No deputy conservation officer
appointed under the authority of provisions of RSA 206:27-a shall be
deemed to be eligible for group II retirement benefits unless said
officer has had previous coverage under group II retirement.

**Source.** 1977, 255:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1977.

### Section 206:27-g

 **206:27-g Uniforms and Equipment. –** The executive director may
provide for deputy conservation officer uniforms and equipment necessary
in the performance of their duties, but all such property shall remain
the property of the state. The executive director shall maintain an
inventory of said property and shall charge against each member the
value of the property issued to him. If it shall be determined by the
executive director that any loss or destruction of such property was due
to carelessness or neglect on the part of such member the value of such
property shall be paid by such member and the amount thereof may be
deducted from the compensation of such member.

**Source.** 1979, 240:3, eff. Aug. 14, 1979.

### Section 206:27-h

 **206:27-h Compensation. –** All deputy conservation officers shall
be compensated for their services while actively engaged in the
performance of their official duties at rates as fixed by the executive
director. This section shall not prohibit a deputy conservation officer
from volunteering his or her service without compensation.

**Source.** 1979, 240:3. 2000, 149:2, eff. July 22, 2000. 2014, 230:2,
eff. July 21, 2014.

Fish and Game Department Volunteers
-----------------------------------

### Section 206:27-i

 **206:27-i Indemnification. –** Any person recognized by the
executive director, department of fish and game, as a fish and game
volunteer who is under the supervision of a department employee and is
actually performing assigned volunteer duties or search and rescue
activities shall be considered a state employee for the purpose of
defense and indemnification from civil suits under RSA 99-D; provided,
however, such a volunteer shall not be indemnified from any civil suit
arising out of a criminal act.

**Source.** 1987, 75:1, eff. June 29, 1987.

Special Areas in White Mountain National Forest
-----------------------------------------------

### Section 206:28

 **206:28 Authority for Establishment. –** The forest service of the
United States department of agriculture may make reasonable rules and
regulations for the protection of game and other animals, birds, and
fish on such area or areas in the White Mountain forest reserve as shall
be designated from time to time by said forest service with the written
approval of the commission. Said areas shall be designated as areas for
the propagation, rearing, and protection of fish and game and other
wildlife. A description of said area or areas and a plan or map thereof
shall be filed in the office of said commission.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:31.

### Section 206:29

 **206:29 Limitation. –** At no time shall the areas designated as in
RSA 206:28 exceed 100,000 acres, in total.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:32.

### Section 206:30

 **206:30 Posting. –** A copy of any rule or regulation made under
the provisions of RSA 206:28, attested by an official or employee of
said forest service, shall be posted on the designated area to which
said rules and regulations are made applicable and a like copy, with
affidavit of posting thereon, shall be filed for record in the office of
the commission and in the office of the secretary of state.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:33.

### Section 206:31

 **206:31 Penalty. –** Whoever shall violate any rule or regulation
made pursuant to the provisions of RSA 206:28 and posted and filed as
provided for herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:34. RSA 206:31. 1973, 528:112, eff. Oct.
31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 206:32

 **206:32 Application of Laws. –** During the period any such rules
or regulations shall be in force the laws of the state relative to fish
and game inconsistent therewith shall be suspended.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:35.

Fish and Game Fund
------------------

### Section 206:33

 **206:33 How Constituted. –** The executive director shall, at least
once a month, make return to the state treasurer of all moneys received
and collected by the department from licenses, permits, fines,
forfeitures or whatever source. The state treasurer shall keep all such
moneys in a separate account to be known as the fish and game fund. Such
fund is annually appropriated for the use of the department during the
fiscal year of its receipt by the state treasurer, in the manner
hereinafter provided. The executive director shall file with the
commission a statement of the finances of the department monthly.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:36.

### Section 206:33-a

 **206:33-a Gifts and Donations; Account Established. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
individual gifts and donations not exceeding 
                                             $2,500 in value in a year
may be received by the fish and game department with the consent of the
commission and without the approval of the governor or the governor and
council. Individual gifts and donations exceeding 
                                             $2,500 in value in a
year may be received by the fish and game department with the consent of
the commission and with the approval of the governor and council.
                                             
 II. There is established an account within the fish and game fund to
be known as the gifts and donations account. Moneys in the gifts and
donations account are nonlapsing and continually appropriated to the
fish and game department. All gifts and donations shall be deposited in
this account, except gifts and donations made to the department in
support of a specific program that has an established dedicated account
in title XVIII which shall be deposited into the appropriate dedicated
account and expended in accordance with the purpose of the dedicated
account.
                                             
 III. This section shall not apply to gifts, grants, bequests, or
donations received pursuant to RSA 206:33-c.

**Source.** 1983, 66:1. 2004, 149:1. 2006, 18:1, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 206:33-b

 **206:33-b Transfers From Fish and Game Fund. –** If the expenditure
of additional funds over budget estimates is necessary for the proper
functioning of the fish and game department, the department may request,
with prior approval of the legislative fiscal committee, that the
governor and council authorize the transfer of funds from the fish and
game fund for fish and game department purposes.

**Source.** 1991, 355:61, eff. July 1, 1991.

### Section 206:33-c

 **206:33-c Agreements With Nonprofit Partners. –**
                                             
 I. The commission, in consultation with the executive director, may
designate one or more nonprofit foundations as an official nonprofit
partner of the department for the purpose of accepting gifts, grants,
bequests, and donations to further department goals.
                                             
 II. An official nonprofit partner shall be a nonpolitical legal
entity that:
                                             
 (a) Is incorporated under the laws of this state;
                                             
 (b) Has been granted an exemption from federal income tax under
section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; and
                                             
 (c) Works with the department to further department goals.
                                             
 III. The executive director shall have the power and authority to
enter into agreements on behalf of the fish and game department with an
official nonprofit partner. Any such agreement shall be subject to
review and approval by the attorney general.
                                             
 IV. The executive director is authorized to assign staff, use
department facilities, and pay necessary and reasonable expenses
associated with executing and implementing agreements and facilitating a
successful partnership between the department and an official nonprofit
partner.
                                             
 V. Any moneys received pursuant to this section shall be accounted
for and expended in accordance with RSA 206:33.

**Source.** 2006, 18:2, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 206:33-d

 **206:33-d Wildlife Legacy Initiative; Account Established. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director may establish a wildlife legacy initiative
that encourages gifts and donations to support fish, wildlife, and
marine resource conservation projects, conservation education
activities, and opportunities to use, access, and appreciate these
public resources by promoting the benefits of the initiative and
recognizing individuals or organizations for their voluntary
participation. The executive director in establishing any relationship
with such persons shall use care to deal with persons who are supportive
of the full mission of the fish and game department and not persons
opposing the legal taking of game or fish.
                                             
 II. The executive director may establish levels of giving and offer
incentives for various levels of donations, enter into agreements and
partnerships with the public or private sector as necessary to develop,
market, promote, solicit for, and conduct the wildlife legacy
initiative. The executive director may issue certificates,
documentation, and other gifts to identify and recognize participants.
                                             
 III. There is established an account within the fish and game fund
to be known as the wildlife legacy initiative account. All gifts and
donations received through the wildlife legacy initiative shall be
deposited in this account. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to
the contrary, donations made to the wildlife legacy initiative shall not
require acceptance by the commission or the governor and council. Moneys
deposited in the wildlife legacy initiative account are nonlapsing and
continually appropriated to the fish and game department and may be used
with approval of the fish and game commission for the purposes stated in
paragraphs I and II.

**Source.** 2006, 172:1, eff. July 23, 2006.

### Section 206:33-e

 **206:33-e Wildlife Heritage Foundation; Donation of Permits. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director may donate up to 5 fishing licenses and
hunting licenses along with any necessary permits to take up to 5 moose,
up to 5 deer, up to 5 bear, and up to 5 turkeys, each calendar year to
the Wildlife Heritage Foundation of New Hampshire, the official
nonprofit partner of the department pursuant to RSA 206:33-c. The
donated permits shall be used by the foundation to assist in its
corporate mission. The donation of permits shall not affect the number
of permits to be made available to the public by the department.
                                             
 II. The licenses and permits donated under paragraph I shall be
valid anywhere in the state open to the taking of the species selected,
and shall be valid to take moose, deer, bear, or turkey of either sex
during the established hunting season for that species. Prior to being
issued a hunting license under this section, a person shall meet the
hunting education requirements under RSA 214:23-a.
                                             
 III. The fish and game department shall submit an annual report to
the fiscal committee of the general court and the policy committees
responsible for wildlife issues in the senate and house of
representatives. The report shall identify funds received and expended
from the foundation and projects supported by the foundation during the
year.

**Source.** 2009, 226:1, eff. Sept. 14, 2009.

### Section 206:33-f

 **206:33-f Environmental Review Fees. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director may charge a fee for the review of
proposed projects which may adversely impact wildlife, including
threatened or endangered species of wildlife, if such review is
requested by a project developer, either public or private, regardless
of whether such request is received before or after an application is
submitted to any permitting agency.
                                             
 II. The fees established by this section shall be designed to
recover a reasonable portion of the costs of:
                                             
 (a) Reviewing, assessing, and monitoring the impacts to wildlife
of a proposed project;
                                             
 (b) Reviewing and assessing research, sampling, or modeling
protocols to be implemented either prior to or after the completion of a
project; and
                                             
 (c) Formulating recommendations designed to avoid, minimize,
and/or mitigate any potential adverse impacts of a project on wildlife.
                                             
 III. Fees shall be fixed in a schedule prepared and revised as
necessary by the executive director, and established in rules adopted
pursuant to RSA 541-A. Such schedule may differentiate among different
classes of projects based on the intensity of the requisite review by
the department.
                                             
 IV. All moneys received under this section shall be deposited into
the fish and game fund established under RSA 206:33 and used solely for
the purposes set forth in RSA 206:34-a.
                                             
 V. Receipt of the fees established by this section shall be a
prerequisite for any environmental review undertaken by the department.
Any permit or certificate dependent on the environmental review
undertaken by the department shall be invalid until the fees assessed
under this section are paid in full.

**Source.** 2015, 186:33, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 206:34

 **206:34 Fines. –**
                                             
 I. The court or justice of any court in which a complaint for a
violation of any law or rule relating to fish, game, fur-bearing
animals, or marine species, or any complaint brought by an employee of
the fish and game department for any violation of RSA 215-A or RSA
215-C, is prosecuted shall, within 30 days after any fine or forfeiture
is paid, remit the amount thereof to the executive director; provided,
however, that from each fine collected by a municipal or district court,
there shall be deducted 
                                             $10 and 20 percent of that part of the fine
which exceeds 
                                             $10, and the same shall be disposed of as provided in RSA
502:14 or RSA 502-A:8.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. Any person charged with a violation of any provision of RSA
title XVIII, excluding any offense for which the penalty is a
misdemeanor or felony, may plead guilty or nolo contendere by mail by
entering a plea as provided in RSA 502-A:19-b. If the plea is accepted
by the court, the defendant shall not be required to appear as directed
by the court.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:37. 1951, 224:11. RSA 206:34. 1957,
110:2. 1975, 35:1; 340:4. 1977, 588:44. 1981, 313:1. 1989, 114:1. 2005,
210:4. 2007, 54:3, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 206:34-a

 **206:34-a Use of Fish and Game Funds. –** All revenues accruing
from sales of licenses and permits, and any other revenue received by
the department, and any money reimbursed or granted to the department by
the state or federal government for fish, game, and wildlife
conservation or related programs shall be used solely for conservation,
restoration, management, educational benefit, recreational use, and
scientific study of the fish, game, and wildlife resources of the state,
including acquisition of property and general administration of RSA
title XVIII. Such funds shall be used for no other purposes.

**Source.** 1997, 88:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1997.

### Section 206:34-b

 **206:34-b Game Management Account Established; Report. –**
                                             
 I. The state treasurer shall establish a separate nonlapsing account
within the fish and game fund, to be known as the game management
account. Each month the department shall determine the number of stamps,
licenses, applications, or permits sold for moose, bear, turkey, and
waterfowl and, for each, transfer 
                                             $10 to the game management account.
The moneys in this account shall be used exclusively for the
implementation of a comprehensive population and habitat management
program, including research and management, protection, education, and
outreach for game as defined in RSA 207:1, IX, fur-bearing animals as
defined in RSA 207:1, VIII, and migratory game birds as defined in RSA
209:5 to include waterfowl, snipe, and woodcock. Funds in the game
management account are hereby continually appropriated for said
purposes. Said funds shall be expended for the purposes of this section
as determined by the executive director with approval of the
commission.
                                             
 II. The state treasurer shall segregate the moneys credited to the
game management account and invest these funds to obtain the highest
possible return on such investment until such funds are required to be
expended exclusively for the purposes specified in paragraph I. Interest
received on investments shall be credited to the account.
                                             
 III. The executive director shall submit a report annually by
October 1 to the chairpersons of the house and senate standing
committees having jurisdiction over the fish and game department on the
status of game populations in the state and a summary of expenditures
made from the game management account.

**Source.** 2007, 220:3, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 206:35

 **206:35 Disbursements. –** The expenses of the commission and the
salaries, compensation and expenses of the executive director,
conservation officers, superintendents of hatcheries, experts, and all
other employees of the department authorized under the provisions
hereof, including the premiums on any bonds required herein, shall be
charged to and paid out of said fish and game fund.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:38.

### Section 206:35-a

 **206:35-a Pheasant Stamp Revenues. –** The state treasurer shall
establish a separate account to which shall be credited all moneys
collected by the fish and game department from issuance of pheasant
stamps under RSA 214:9, X. The moneys in said account shall be used only
for purchase or propagation of pheasants, and is hereby appropriated for
said purposes. Said funds shall be expended for the purposes hereof as
determined by the executive director with the approval of the
commission. The moneys in said account shall be nonlapsing.

**Source.** 1975, 440:3. 1985, 291:1. 1986, 214:19, eff. Aug. 5, 1986.

### Section 206:35-b

 **206:35-b Wild Turkey License or Permit Revenues. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2007, 220:7, VI, eff. July 1, 2007, as amended by 2007, 263:58.
                                             ]

### Section 206:35-c

 **206:35-c Fish Food Sales Revenues. –** The state treasurer shall
establish a separate account to which shall be credited all monies
collected by the fish and game department from the sale of fish food at
hatchery vending machines. The moneys in said account shall be used for
the acquisition and maintenance of fish hatchery equipment and/or
emergency trout or salmon egg purchase and are hereby appropriated for
said purposes. Said funds shall be nonlapsing and are to be expended for
the purposes of this section as determined by the executive director
with the approval of the commission.

**Source.** 1983, 39:1, eff. June 20, 1983. 2013, 144:76, eff. July 1,
2013.

### Section 206:35-d

 **206:35-d Fishing Derbies Conducted by any Organizations. –**

                                             [Repealed 1996, 73:2, eff. June 12, 1996.
                                             ]

### Section 206:35-e

 **206:35-e Wallop-Breaux Funds. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 26:4, I, eff.
July 1, 1999.
                                             ]

### Section 206:36

 **206:36 Balance. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1976, 56:3, eff. June 4, 1976.
                                             ]

### Section 206:37

 **206:37 Control of Expenditures. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 568:130, II,
eff. July 1, 1981.
                                             ]

### Section 206:38

 **206:38 Purposes of Expenditures. –** The executive director, under
the supervision of the commission, shall have the exclusive power to
expend for the protection, conservation, propagation and restoration of
fish, game, fur-bearing animals and marine species, all funds of the
state acquired for the protection, conservation, propagation or
restoration of fish, game, fur-bearing animals and marine species,
arising from state appropriations, licenses, gifts or otherwise.

**Source.** 1935, 123:1. RL 240:41. RSA 206:38. 1975, 340:5, eff. Aug.
6, 1975.

### Section 206:39

 **206:39 Federal Funds. –** The department of fish and game is
authorized to receive and expend with the approval of the governor and
council any gifts and grants from any source including the United States
of America and to hold property real and personal, acquired thereunder
to complete any project authorized under the provisions of this title.

**Source.** 1969, 251:1, eff. Aug. 16, 1969.

### Section 206:40

 **206:40 Copies of Plans and Requests to be Filed. –** The
department of fish and game shall file copies of any plans or requests
for funds submitted to the United States government as part of an
application for federal funds with the speaker of the house and the
president of the senate within 7 days after said plans or requests for
funds are submitted.

**Source.** 1969, 251:1, eff. Aug. 16, 1969.

Conservation Stamps
-------------------

### Section 206:41

 **206:41 Wildlife Emblems; Wildlife Protection Fund. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2003, 60:5, eff. July 1, 2003
                                             ].

Fish and Game Search and Rescue Fund
------------------------------------

### Section 206:42

 **206:42 Fish and Game Search and Rescue Fund. –** The additional
fee of 
                                             $1 collected under the provisions of RSA 270-E:5, II(b) for each
private boat registered, under RSA 215-A:23, X for each OHRV registered,
and under RSA 215-C:39, XI for each snowmobile registered, shall be paid
over to the state treasurer who shall keep such fees in a special fund
to be expended by the fish and game department for use in search and
rescue operations. The special fund shall be nonlapsing. All funds
received under this subdivision are continually appropriated to the fish
and game department for the purposes of this subdivision. The fish and
game department shall report to the fiscal committee on a quarterly
basis beginning on October 1, 1989, on the expenditures made from the
fund.

**Source.** 1989, 408:94. 1990, 229:19. 1997, 268:1. 2005, 210:5, eff.
July 1, 2006.
