---
title: CHAPTER 207 GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO FISH AND GAME
---

TITLE XVIII
                                             
FISH AND GAME
=============

CHAPTER 207
                                             
GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO FISH AND GAME
--------------------------------------

Definitions, Inclusions, Methods of Taking, Etc.
------------------------------------------------

### Section 207:1

 **207:1 Definitions. –** Words and phrases used in this title shall
be construed as follows:
                                             
 I. Angling: The taking of fish by line in hand, or rod in hand to
which is attached a cast of artificial flies, or an artificial bait, or
hooks or other devices for the attachment of bait. A person may have in
use not more than 2 such lines at one time. Nothing in this title shall
prohibit the use of a rod-holder in a boat.
                                             
 II. Bag and Creel Limit: The number or weight of any kind of
wildlife permitted to be killed in a specified time.
                                             
 II-a. Baiting: The act of placing meat, carrion, honey or any other
food or ingestible substance capable of luring or attracting coyote,
fur-bearing animals, game birds, or game animals with the exception of
gray squirrel.
                                             
 II-b. Baited Area: An area where meat, carrion, honey or any other
food or ingestible substance is placed, capable of luring or attracting
coyote, fur-bearing animals, game birds, or game animals with the
exception of gray squirrel.
                                             
 III. Brook Trout: Charr, commonly called brook trout, rainbow trout,
brown trout, and Loch Leven trout.
                                             
 IV. Closed Season: That period of time during which fish, game, wild
or fur-bearing animals or marine species may not be taken or killed, and
all periods of time not included within the open season.
                                             
 IV-a. Commercial Fisherman: Any person who takes, possesses, lands,
or transports, on the waters of this state, any marine species by any
method for the purposes of sale.
                                             
 V. Fin Fish: Includes all species and subspecies of fish listed
under the definition of fish.
                                             
 VI. Fish: A member of any of the following classes: Cyclostomata,
including, but not limited to, hagfishes and lampreys; elasmobranchii,
including, but not limited to, sharks, skates, and rays; and pisces,
including, but not limited to, trout, perch, bass, minnows, and catfish;
including, any part, product, egg or offspring thereof, or the dead body
or parts thereof, excluding fossils.
                                             
 VII. Fly: A hook dressed with feathers, hair, thread, tinsel or any
similar material to which no spinner, spoon or similar device is added.
                                             
 VIII. Fur-Bearing Animals: Beaver, otter, marten, sable, mink,
fisher or fisher cat, raccoon, bobcat, fox, coyote, opossum, weasel,
skunk, and muskrat.
                                             
 IX. Game: Game birds and game animals.
                                             
 X. Game Animals: Moose, bear, caribou, elk, deer, wild rabbit, hare
and gray squirrel.
                                             
 XI. Game Birds: Ruffed grouse or partridge, spruce grouse, commonly
called spruce partridge, pheasant, quail, European partridge, chukar
partridge and turkeys.
                                             
 XII. Guide: Any person who engages for hire, either directly or
indirectly, in the business of guiding in this state.
                                             
 XIII. Guiding: Includes every act whereby a person for hire directs,
aids, assists or instructs another person in taking wildlife in this
state.
                                             
 XIV. Inclusion of Dates: Whenever a period is named during which an
act is permitted or prohibited, both the first and second dates named
shall be included within such period.
                                             
 XV. Marine Species: Includes all fish which usually inhabit salt
water, and all shellfish, lobsters, crabs, shrimps, clams, marine worms,
other marine invertebrates and marine plants found in the coastal waters
and estuarine waters under the jurisdiction of this state as defined in
RSA 1:14 and 1:15.
                                             
 XVI. Migratory Birds: See federal regulations.
                                             
 XVII. Nonresident: All persons not coming within the definition of
resident.
                                             
 XVIII. Number; Gender: The singular shall include the plural; and
the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
                                             
 XVIII-a. OHRV: Off highway recreational vehicle as defined in RSA
215-A:1, VI.
                                             
 XIX. Open Season: That period of time during which wildlife may be
legally taken or killed.
                                             
 XX. Person: Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
business trust, political subdivision or any other public or private
entity.
                                             
 XXI. Possession: Actual or constructive possession, and any control
of things referred to.
                                             
 XXII. Protected Birds: All wild birds not included within the terms
Game Birds and Unprotected Birds.
                                             
 XXIII. Resident: A resident of the state as defined in RSA 21:6,
except that no person shall be deemed to be a resident who claims
residence in any other state for any purpose.
                                             
 XXIII-a. Revoke or Revocation: The recision, cancellation,
nullification or invalidation of a license, the ability to acquire a
license, or the ability to participate in any of the activities
specified in the revocation.
                                             
 XXIV. Sell and Sale: Includes barter, exchange, and offering or
exposing for sale.
                                             
 XXV. Set Line: A set line means any unattended line which is placed
in the freshwaters of the state, including through the ice, for the
purpose of taking fish which is not under the direct view and control of
the person placing the line.
                                             
 XXVI. Small Game: Ruffed grouse or partridge, spruce grouse,
commonly called spruce partridge, pheasant, quail, European partridge,
chukar partridge, wild rabbit and hare, gray squirrel and migratory
birds (subject to federal regulations).
                                             
 XXVI-a. Suspend or Suspension: The temporary discontinuance or
cessation for a period of time of a license, the ability to acquire a
license or the ability to participate in any of the activities specified
in the suspension.
                                             
 XXVII. Take or Taking: Includes pursuing, shooting, hunting,
killing, capturing, trapping, snaring, and netting wildlife, and all
lesser acts, such as disturbing, harrying, worrying, wounding, or
placing, setting, drawing, or using any net or other device commonly
used to take wildlife, whether they result in taking or not, and
includes every attempt to take and every act of assistance to every
other person in taking or attempting to take wildlife, provided that
whenever taking is allowed by law, reference is had to taking by lawful
means and in lawful manner.
                                             
 XXVII-a. Taxidermy: The process of preparing, as in but not limited
to, preserving, stuffing, and mounting the skins of wildlife for
compensation.
                                             
 XXVIII. Transport and Transportation: All carrying or moving, or
causing to be carried or moved.
                                             
 XXIX. Unprotected Birds: English sparrows, European starlings, and
the common feral pigeon commonly known as the rock dove, Columba liva,
except such birds as are protected by the laws of the federal
government.
                                             
 XXX. When Accompanied: Within sight and hearing, excluding
electronic devices, when actual physical direction and control can be
effected.
                                             
 XXXI. White Deer: All deer which are primarily and predominantly
white in color.
                                             
 XXXII. Whole to Include Part: Every provision relating to wildlife
shall apply to a part of such wildlife.
                                             
 XXXIII. Wild Animals: All animals other than domestic animals.
                                             
 XXXIV. Wild Birds: All birds other than domestic birds.
                                             
 XXXV. Wildlife: Refers to all species of mammals, birds, fish,
mollusks, crustaceans, amphibians, invertebrates, reptiles or their
progeny or eggs which, whether raised in captivity or not, are normally
found in a wild state.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. 1937, 188:3. 1939, 216:1. 1941, 126:2-7. RL
241:1. 1945, 131:1. 1947, 40:1. 1949, 9:1. 1951, 84:1. 1953, 193:2. RSA
207:1. 1955, 277:5. 1959, 24:1; 72:1. 1961, 188:1. 1965, 145:1. 1971,
90:2. 1973, 61:1; 207:1. 1975, 163:1; 340:6-9. 1977, 12:2; 67:2; 111:1;
247:1. 1979, 57:1. 1981, 148:1. 1983, 49:1; 251:1; 254:2; 449:18. 1985,
42:1. 1986, 9:1. 1991, 224:1; 229:1, 2. 1992, 171:1, 2. 1993, 235:2, 3.
1994, 43:1. 1997, 10:1. 2005, 11:1. 2006, 14:1. 2008, 65:1. 2010, 18:1,
eff. July 6, 2010.

### Section 207:1-a

 **207:1-a Ranch Bred Mink. –** The provisions of this title shall
not apply to ranch bred mink.

**Source.** 1961, 125:1, eff. July 17, 1961.

### Section 207:2

 **207:2 Inclusions. –** No person shall at any time of the year
take, in any manner, number, or quantity, fish, game, fur-bearing
animals, or protected birds, or buy, sell, offer or expose for sale the
same, or any part thereof, transport or have the same in his possession,
wherever taken or killed, except as permitted in this title; and this
prohibition shall be a part of each permissive section or part thereof.
A person doing anything prohibited or neglecting to do anything required
by this title, with reference to such fish, game, fur-bearing animals,
and protected birds, shall be deemed to have violated this section. A
person who counsels, aids or assists in a violation of a provision of
this title, or knowingly shares in any of the proceeds of said violation
by receiving or possessing either fish, game, fur-bearing animals, or
protected birds, shall be fined or imprisoned as provided in this title
in the case of a person guilty of such violation.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:2.

### Section 207:2-a

 **207:2-a Minors Hunting. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall knowingly permit any minor, including a
nonresident minor, less than 16 years of age to hunt using a firearm,
bow and arrow, or crossbow and bolt, except when accompanied by a person
at least 18 years of age who is properly licensed for said activity. In
accordance with RSA 626:8, II(b), such person shall be held criminally
liable and fully accountable for any damage incurred or for any
violations which may be committed by the minor under the age of 16 while
hunting using a firearm, bow and arrow, or crossbow and bolt.
                                             
 II. No minor, including a nonresident minor, under the age of 16
shall hunt using a firearm, bow and arrow, or crossbow and bolt, except
when accompanied by a person at least 18 years of age who is properly
licensed for said activity.

**Source.** 1993, 235:4. 1997, 10:23, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 207:3

 **207:3 Lawful Methods of Taking. –**
                                             
 I. Wildlife shall be taken in the daytime between 1/2 hour before
sunrise and 1/2 hour after sunset with a gun fired at arm's length or
bow and arrow, unless otherwise specifically permitted.
                                             
 II. A full automatic rifle shall not be used at any time nor shall a
semi-automatic rifle be used to which is attached a magazine or clip
holding more than 5 cartridges, nor shall a full jacketed metal case
bullet be used, either in its original form or any alteration thereof.
                                             
 III. Paragraph II shall not apply to the use of .22 or smaller
caliber rimfire firearms.
                                             
 IV. A person may take wildlife during the open season therefor with
the aid of a dog, unless otherwise specifically prohibited.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:3. 1945, 146:1. RSA 207:3. 1977, 247:2.
2006, 19:1, eff. May 22, 2006.

### Section 207:3-a

 **207:3-a Prohibition. –** It is unlawful for a person to discharge
a firearm or to shoot with a bow and arrow or crossbow and bolt within
300 feet of a permanently occupied dwelling without permission of the
owner or the occupant of the dwelling or from the owner of the land on
which the person discharging the firearm or shooting the bow and arrow
or crossbow and bolt is situated. Whoever violates the provisions of
this section shall be guilty of a violation if a natural person, or
guilty of a misdemeanor if any other person.

**Source.** 1967, 388:1. 1973, 530:59. 1996, 161:3. 2004, 40:1, eff.
Jan. 1, 2005.

### Section 207:3-b

 **207:3-b Town of Bow. –** All hunting is forbidden in the following
area of the town of Bow with any firearm other than a shotgun, muzzle
loading rifle, bow and arrow, or crossbow as provided in RSA 208:7-a:
Southeast from the Concord-Bow boundary line along the west bank of the
Merrimack River, then westerly along the Bow-Hooksett boundary line,
then northerly along Interstate 93, then westerly along Robinson Road,
then northwest along Branch Londonderry Turnpike East, then southerly
along Woodhill Road, then southwesterly along Dunbarton Center Road to
the Bow-Dunbarton boundary line, then northwesterly along the
Bow-Dunbarton boundary line to the Bow-Hopkinton boundary line, then
easterly along the Bow-Hopkinton boundary line to the Bow-Concord
boundary line, then southeasterly and easterly along the Bow-Concord
boundary line to the west bank of the Merrimack River.

**Source.** 1975, 162:1. 1989, 32:1. 2003, 35:1, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 207:3-c

 **207:3-c Use of Firearms, Bow, or Crossbow in or Across Highway
Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall discharge a firearm, bow and arrow, or crossbow
and bolt from within 15 feet of the traveled portion of or across any
class I through V highway of the state. This section shall not apply to
those persons holding a special permit pursuant to RSA 207:7-a.
                                             
 II. No person shall discharge a firearm, bow and arrow, or crossbow
and bolt from or across the following public highways of the state
including the rights of way thereof:
                                             
 (a) Route 93 from the New Hampshire/Massachusetts state line in
the town of Salem to the New Hampshire/Vermont state line in the town of
Littleton;
                                             
 (b) Route 89 from the intersection with Route 93 in the town of
Bow to the New Hampshire/Vermont state line in the town of Lebanon;
                                             
 (c) Route 95 from the New Hampshire/Massachusetts state line in
the town of Seabrook to the New Hampshire/Maine state line in the town
of Portsmouth;
                                             
 (d) Route 293 from the intersection with Route 93 in the city of
Manchester to the intersection with Route 93 in the town of Hooksett;
                                             
 (e) Route 393 from the intersection with North Main Street in the
city of Concord to the Concord/Chichester town line;
                                             
 (f) Route 202/9 from the intersection with Route 114 in the town
of Henniker to the junction with Route 31 in the town of Hillsborough;
                                             
 (g) Route 16, commonly known as the Spaulding Turnpike, from the
intersection with Route 95 in the town of Portsmouth to the
Milton/Middletown town line;
                                             
 (h) Route 3, commonly known as the F.E. Everett Turnpike, from
the New Hampshire/Massachusetts state line in the city of Nashua to the
intersection with Route 101 in the town of Bedford;
                                             
 (i) Route 101 from the intersection with Route 114 in the town of
Bedford to the intersection with Route 1 in the town of Hampton.
                                             
 III. Any person convicted of discharging a firearm, bow and arrow,
or crossbow and bolt prohibited under the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1979, 37:1. 2004, 40:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2005.

### Section 207:3-d

 **207:3-d Baiting. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to the opening and closing of the season for the practice of
baiting for coyote, furbearing animals, game birds, or game animals with
the exception of gray squirrel.
                                             
 II. No person shall engage in the act of baiting on the property of
another unless he has secured from the owner or occupant of the property
upon which the bait is to be deposited a permit in writing, signed by
the owner or occupant, and until he has filed a copy of the permit with
the conservation officer in whose district the person plans to bait,
together with a topographic map or copy thereof showing the specific
location of the bait site.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, persons holding
a valid trapping license who have complied with the landowner permit
requirements of RSA 210:11 shall be allowed to place bait for the
trapping of fur-bearing animals during the open season.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the executive
director may grant a special permit for scientific purposes, animal
damage control, or for any other purpose at the discretion of the
executive director.
                                             
 V. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, no person shall
place bait less than 300 feet from a dwelling or public roadway, pathway
or trail.

**Source.** 1991, 224:2. 1995, 59:1. 2008, 65:2, eff. July 20, 2008.

### Section 207:3-e

 **207:3-e Use of Telemetry Equipment Restricted. –** No person shall
use a telemetry receiver to locate trail or tree hounds from 1/2 hour
before sunrise to 1/2 hour after sunset while in any motorized vehicle
or within 300 feet, as measured from the center of the traveled
position, of any public highway or any private road open to use by the
public. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty
of a violation if a natural person, or guilty of a misdemeanor if any
other person.

**Source.** 1991, 363:2, eff. July 2, 1991.

### Section 207:4

 **207:4 Silencing Devices. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2016, 234:2, I, eff. June
10, 2016.
                                             ]

### Section 207:5

 **207:5 Limit on Possession. –** No person may have in his
possession at one time more wildlife than he may lawfully take in 2
days, unless otherwise provided in this title.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:4. RSA 207:5. 1977, 247:3, eff. Aug. 19,
1977.

### Section 207:6

 **207:6 Ferrets. –** No person, while hunting or obviously on his
way to or from hunting, shall have a ferret in his possession, custody
or control.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:5.

### Section 207:7

 **207:7 Hunting From Motor Vehicle, OHRV, Snowmobile, Boat, or
Aircraft. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall take or attempt to take wild birds or wild
animals from a motor vehicle, OHRV, snowmobile as defined in RSA
215-C:1, boat, aircraft or other craft propelled by mechanical power.
                                             
 II. No person shall have or carry, in or on a motor vehicle, OHRV,
snowmobile, or aircraft, whether moving or stationary, a cocked
crossbow, a loaded rifle or loaded shotgun, or a rifle or shotgun with a
cartridge in a magazine or clip attached to the gun.
                                             
 III. No person shall have in or on a boat or other craft while being
propelled by mechanical power, or in a boat or other craft being towed
by a boat or other craft propelled by mechanical power, a cocked
crossbow, a loaded rifle or loaded shotgun, or a rifle or shotgun with a
cartridge in a magazine or clip attached to the gun.
                                             
 IV. The provisions of this section shall not apply to law
enforcement officers carrying guns in the line of duty.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. 1937, 188:4. RL 241:6. 1947, 47:1. 1949, 16:1.
RSA 207:7. 1969, 11:1. 1971, 308:1. 1983, 449:19. 2003, 35:3. 2005,
210:6, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 207:7-a

 **207:7-a Disabled Persons. –**
                                             
 I. RSA 207:7 shall not apply to a disabled person who is suffering
from paraplegia or who is suffering from the loss of, or the loss of the
use of, both lower extremities and who has obtained a current license to
hunt; provided, however, that such person must first obtain from the
executive director a special permit entitling said person to hunt while
using a motor vehicle, not to include boats with motor attached or
aircraft. For purposes of this section, "motor vehicle'' shall include
off highway recreational vehicles and all terrain vehicles as defined in
RSA 215-A:1, and snowmobiles as defined in RSA 215-C:1. No loaded
firearm, shotgun, or rifle shall be carried or transported with a
cartridge in the chamber, magazine, or clip attached to the firearm,
shotgun, or rifle, while the vehicle is in motion. The executive
director may issue such a permit upon application in person or upon
documentary proof of such disability by a licensed hunter. Such permit
shall be carried upon the person of the permittee while hunting and
shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any law enforcement
officer. A 
                                             $10 administrative fee shall be charged once, upon
application to the executive director for such permit.
                                             
 II. The permit shall be perpetual. The executive director shall
retain the records for such permits for a period not less than 7 years.
Loss or destruction of the permit after 7 years shall obligate the
permittee to re-establish eligibility.

**Source.** 1957, 188:1. 1963, 81:1. 1988, 95:1. 1996, 202:1. 2005,
210:7, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 207:7-b

 **207:7-b Penalty. –** Any person who violates a provision of RSA
207:7 shall be guilty of a violation and shall be guilty of an
additional violation for each wild bird or animal taken or possessed
contrary to said provision.

**Source.** 1959, 32:1. 1977, 588:35, eff. Sept. 16, 1977.

### Section 207:8

 **207:8 Taking for Hire. –** No person shall take fish or game for
wages or hire.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:7.

### Section 207:8-a

 **207:8-a Remote Control or Internet Hunting Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall offer for sale, take, or assist in the taking of
wildlife by use of remote control or Internet hunting. Any person who
violates this section shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor if a
natural person and guilty of a felony if any other person. In addition,
the executive director may impose a civil penalty of not less than

                                             $10,000 for each violation of this section, with the moneys received
from imposition of such civil penalty to be deposited in the fish and
game fund.
                                             
 II. For the purpose of this section "remote control or Internet
hunting'' shall mean the use of a computer or other electronic device,
equipment, or software, to remotely control the aiming or discharge of a
firearm or other weapon, that allows a person, not physically present,
to take wildlife.

**Source.** 2006, 73:1, eff. April 28, 2006.

### Section 207:8-b

 **207:8-b Use of Tranquilizers Prohibited. –** No person shall take
game using a tranquilizer propelled from a bow, crossbow, or firearm.
This shall not apply to the executive director of fish and game or the
executive director's authorized agents.

**Source.** 2007, 23:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 207:8-c

 **207:8-c Use of Drugs on Wildlife. –**
                                             
 I. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Drug'' means any chemical substance, other than food or
mineral/vitamin supplements, that affects the structure or biological
function of any mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian under the
jurisdiction of the fish and game department.
                                             
 (b) "Normal animal husbandry practices'' means practices related
to the production and care of animals in accordance with RSA 21:34-a,
II(a)(4).
                                             
 II. No person shall administer any drug, including but not limited
to drugs used for fertility control, disease prevention or treatment,
immobilization, or growth stimulation, to any mammal, bird, reptile, or
amphibian under the jurisdiction of the fish and game department without
the written authorization from the executive director or his or her
designee, except as provided in paragraph III or IV.
                                             
 III. This section does not apply to the use of a drug as an aid in
normal animal husbandry practices.
                                             
 IV. This section shall not be construed to limit employees or
agencies of the state or the United States, or local animal control
officers or licensed wildlife rehabilitators in the performance of their
official duties related to public health, wildlife management, wildlife
rehabilitation, or wildlife removal. However, a drug shall not be
administered by any person for fertility control or growth stimulation
without the written authorization of the executive director or his or
her designee, except as provided in paragraph III.
                                             
 V. An officer of the fish and game department may take possession of
any mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian under the jurisdiction of the
department, if the officer has probable cause to believe the animal has
been administered drugs in violation of this section.
                                             
 VI. A person who violates this section is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2008, 82:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 207:9

 **207:9 Angling, Restriction of Fishing to. –** Fish shall be taken
only by angling unless otherwise specifically permitted. If a fish is
unintentionally taken contrary to the prohibitions or restrictions
contained in a provision of this title, such fish shall be immediately
liberated and returned to the water without unnecessary injury.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:8.

### Section 207:10

 **207:10 Prohibited Devices. –** A trotline, tips-ups, set and trap
lines, crossbows, spears, grappling hooks, naked hooks, snatch hooks,
eel wires, eel pots, and nets, shall not be used in any fresh waters of
the state to take fish, unless otherwise specifically permitted. No
person shall possess, while hunting or trapping any wild bird, or wild
animal, including bear, any snare, jack or artificial light, swivel,
pivot or set gun, except as otherwise permitted. Any person convicted of
illegal night hunting shall forfeit such firearms, jacks or other
equipment used or usable in the illegal night hunting at the time of the
violation. Prohibited articles, upon conviction of a violation of
illegal night hunting, shall become the property of the fish and game
department, and shall be sold at auction by the executive director
within one year of the forfeiture. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the use of lights for checking traps as permitted
in RSA 210:13.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. 1937, 188:5. RL 241:9. 1945, 74:1. RSA 207:10.
1955, 48:1. 1971, 23:1. 1994, 51:2. 1997, 8:1. 2001, 161:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2003.

### Section 207:10-a

 **207:10-a Exception. –** The provisions of RSA 207:10 relative to
use of certain prohibited devices shall not apply to the fish and game
executive director or his authorized agents when engaged in removing
nuisance animals, birds or fish.

**Source.** 1969, 45:1, eff. May 12, 1969.

### Section 207:10-b

 **207:10-b Tracking Wildlife; Permission Required. –** No person
shall at any time of the year affix tags, markers, or radio transmitters
on any fish, game, or fur-bearing animals, or any wild animals or birds
without first procuring written permission of the executive director or
his agent. It shall be unlawful to locate or attempt to locate any such
wildlife tagged with the permission of the executive director with the
aid and use of a radio receiver, except by the person authorized by the
executive director to do so.

**Source.** 1981, 10:1, eff. May 10, 1981.

### Section 207:10-c

 **207:10-c Crossbows Permitted for Certain Persons With a
Disability. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 207:10, a crossbow permit
may be issued to a person who has a permanent physical disability and as
a result of that disability the person cannot operate a conventional
longbow or compound bow safely. Such permit shall allow that person to
take any species permitted to be taken by bow and arrow pursuant to RSA
208:5, provided that the bow and arrow license under RSA 208:5 and the
necessary licenses under RSA 208, RSA 209, and RSA 214 have been
acquired each year. The permit applicant may be required to appear
before the executive director, the director's designee or designated
medical consultant or consultants to substantiate the presence of the
disability and demonstrate the ability to safely use a crossbow. The
applicant shall be responsible for submitting medical documentation as
required by the executive director. The executive director may require a
second medical opinion from a medical consultant or physician designated
by the executive director to verify the disability. Any costs associated
with obtaining the medical documentation, re-evaluation of the
information or a second medical opinion, upon recommendation of the
medical consultant or consultants, are the responsibility of the
applicant. The executive director shall determine the eligibility of the
applicant, and the executive director's decision shall be final.
                                             
 II. The crossbow permit shall be perpetual. The executive director
shall retain the records for such permits for a period not less than 7
years. Loss or destruction of the permit after 7 years shall obligate
the permittee to re-establish eligibility.
                                             
 III. The medical documentation requested under paragraph I shall
consist of:
                                             
 (a) Signed application and statement of disability by the
applicant; and
                                             
 (b) Signed medical section to be completed by the applicant's
physician or advanced practice registered nurse providing applicant's
medical history, physical examination findings and attesting to the
disability and its permanence.
                                             
 IV. The fee for taking deer shall be the same as provided in RSA
208:5, and the fee for taking bear, wild turkey, or carp shall be the
appropriate fee established under RSA 214:9.
                                             
 V. An administrative fee set by the executive director pursuant to
RSA 206:10, I shall be charged once, upon application to the executive
director for such permit.
                                             
 VI. Any person possessing a valid crossbow permit under this section
on January 1, 1997, may apply on or before January 1, 1998, and shall be
issued upon payment of a 
                                             $10 administrative fee a permanent crossbow
permit.

**Source.** 1981, 88:1. 1990, 140:2, I. 1993, 44:1. 1996, 202:2. 1999,
108:1. 2007, 52:1, eff. July 21, 2007. 2011, 7:1, eff. June 24, 2011.
2015, 186:3, eff. July 1, 2015.

Dogs
----

### Section 207:11

 **207:11 Hunting Game. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1979, 5:1, eff. May 11,
1979.
                                             ]

### Section 207:12

 **207:12 Training of Dogs. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 410:2, eff. Aug. 29,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 207:12-a

 **207:12-a Dog Training; Fee. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who is licensed to hunt within the state may be issued
a training permit for the training of bird dogs and trail or tree hounds
during the closed season on any wildlife, except deer, moose, caribou,
elk, lynx, cougar, bobcat, and turkey, upon application and the payment
of a fee. The executive director shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA
541-A, relative to the amount of the fee for the training permit and the
period for the training of bear dogs. Notwithstanding the provisions of
this paragraph, field trials shall be permitted pursuant to RSA 207:13.
                                             
 II. Permits issued pursuant to this section shall contain
information pertaining to the breed of dogs to be trained, the township
and location where training is to take place, the days of the week, and
times in which training will take place. Members of a bona fide dog club
who maintain and stock a specific area of club grounds for the training
of dogs or conducting of field trials, and whose right to use said land
for this purpose is derived through ownership, lease or club-land owner
agreement, shall not be required to have a permit under this section but
shall be required to meet the requirements for a breeder's license as
provided in RSA 212:25.
                                             
 III. Dogs being trained pursuant to this section shall be
accompanied by the permittee. "Accompanied'' for the purpose of this
section shall mean that the permittee must be able to see or hear the
dog, or both, or have reasonable knowledge of where the dog is hunting.
Nothing in this section shall require that the dog be within sight at
all times.
                                             
 IV. Anyone violating a provision of this section shall be subject to
the penalty provided for in RSA 207:46 and shall, in addition, have his
license to hunt suspended for a period of one year; and the license to
train dogs under the permit provided for in this section shall be
suspended for a period of 3 years.
                                             
 V. Any protected species accidentally killed during dog training
under this section shall be turned over to the fish and game department
intact within 48 hours of the time of taking.
                                             
 VI. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the executive
director of fish and game shall have the authority to issue special
permits for the use of bear dogs to control agricultural and property
damage.

**Source.** 1973, 410:1. 1975, 113:1. 1977, 94:1; 113:3. 1981, 498:8.
1985, 247:1. 1993, 234:1, 2. 1995, 59:2. 1996, 126:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.
2015, 186:4, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 207:12-b

 **207:12-b Restriction on Nonresident's Dog Training and Use of Dogs
for Hunting Bear. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding RSA 207:12-a, nonresidents from states or
provinces or territories of Canada which allow the training or taking of
bear with dogs, and who do not limit or prohibit New Hampshire residents
from training or hunting bear with New Hampshire dogs, shall be the only
nonresidents allowed to bring dogs into New Hampshire to train or take
bear.
                                             
 II. For the purposes of this section, the executive director shall
determine the states, provinces or territories which prohibit or limit
New Hampshire residents from the training or use of dogs for hunting
bear. Such determination as to the degree of reciprocity shall be final.

**Source.** 1986, 100:1. 1991, 363:1, eff. July 2, 1991. 2012, 32:1,
eff. July 1, 2012.

### Section 207:12-c

 **207:12-c Use and Training of Leashed Tracking Dogs. –**
Notwithstanding any provision of this title to the contrary, a handler
with a leashed dog may track wounded dear, moose, or bear. The executive
director shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the method
and manner of take, time periods for training or using leashed tracking
dogs, licensing requirements and fees, possession of recovered deer,
moose, or bear, notification requirements, and other provisions deemed
necessary to effectively regulate this practice. No person shall use an
intact carcass of a deer, moose, or bear for training purposes, but may
use samples of blood, tissue, and hide of a deer, moose, or bear legally
taken or acquired in this state.

**Source.** 2006, 65:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 207:13

 **207:13 Field Trials. –**
                                             
 I. Field trials for dogs may be held at such times, in such manner,
and under such restrictions, as may be prescribed by the executive
director. Any person wishing to hold a field trial shall first obtain a
written permit from the person on whose land it is proposed to hold the
trial, present the same to the executive director, and pay a fee set by
the executive director pursuant to RSA 206:10, I, including field trials
for coon dogs and such night hunts for coon dogs as authorized by
paragraph II. The executive director may thereupon issue a permit for
such field trial. The executive director or his duly authorized agent
shall supervise the holding of such field trial, enforce the terms of
the permits, and the rules for its conduct. The executive director shall
adopt rules under RSA 541-A for the conduct of field trials as in his or
her opinion are necessary to safeguard the interest of the wildlife of
the state, provided that the executive director shall issue permits for
beagle trials to any beagle club recognized by the American Kennel Club
for trials to be run under the rules and regulations of the American
Kennel Club. The fee for this permit shall be set by the executive
director pursuant to RSA 206:10, I. The executive director or his or her
authorized agent shall enforce the terms of such permits.
                                             
 II. The executive director shall issue permits for night hunts to
any coon club recognized by the United Kennel Club. Such night hunts
shall be run under the rules and regulations of the United Kennel Club.
Night hunts may take place in various selected locations throughout the
state except on posted lands. Anyone may participate in the night hunts.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:12. RSA 207:13. 1955, 78:1. 1963, 299:2.
1977, 94:2. 1978, 10:1. 1981, 498:9. 1986, 214:1, eff. Nov. 15, 1986.
2015, 186:5, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 207:13-a

 **207:13-a Signs. –** Any person, when hunting with dogs is
permitted, may post along highways not more than 2 signs reading
"Caution Hunting Dogs''. These signs shall be 12 inches wide by 12
inches high with blaze orange letters on a yellow background and must be
40 inches over-all height, and shall be posted no more than 1,000 feet
apart. Such hunter shall bear the cost and maintenance of his signs and
shall not block driveways, intersections or rights of way with said
signs. No such signs shall be posted on private roads or lands without
permission of the owner. When not hunting, the owner of said signs shall
remove the same.

**Source.** 1969, 452:2, eff. Sept. 1, 1969.

### Section 207:13-b

 **207:13-b Treed Animals. –** It shall be unlawful for any person to
shoot any wildlife which has been treed or cornered by a dog, unless the
owner of said dog, or a member of his hunting party, is present when the
animal is shot. Persons violating the provisions of this section shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1971, 21:1. 1973, 528:113. 1977, 247:4, eff. Aug. 19, 1977.

Import, Possession, or Release of Wildlife
------------------------------------------

### Section 207:14

 **207:14 Import, Possession, or Release of Wildlife. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall import, possess, sell, exhibit, or release any
live marine species or wildlife, or the eggs or progeny thereof, without
first obtaining a permit from the executive director except as permitted
under title XVIII. The executive director shall have the authority to
determine the time period and any other conditions governing the
issuance of such permit. The executive director may refuse to issue a
permit if he determines that such issuance may pose significant disease,
genetic, ecological, environmental, health, safety, or welfare risks to
persons, marine species or wildlife.
                                             
 II. The executive director shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
to administer this section and relative to the importation, possession,
exhibition, sale or release of all marine species and wildlife,
including, but not limited to:
                                             
 (a) Size, sex, number and quantity.
                                             
 (b) Transportation, within or through the state of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 (c) Sale, inspection, processing, recordkeeping and marking.
                                             
 (d) Method of keeping.
                                             
 (e) Areas of release.
                                             
 (f) Method of release.
                                             
 (g) Method of taking.
                                             
 (h) Permit fee schedules.
                                             
 (i) Appropriate definitions.
                                             
 III. The executive director may establish a list of marine species
or wildlife or the eggs or progeny of such marine species or wildlife
which may be exempted from any or all of the provisions of RSA 207:14.
                                             
 IV. Except where otherwise provided, any person who violates this
section or any rule adopted under this section shall be guilty of a
violation and guilty of an additional violation for each marine species
or wildlife possessed contrary to the provisions of this section.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:13. RSA 207:14. 1963, 164:1. 1969, 71:1.
1973, 304:1. 1979, 90:1. 1986, 214:2. 1990, 122:2. 1992, 171:3. 2003,
112:4, eff. Aug. 5, 2003.

### Section 207:14-a,-14-b

 **207:14-a, 207:14-b Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1992, 171:12, I, eff.
June 7, 1992.
                                             ]

### Section 207:15

 **207:15 Releasing Fish and Wildlife. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1992, 171:12,
II, eff. June 7, 1992.
                                             ]

### Section 207:15-a

 **207:15-a Seizure. –** All fish or the fry thereof, living wild
birds or the eggs thereof or wild animals imported or released in this
state contrary to the provisions of this subdivision shall be seized and
forfeited as provided in RSA 207:17.

**Source.** 1961, 11:1, eff. April 28, 1961.

Possession as Evidence
----------------------

### Section 207:16

 **207:16 In Closed Season. –** Possession of fish, protected birds,
game and fur-bearing animals during the closed season therefor, except
as specifically permitted in this title, shall be prima facie evidence
that the same were unlawfully taken by the possessor.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:14.

Disposition of Seizures and Acquisitions
----------------------------------------

### Section 207:17

 **207:17 Seizures and Acquisitions. –**
                                             
 I. All fish and wildlife protected by this title, found in the
possession of any person and not legally taken or possessed, shall be
seized and forfeited. All such fish and wildlife so forfeited shall be
disposed of by a conservation officer upon instructions from the
executive director.
                                             
 II. The proceeds from the sale of seized and road-killed furbearers
and coyotes acquired by the department of fish and game shall be
deposited in the fish and game fund.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:15. RSA 207:17. 1961, 12:1. 1977, 247:5.
1985, 217:2. 2007, 134:1, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 207:18

 **207:18 Other Property Upon Conviction. –**
                                             
 I. When a defendant is convicted of violating any of the provisions
of this title, all fishing tackle, guns, shooting or hunting
paraphernalia, traps, dogs, boats, decoys, bob houses or other
appliances and vehicles except motor vehicles designed for use on the
highway and required to be registered under the provisions of RSA 261
used in such violation may be seized and held until the fine and costs
for the violation have been paid in full.
                                             
 II. One year after conviction under paragraph I, if the defendant
has not paid the fine and costs imposed in full or when the seized or
confiscated property is not claimed by the defendant, the executive
director is authorized to sell at public auction any of the seized or
confiscated property of said defendant. All receipts from said sale
shall be credited to the fish and game fund.
                                             
 III. If the seized or confiscated property is of no monetary value,
and cannot be sold pursuant to paragraph II, said property may be
destroyed under the instructions of the executive director.
                                             
 IV. In the event that the owner of any confiscated or abandoned
property is not known or cannot be located, said confiscated or
abandoned property may be sold at public auction by the executive
director after one year from the date said property came into the
possession of the fish and game department.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:16. RSA 207:18. 1979, 17:1. 1981, 146:5,
V, eff. Jan. 1, 1982.

Transportation
--------------

### Section 207:19

 **207:19 Fish or Wildlife, by Residents. –** A resident of the state
may transport, within the state, during the open season therefor, the
number or limit of fish or wildlife, except deer, that he may lawfully
take in 2 days. If such fish or wildlife is placed in the custody of a
common carrier or transported in a package, said fish or wildlife, or
the package containing the same, shall have attached thereto a tag or
label plainly marked with the kind and number of such fish or wildlife,
the name of the consignor, and the name of the consignee, the point of
shipment and the destination.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:17. RSA 207:19. 1977, 247:6, eff. Aug.
19, 1977.

### Section 207:20

 **207:20 By Nonresidents. –** A nonresident license holder may
transport or have transported within the state, or from a point within
the state to a point out of the state, the number or limit of fish or
wildlife, except deer, that he may lawfully take in 2 days. If such fish
or wildlife be placed in the custody of a common carrier or transported
in a package, said fish or wildlife, or the package containing the same,
shall have attached thereto a tag or label plainly marked with the kind
and number of such fish or wildlife, the name of the consignee, the
point of shipment and the destination. If such fish or wildlife is
presented to a common carrier, the agent of said common carrier shall
see that the license is properly endorsed before accepting such fish or
wildlife for shipment.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:18. RSA 207:20. 1977, 247:7, eff. Aug.
19, 1977.

### Section 207:21

 **207:21 Special Permits. –** Any transportation of fish or
wildlife, except deer, not provided for in this subdivision, shall be
allowed only under the terms of a special permit issued by the executive
director, provided that a child under 16 years of age, hunting without a
license but accompanied by a licensee 18 years of age or over, may
transport fish or wildlife, except deer, killed by him, by identifying
it with a tag bearing his name, residence, and the date taken or killed,
until such time as he may be able to secure a special permit from the
executive director.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:19. RSA 207:21. 1973, 72:18. 1977,
247:8, eff. Aug. 19, 1977.

Wildlife Damage Control
-----------------------

### Section 207:22

 **207:22 By Game Birds. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 344:10, eff. Nov. 18,
1999.
                                             ]

### Section 207:22-a

 **207:22-a Limitations for Persons Posting Property. –** Any person
whose land is posted pursuant to RSA 635:4 to prohibit hunting shall
forfeit the right to participate in the wildlife damage control program
established pursuant to RSA 207:22-c, or to receive payment pursuant to
RSA 207:23-a, except that this limitation shall not apply in the
following circumstances:
                                             
 I. To a person who posts only the person's land lying within 100
yards of a dwelling or other farm or outbuildings contiguous to the
person's dwelling and used regularly by the person, or the person's
family or tenant.
                                             
 II. To any person whose land is posted for the protection of crops
only during the closed season for the type of game birds or animals for
which the person seeks assistance from the wildlife damage control
program.
                                             
 III. To any person who posts such person's land "Hunting by
Permission Only'', provided that the names and addresses of the hunters
who have received permission to hunt that land in that year shall be
furnished when requested by the executive director, and that in the
judgment of the executive director, the history of hunter access and
hunter density represents a good-faith effort by the landowner to allow
hunting.

**Source.** 1973, 532:9. 1999, 344:3, eff. Nov. 18, 1999.

### Section 207:22-b

 **207:22-b Wildlife Damage Control Advisory Board. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2010, 368:1(47), eff. Dec. 31, 2010.
                                             ]

### Section 207:22-c

 **207:22-c Wildlife Damage Control Program; Administration. –**
There is established a wildlife damage control program which shall be
administered by the executive director in cooperation with the United
States Department of Agriculture and the New Hampshire department of
agriculture, markets, and food. The program shall emphasize a
comprehensive approach that integrates wildlife management and wildlife
control methods and strategies and shall respond to conflicts between
wildlife and human populations by stressing the importance of prevention
of damage by initiating one or more of the following courses of action:
                                             
 I. A general wildlife damage mitigation program:
                                             
 (a) The general wildlife damage mitigation program shall address
conflicts between wildlife and human populations by disseminating
educational and technical information, and providing assistance. The
program may make available various repellents, institute the loan of
direct control devices and materials including electric fences and
frightening devices, and make referrals to nuisance wildlife
cooperators.
                                             
 (b) Actions under this paragraph shall be of a temporary nature
and may include any other nuisance control methods available, as
determined by the executive director, or designee.
                                             
 II. A cooperative fencing program:
                                             
 (a) Commercial growers may participate in a cost-share-fencing
program where the state pays for the full cost of fencing materials
only. Under this program, the executive director may provide payment
from funds designated for this program in the fish and game fund to an
eligible commercial grower for the purchase of fencing materials.
                                             
 (b) Commercial growers desiring to participate in the cost share
program shall submit written applications to the executive director in
such manner as prescribed by the executive director on or before April l
of each year.
                                             
 (c) Construction and maintenance costs of installed fences shall
be the responsibility of the applicant.
                                             
 (d) The failure of a commercial grower to properly install and
maintain fencing purchased under this paragraph shall make the
commercial grower ineligible to participate in this program until
approved by the executive director.
                                             
 (e) The executive director shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA
541-A to implement and execute the cooperative fencing program, which
may include but not be limited to eligibility criteria, fencing
specifications, funding levels, and inspection procedures.
                                             
 (f) The provisions and penalties of RSA 641 concerning false
statements shall apply to all reporting and documentation required
pursuant to this paragraph.
                                             
 (g) For purposes of this paragraph, a "commercial grower'' means
any person who grows an agricultural or horticultural crop from which
the person has derived, or reasonably expects to derive, an annual gross
income from the sale of crops normally produced of at least 
                                             $2,500.
                                             
 III. A depredation permit program:
                                             
 (a) The executive director shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA
541-A, regulating the issuance of depredation permits to kill animals
causing damage to commercial crops or which pose a threat to human
health and safety. Such rules shall address the method and manner of
taking animals, the disposition of animals taken under such permits, as
well as the qualifications necessary to participate in the program. Such
qualifications shall include, but not be limited to, the provision of
information concerning the history of damage, the record of preventative
methods used in the past, and the public hunting access history.
                                             
 (b) The depredation permit program shall include the issuance of
pre-damage deer kill permits to commercial growers as defined in RSA
207:22-c, II(h) upon request to the director. Issuance of pre-damage
deer kill permits will facilitate protection of qualifying crops at the
onset of deer visitation to said crops. Any deer taken under this
provision shall be subject to investigation by the local conservation
officer to determine whether or not the potential existed at the time of
taking for damage to have occurred. Depredation permits shall be issued
following the procedures in this paragraph.

**Source.** 1999, 344:4. 2001, 42:1, 2. 2009, 107:2, 3. 2010, 368:24,
eff. Dec. 31, 2010.

### Section 207:23

 **207:23 By Game. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 344:10, eff. Nov. 18, 1999.
                                             ]

### Section 207:23-a

 **207:23-a Damage by Bears or Mountain Lions. –** A person who
suffers loss or damage to livestock, bees, orchards or growing crops, by
bear or mountain lion, shall, if he claims damage therefor, notify the
executive director of fish and game in writing of such damage. The
executive director or his agent shall investigate such claim within 30
days from the receipt by him of notice of such damage, and within one
year determine whether such damage was caused by bear or mountain lion,
and appraise the amount to be paid. The executive director, immediately
upon making any appraisal of damage thereof, shall present his
certificate of the amount of appraisal to the governor, who is
authorized to draw his warrant upon any money in the treasury not
otherwise appropriated in payment therefor.

**Source.** 1895, 121:2. PL 150:1. RL 180:1. 1955, 324:4. RSA 470:1. RSA
207:23-a. 1967, 81:2, eff. June 26, 1967; 189:1, eff. Aug. 8, 1967.

### Section 207:23-b

 **207:23-b Preventative Measures to Alleviate Damage. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1999, 344:10, eff. Nov. 18, 1999.
                                             ]

### Section 207:24

 **207:24 Appeal From Executive Director. –** If the person
sustaining the damage pursuant to RSA 207:23-a is dissatisfied with the
finding of the executive director, either as to the cause of the damage
or the amount thereof, the person may appeal therefrom within 30 days to
the superior court in the county where the damage was sustained.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:22. 1999, 344:5, eff. Nov. 18, 1999.

### Section 207:25

 **207:25 From Non-action. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1967, 189:2, eff. Aug. 8,
1967.
                                             ]

### Section 207:25-a

 **207:25-a Department to Destroy Bears Doing Damage. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1981, 79:1, eff. June 2, 1981.
                                             ]

### Section 207:26

 **207:26 Killing by Land Owner of Bird or Animal Inflicting Damage.
–** A person may pursue, wound or kill, on land owned or occupied by
such person, any unprotected bird or wild animal which the person finds
in the act of doing actual and substantial damage to poultry, crops,
domestic animals, or the person's property, and may authorize a family
member, employee, or other person requested to do so under the provision
of a depredation permit issued by the executive director pursuant to RSA
207:22-c, III.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. 1937, 188:6. RL 241:24. RSA 207:26. 1977,
247:13. 1999, 344:6, eff. Nov. 18, 1999.

### Section 207:27

 **207:27 Report of. –** The person by whom or under whose direction
any game or fur-bearing animal is wounded or killed shall, within 12
hours, report all facts relative thereto to the nearest conservation
officer or to the executive director. Such report shall state the time
and place of wounding or killing and the nature and amount of property
destroyed.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:25.

### Section 207:28

 **207:28 Investigation. –** The conservation officer who receives
such notice shall immediately investigate the report and satisfy himself
whether the game or fur-bearing animal has been wounded or killed, as
reported.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:26.

### Section 207:29

 **207:29 Disposition of Game, Etc., Killed. –** Any game or
fur-bearing animal killed or wounded as provided in this subdivision
shall, in the discretion of the executive director, be returned to the
person who killed the same, be given to some charitable institution, or
otherwise disposed of.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:27. 1999, 344:7, eff. Nov. 18, 1999.

### Section 207:30

 **207:30 Rights Reserved. –** The provisions of this subdivision
shall not impair the constitutional rights of persons to protect
themselves or their property from injury or destruction by wild birds,
game, or fur-bearing animals, protected by the laws of this state.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:28.

Season Closed by Proclamation, Etc.
-----------------------------------

### Section 207:31

 **207:31 Declaring. –** The governor and council, upon the joint
recommendation of the executive director of the fish and game department
and the director, division of forests and lands, department of resources
and economic development, when, in their opinion, the danger of starting
fires in the woodlands of the state, during periods of protracted drouth
or excessive dryness requires extraordinary precautions, may, by
official proclamation, declare any or all of the woodlands of the state
closed to hunters, fishermen, trappers and other persons whose presence
in such woodlands might create a fire hazard under the circumstances,
for such time as they may designate.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:29.

### Section 207:32

 **207:32 Special Precautions. –** During periods when woodland is
closed, the operation of sawmills and other machine units, except trucks
and pleasure motor vehicles, in or near woodland may also be suspended
and smoking prohibited. All persons engaged in lumbering operations may
be required to furnish sufficient fire guards to patrol areas under
operation, to provide sufficient fire-fighting tools which shall be
located at convenient places therein, to forbid smoking within such
areas and to take all other reasonable precautions to prevent fires.
Each day's violation of any such suspension and each day's failure to
meet any requirement hereof shall constitute a violation. Unlawful
smoking shall constitute a violation.

**Source.** 1941, 217:8. RL 241:30. RSA 207:32. 1973, 531:49, eff. Oct.
31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 207:33

 **207:33 Woodland Defined. –** Woodland includes cut-over land,
slash, and such other land as bears a sufficient amount of wood growth,
wood, weeds, grass or other growth as to be likely to be burned over.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:31.

### Section 207:34

 **207:34 Notice. –** Such proclamation shall be published in 2 or
more newspapers of the state and shall be posted in such places and in
such manner as the governor may order.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:32.

### Section 207:35

 **207:35 Violations. –** No person shall drop a lighted cigarette,
lighted cigar, lighted match or other article likely to cause fire,
within 200 yards of any woodlands during the time such woodlands are
closed by such proclamation.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:33.

Injuring Property or Person
---------------------------

### Section 207:36

 **207:36 Injuring Property. –** No person shall tear down, damage or
destroy any fence, wall, lock, boat or dock, or leave open any gate or
bars, or trample or destroy any crop, on land of another person, while
taking, trapping, hunting, or pursuing any fish, game or fur-bearing
animal.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:34. RSA 207:36. 1959, 30:1, eff. May 31,
1959.

### Section 207:36-a

 **207:36-a Use of Tree Stands, Observation Blinds, and Pit Blinds.
–**
                                             
 I. No person shall erect, build or use a tree stand or observation
blind on land of another person that damages or destroys a tree by
inserting into the tree any metallic, ceramic, or other object used as
part of a ladder or observation deck, without express written permission
from the property owner or designee.
                                             
 II. No person shall erect, build or use a pit blind on land of
another person without express written permission from the property
owner or designee.
                                             
 III. No person shall cut any tree in connection with any of the
activities regulated under this section without the express written
permission of the property owner or designee.
                                             
 IV. The permittee shall carry such permit on his person while in the
field and shall be subject to inspection on demand of any conservation
officer.
                                             
 V. All property owner permits shall expire on December 31 of each
year unless rescinded by the property owner or designee.
                                             
 VI. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a violation and shall be liable for the amount of damage
caused by the act, to be recovered by the property owner sustaining the
damage.
                                             
 VII. The executive director shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA
541-A, relative to the form, issuance and filing of property owner
permits for the tree stands, observation blinds and pit blinds.

**Source.** 1991, 144:1, eff. July 19, 1991.

### Section 207:36-b

 **207:36-b Littering; Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall put, place or leave, or cause to be put, placed
or left, in or upon any way, public property, private property, into or
on the ice over any public water, or into or on any waters of the state,
any bottles, glass, crockery, cans, scrap metal, junk, paper, garbage,
old automobile or parts thereof, or refuse of any nature whatsoever, or
any noxious thing.
                                             
 II. Paragraph I shall not apply to any person who is the owner or
tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained
consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act
is done under the personal direction of said owner or tenant, all in a
manner consistent with the public welfare.
                                             
 III. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1997, 29:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 207:37

 **207:37 Shooting Human Beings. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 95:4, eff. July
5, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 207:37-a

 **207:37-a Negligent Discharge of Firearms, Bow and Arrow or
Crossbow and Bolt. –** Any person who shall negligently discharge any
firearm, bow and arrow, or crossbow and bolt while on a hunting trip, in
the field, or while target practicing, in such a manner that the life of
any person is endangered or so as to cause damage to the property of
another person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and at the discretion
of the executive director, the hunting license of such a person may be
revoked for a period not to exceed 10 years.

**Source.** 1967, 173:1. 1973, 528:115. 1987, 95:1. 1991, 37:1. 1993,
235:5, eff. Aug. 14, 1993.

### Section 207:37-b

 **207:37-b Hunting License Revoked. –**
                                             
 I. Any person, while on a hunting trip or in pursuit of wild animals
or wild birds or while target practicing, who is convicted of shooting
and wounding or killing a human being shall not be issued a license to
hunt or, if the person holds a hunting license, the license shall be
revoked and the person shall not be granted a license to hunt for the
following period:
                                             
 (a) If the shooting and wounding of a human being results in
death or serious bodily injury, as defined in RSA 625:11, VI, the
license revocation shall be for a period of 10 years.
                                             
 (b) If the shooting and wounding of a human being results in less
than serious bodily injury as defined in RSA 625:11, VI, the license
revocation shall be for a period of 5 years.
                                             
 II. A hunting license revocation under paragraph I shall commence
immediately upon indictment or arrest. Upon conviction, the period of
revocation shall be computed from the date of indictment or arrest.
                                             
 III. A license to hunt may be granted or restored following a
hearing before the executive director and the commission at any time
following the full revocation period under paragraph I and following
application for a license and successful completion of a hunter
education program pursuant to RSA 214:23-a.
                                             
 IV. A person convicted of negligently shooting and wounding or
killing a human being while hunting or target practicing in another
state or province shall not be issued a license to hunt in this state
for any period of time that the person's privilege to hunt is suspended
by the state or province where the offense was committed.

**Source.** 1987, 95:2. 1997, 188:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 207:37-c

 **207:37-c Shooting Human Beings While Hunting. –**
                                             
 I. Any person, while on a hunting trip, or in pursuit of wild
animals or wild birds, or while target practicing, who negligently
shoots and wounds any human being, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
                                             
 II. Any person, while on a hunting trip, or in pursuit of wild
animals or wild birds, or while target practicing, who shoots and causes
the death of any human being, may be charged pursuant to the appropriate
criminal code statute.
                                             
 III. The provisions of this section shall apply to any person
hunting or target practicing with a firearm, bow and arrow, or crossbow
and bolt.
                                             
 IV. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, the
person shall be subject to license revocation under RSA 207:37-b.

**Source.** 1997, 188:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 207:38

 **207:38 Abandoning a Wounded or Killed Human Being. –** Any person
who shall have shot and wounded or killed a human being shall forthwith
render necessary assistance to the injured person and report immediately
to the nearest conservation officer or law enforcement officer. Any
person who knowingly fails to render such assistance shall be guilty of
a class B felony and his license to hunt shall be revoked for life. The
penalty for conviction under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by law.

**Source.** 1949, 223:2. 1953, 101:2. RSA 207:38. 1955, 66:1. 1973,
528:116. 1977, 343:1. 1987, 95:3, eff. July 5, 1987.

### Section 207:38-a

 **207:38-a Hunting Related Shootings. –** Any person while hunting
or in the field who shall cause any injury by shooting another human
being shall report immediately to the nearest conservation officer or
law enforcement officer giving his or her name, address, date of birth,
hunting license number and any other information needed to identify that
person. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1955, 66:2. 1973, 531:50. 1977, 343:2. 1997, 188:3, eff.
Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 207:38-b

 **207:38-b Hunter Orange Recommendation. –**
                                             
 I. Any person hunting with a firearm or bow and arrow in this state
during the hunting season, except for a person legally hunting
waterfowl, should wear a hat, vest or other suitable article of clothing
of material in the color of hunter orange visible from all sides at a
minimum distance of 200 feet. "Hunter orange'' means a daylight
fluorescent orange color with a dominant wave length between 595 and 605
nanometers, an excitation purity of not less than 85 percent, and a
luminance factor of not less than 40 percent.
                                             
 II. The executive director is directed to issue a written
recommendation to each person purchasing a hunting license or to have
printed on each hunting license the recommendation that the licensee
should wear hunter orange when engaged in hunting in this state.

**Source.** 1983, 125:1, eff. June 7, 1983.

### Section 207:39

 **207:39 Publication. –** The executive director shall publish the 2
preceding sections in all pamphlet editions of the fish and game laws
issued by him.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:36.

### Section 207:39-a

 **207:39-a Shooting Domestic Animals; Liability. –** Any person,
while actually engaged in hunting or in the pursuit of wild animals or
wild birds, who causes death, injury, or damage to domestic animals,
ducks, or fowl shall be liable for damages to the owner of the animals.

**Source.** 1965, 179:1. 1971, 89:1. 2005, 289:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 207:39-b

 **207:39-b Intentional or Negligent Shooting of Domestic Animals;
Penalty. –** Any person, while actually engaged in hunting or in pursuit
of wild animals or wild birds who knowingly or purposely causes death,
injury, or damage to such domestic animals, ducks, or fowl through the
discharge of a firearm or bow and arrow may have his or her license to
hunt revoked and he or she may not be granted a license to hunt for a
period not to exceed 5 years. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to a hunter killing or injuring his or her own animal or a
borrowed animal or one used by another member of the same hunting party,
other than being liable to the owner of the animal. The executive
director of the fish and game department may make such revocation and
suspension of the privilege of obtaining a license and determine the
term of such suspension when, in the executive director's opinion,
reasonable evidence of a violation of the provisions of this section
exist.

**Source.** 2005, 289:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 207:39-c

 **207:39-c Reporting the Death or Injury of Domestic Animals. –**
Any person who negligently or accidentally causes death, injury, or
damage to domestic animals through the discharge of a firearm or bow and
arrow shall immediately report the death, injury, or damage to the local
police department, and in the case of injury to such domestic animals,
shall render aid to the animal in an attempt to save the animal's life.

**Source.** 2005, 289:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

Closing Waters to Protect Ice
-----------------------------

### Section 207:40

 **207:40 By Executive Director. –** Upon application of any person
interested in the cutting or harvesting of ice for domestic or
commercial purposes in any of the public ponds, rivers or lakes, the
executive director may, upon hearing, close to ice fishing, for such
period of time as he may order, the whole or a part of any such waters
as he may deem necessary to protect the crop of ice thereon while the
same is being formed, cut and harvested.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:39.

### Section 207:41

 **207:41 Notice. –** The executive director shall give notice of
such hearing by posting notice thereof, stating the time and place of
such hearing and the purpose thereof, at least 5 days before the date
thereof, in at least 3 public places in the town or towns where such
waters are located.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:40.

### Section 207:42

 **207:42 Expense. –** The expense of separating, by suitable marks,
monuments or boundaries, the area on which ice is to be harvested shall
be borne by the petitioner.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:41.

Foreign Sporting Clubs
----------------------

### Section 207:43

 **207:43 Rights Limited. –** No foreign corporation, association,
club or similar organization shall hold or acquire property in New
Hampshire for the purpose of hunting, fishing, sporting or recreation,
without first becoming incorporated in this state. Before becoming
incorporated in this state, the purposes of such corporation shall be
approved by the executive director.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:42.

### Section 207:44

 **207:44 Injunctions. –** The superior court shall have power by
injunction or other appropriate process to restrain any corporation,
association, club or other similar organization, and any member, servant
or agent thereof, from occupying, using or enjoining any property held
or acquired in this state in violation of the provisions of RSA 207:43.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:43.

### Section 207:45

 **207:45 Exceptions. –** Nothing in this title shall repeal any
special laws of the state relating only to the Blue Mountain Forest
Association.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. RL 241:44.

Penalties
---------

### Section 207:46

 **207:46 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter, or any rule
or regulation of the executive director, shall be guilty of a violation,
except where otherwise provided, and an additional violation for each
fish, bird or animal, or part thereof bought, sold, offered for sale or
transported contrary to the provisions thereof.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. Any person convicted of setting or having under his control a
set gun as prohibited by RSA 207:10 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1935, 124:1. 1937, 188:8. RL 241:45. 1947, 69:2. RSA 207:46.
1959, 32:2. 1973, 528:117. 1981, 8:1, eff. May 10, 1981. 2016, 234:2,
II, eff. June 10, 2016.

### Section 207:47

 **207:47 For Disobeying Officer. –** Any person who shall refuse or
neglect to stop when signalled to stop by any conservation officer who
is in uniform or who refuses on demand of such officer to produce his
fish and game license or to permit such officer to take the license or
certificate in hand for the purpose of examination shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1949, 52:2. RSA 207:47. 1973, 528:118, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at
11:59 p.m.

Collecting Seaweed
------------------

### Section 207:48

 **207:48 In Night. –** If any person shall carry away or collect for
the purpose of carrying away any seaweed or rockweed from the seashore
below high-water mark, between daylight in the evening and daylight in
the morning, he shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1973, 532:10, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 207:49

 **207:49 Without Leave of Owner of Marsh or Flats. –** If any person
shall collect or carry away from any salt marsh or flats any flats-weed
or any seaweed thrown thereon by the sea or tide, without leave of the
owner of the marsh or flats, he shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1973, 532:10, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 207:50

 **207:50 Piling Below High-water Mark. –** If any person shall pile
below high-water mark, for the purpose of hauling it away, any seaweed
or rockweed shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1973, 532:10, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 207:51

 **207:51 Sale Outside State. –** If any person shall carry away or
collect any seaweed, rockweed, or sea moss from the banks or shores of
this state for sale outside the state, or for sale within the state for
the purpose of its being carried outside the state, or shall sell any
such seaweed, rockweed, or sea moss to be carried outside the state, he
shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1973, 532:10, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 207:52

 **207:52 Uprooting. –** If any person shall pull or take any growing
rockweed or sea moss from the rocks, banks or shores of this state,
except by cutting same with a knife so as not to detach or injure its
roots, he shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1973, 532:10, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 207:53

 **207:53 From Rocks. –** If any person shall cut or take any growing
rockweed or sea moss from the rocks, banks or shores of this state below
high-water mark, above the amount of 3 bushels in any one day, allowed
only in the case of a resident or summer resident of this state, he
shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1973, 532:10, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 207:54

 **207:54 Enforcement of Laws. –** Fish and game conservation
officers, as well as all state and local police officers, in addition to
their other powers and duties, shall enforce all laws relative to the
collecting, carrying away, uprooting, cutting, taking, piling and
selling of seaweed, rockweed, flats-weed, and sea moss.

**Source.** 1973, 532:10, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

Restitution for Illegal Taking or Possessing
--------------------------------------------

### Section 207:55

 **207:55 Restitution for Illegal Taking or Possessing. –**
                                             
 I. In addition to the penalties provided for violating any of the
provisions of RSA title LXII or title XVIII or any rule made under the
authority thereof, any person convicted of the illegal taking or illegal
possession of game animals, game birds, or fur-bearing animals,
resulting in the injury, death, or destruction of the same, may be
sentenced to make restitution to the state for the value of each game
animal, game bird, or fur-bearing animal so taken or possessed as
follows:
                                             
 (a) Marten, moose and bear: 
                                             $1,000 per animal illegally taken or
illegally possessed.
                                             
 (b) Deer: 
                                             $250 per animal illegally taken or illegally
possessed.
                                             
 (c) Wild rabbit, hare, muskrat and gray squirrel: 
                                             $10 per animal
illegally taken or illegally possessed.
                                             
 (d) Wild turkey: 
                                             $200 per bird illegally taken or illegally
possessed.
                                             
 (e) Ruffed grouse, spruce grouse, pheasant, woodcock, ducks or
geese: 
                                             $15 per bird illegally taken or illegally possessed.
                                             
 (f) Fisher, bobcat, otter: 
                                             $200 per animal illegally taken or
illegally possessed.
                                             
 (g) Fox: 
                                             $75 per animal illegally taken or illegally possessed.
                                             
 (h) Beaver and mink: 
                                             $20 per animal illegally taken or illegally
possessed.
                                             
 (i) Raccoon: 
                                             $20 per animal illegally taken or illegally
possessed.
                                             
 II. In every case of conviction involving the illegal taking or
illegal possession of game animals, game birds, or fur-bearing animals,
the court may order the defendant to reimburse the state in a sum or
sums not to exceed the amount as established in paragraph I. Such
reimbursements shall be paid directly to the court. If 2 or more
defendants are convicted of the illegal taking or the illegal possession
of the game animal, game bird or fur-bearing animal the reimbursement
above prescribed shall be declared against them jointly and severally.
                                             
 III. Courts ordering such reimbursement damages shall remit such
monies as prescribed in RSA 206:34. Monies collected from such
reimbursement damages shall be deposited in the fish and game fund.
                                             
 IV. Any person failing to make a damage assessment payment as
ordered by the court shall be guilty of contempt and such person shall
not be eligible to purchase any license issued by the fish and game
department until all assessments are paid in full.

**Source.** 1983, 263:1. 1994, 194:1. 2007, 134:3, eff. July 1, 2007.

Small Game and Game Birds
-------------------------

### Section 207:56

 **207:56 Authority to Set Seasons, Bag Limits, Methods and Manner of
Taking Small Game Animals and Game Birds. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director, after consultation with the commission,
shall have the authority to open and close the seasons for the taking of
small game and game birds as defined in RSA 207:1, XXVI and XI, except
those birds protected under RSA 209:4, to fix the number and sex
limitations for small game, and any other conditions governing the
methods and manner of taking and reporting the same, subject to any
restrictions imposed by statute.
                                             
 II. The authority of the executive director under this section shall
be exercised with reference to the state as a whole or for any specified
county or part thereof.
                                             
 III. All rules adopted by the executive director shall be in
accordance with RSA 541-A.
                                             
 IV. Any person who violates a rule adopted under this subdivision
shall be guilty of a violation if a natural person and a misdemeanor if
any other person, and shall also be guilty of a violation for each game
bird or small game animal illegally taken or possessed.

**Source.** 1988, 219:1, eff. April 29, 1988.

Interference With Hunting, Trapping or Fishing
----------------------------------------------

### Section 207:57

 **207:57 Harassment. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall purposely obstruct or impede the participation of
any individual in the lawful activity of hunting, fishing or trapping.
No person shall purposely obstruct or impede the participation of any
individual in the lawful activity of hunting, fishing or trapping. No
person shall purposely engage in an activity that will tend to disturb
wild animals, with intent to prevent their lawful taking. No person
shall use a drone or UAV with the intent to conduct video surveillance
of private citizens who are lawfully hunting, fishing, or trapping
without obtaining the written consent of the persons being surveilled
prior to conducting the surveillance.
                                             
 I-a. For purposes of this section, "unmanned aerial vehicle'' or
"UAV'' means any device capable of flying in the air which is remotely,
automatically, or otherwise piloted without an occupant, including but
not limited to, drones.
                                             
 II. The provisions of paragraph I shall not apply to the actions of
law enforcement officers and personnel of the department of fish and
game in the performance of their official duties. The provisions of
paragraph I shall not apply to any incidental interference arising from
the lawful and normal activities of public land users.
                                             
 III. The executive director shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA
541-A, to administer this section.
                                             
 IV. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1989, 308:1, eff. May 29, 1989. 2015, 38:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2016.

State Jurisdiction
------------------

### Section 207:58

 **207:58 Purpose. –** The legislature finds it is in the best
interests of the state and its citizens to regulate, protect, restore,
and conserve the wildlife resources of the state under a uniform scheme
of management through the fish and game department. It is the intent of
the general court to explicitly reaffirm the state's long-standing
exclusive authority and jurisdiction over the wildlife of the state as
established by title XVIII. The general court further finds that it is
in the best interest of the state and its citizens that the fish and
game department recognize, preserve, and promote our special heritage of
hunting, fishing, trapping, and wildlife viewing by providing
opportunities to hunt, fish, trap, and view wildlife in accordance with
title XVIII.

**Source.** 1998, 95:1. 2001, 25:1, eff. July 14, 2001.

### Section 207:59

 **207:59 Exclusive Authority of the State. –** The state of New
Hampshire shall have exclusive authority and jurisdiction over the
management, preservation, protection, propagation and taking of wildlife
in the state. Except as otherwise specifically provided by statute, no
ordinance or regulation of a political subdivision may regulate the
management, preservation, protection, propagation and taking of
wildlife. Nothing in this section shall be construed as affecting a
political subdivision's property rights concerning land owned and
controlled by that entity.

**Source.** 1998, 95:1, eff. July 19, 1998.

Lead Education Program
----------------------

### Section 207:60

 **207:60 Lead Education Program. –**
                                             
 I. To discourage the use of lead, the fish and game department, in
consultation with the department of health and human services and in
partnership with the department of environmental services, the Loon
Preservation Committee, the Audubon Society of New Hampshire, and the
New Hampshire Wildlife Federation, shall institute an educational
program consisting of, but not limited to, press releases or articles
for all news media, an informational brochure for distribution by
licensing agents and at department sponsored training programs, videos
for use by television outlets, posters for boat access kiosks and other
bulletin boards, and a mobile display for use at public events.
                                             
 II. The purpose of the educational program is to inform the public
about adverse, though unintentional, effects of lead on wildlife, and
how to reduce the introduction of lead into the environment through
personal action.

**Source.** 1998, 312:2, eff. June 26, 1998.

Wolf Introduction Prohibited
----------------------------

### Section 207:61

 **207:61 Wolf Introduction Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. For the purposes of this subdivision, "wolf'' means any canine
classified as Canis lupis or Canis rufus.
                                             
 II. No person or state agency shall introduce wolf populations to
the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1999, 80:2, eff. July 31, 1999.

Operation Game Thief
--------------------

### Section 207:62


                                             


                                             [RSA 207:62 contingently repealed by 2001, 107:3; see contingent repeal
note set out below.
                                             ]

 **207:62 Operation Game Thief; Fund Account Established. –**
                                             
 The state treasurer shall establish a separate nonlapsing account
within the fish and game fund to be known as the operation game thief
account to which moneys obtained by the fish and game department shall
be applied, including any federal moneys which become available and all
donations received for such purpose. The moneys in this account
including accrued interest, shall be used exclusively for, and shall be
continually appropriated to, the administration and participation in
Operation Game Thief.

**Source.** 2001, 107:1, eff. July 1, 2001.
