---
title: 'CHAPTER 209-A FALCONRY'
---

TITLE XVIII
                                             
FISH AND GAME
=============

CHAPTER 209-A
                                             
FALCONRY
--------------

### Section 209-A:1

 **209-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Department'' means the department of fish and game.
                                             
 II. "Executive director'' means the executive director of the
department of fish and game.
                                             
 III. "Falconry'' means the sport of taking quarry by means of a
trained raptor.
                                             
 IV. "Raptor'' means a live migratory bird of the family Accipitridae
or of the family Falconidae.

**Source.** 1987, 130:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 209-A:2

 **209-A:2 Purpose. –** Notwithstanding RSA 207:3 or any law to the
contrary, the general court recognizes that falconry is a legal means of
taking game and a legal basis for keeping otherwise protected raptorial
birds.

**Source.** 1987, 130:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.

### Section 209-A:3

 **209-A:3 Falconry. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding RSA 207:14 and in accordance with any applicable
federal regulations, the executive director may issue falconry permits
for the capture and possession of raptors for falconry purposes, raptor
propagation, or for salvage or rehabilitation purposes. No person shall
engage in the sport of falconry without a valid falconry permit and
applicable license to hunt issued under RSA 214. The initial fee for a
falconry permit shall be 
                                             $50 and renewal fees and procedures for
issuance of permits shall be established under rules adopted by the
executive director, with the approval of the fish and game commission,
pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 II. Revenues from fees and renewals under paragraph I shall be
deposited in the nongame species account established in RSA 212-B:6.
                                             
 III. The executive director, with the consent of the commission, may
establish, by rules under RSA 541-A, an open season or closed season for
the taking of certain game animals, game birds, and small game by the
use of raptors in falconry in any county of the state, or any portion
thereof. Such rules shall include, but not be limited to, the length of
the season, bag limits, and methods of taking.
                                             
 IV. Any person permitted under this section shall be exempt from the
requirements of RSA 207:14, when the permittee's activities pertain to
falconry.

**Source.** 1987, 130:1. 1990, 122:1. 2001, 180:3. 2003, 60:2, eff. July
1, 2003.

### Section 209-A:4

 **209-A:4 Penalty. –** Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1987, 130:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1988.
