---
title: 'CHAPTER 209 GAME BIRDS; PIGEONS'
---

TITLE XVIII
                                             
FISH AND GAME
=============

CHAPTER 209
                                             
GAME BIRDS; PIGEONS
-------------------

### Section 209:1

 **209:1 Grouse, Woodcock; Snipe. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988, 219:2, VI,
eff. Jan. 1, 1989.
                                             ]

### Section 209:2

 **209:2 Pheasants. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988, 219:2, VII, eff. Jan. 1,
1989.
                                             ]

### Section 209:3

 **209:3 Closed Season on. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988, 219:2, VIII, eff.
Jan. 1, 1989.
                                             ]

### Section 209:4

 **209:4 No Open Season. –** There shall be no open season for spruce
grouse, upland plover, ptarmigan, and mourning dove (Zenaida macroura).

**Source.** 1935, 124:3. 1937, 188:14. 1941, 115:1. RL 243:3. 1945,
182:2. RSA 209:4. 1967, 2:1; 170:2. 1971, 574:4. 1975, 41:1. 1977,
459:4. 1988, 155:1. 1999, 28:1. 2005, 11:2, eff. July 2, 2005.

### Section 209:4-a

 **209:4-a Quail. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1988, 219:2, IX, eff. Jan. 1,
1989.
                                             ]

### Section 209:5

 **209:5 Migratory Game Birds. –** Anatidae or waterfowl, including
wild ducks and geese; Rallidae or rails, including coot and gallinules;
Limicolae or shore birds, including plover, snipe and yellow legs; and
Scolopacidae or woodcock are declared to be migratory game birds.

**Source.** 1935, 124:3. RL 243:4. 1945, 182:3. RSA 209:5. 1979, 97:1.
1985, 42:2. 1988, 155:2, eff. June 21, 1988.

### Section 209:5-a

 **209:5-a Connecticut River Zone. –**
                                             
 I. A person holding a Vermont resident hunting license which allows
the taking of migratory waterfowl and coots, may take migratory game
birds, as provided in RSA 209:5, except woodcock and snipe, from the
Connecticut River zone, provided the state of Vermont grants the same
right to a person holding a New Hampshire resident hunting license and
waterfowl license which allows the taking of migratory game birds in the
Connecticut River zone in Vermont pursuant to Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 10,
sec. 4909.
                                             
 II. The Connecticut River zone in New Hampshire shall include that
portion of New Hampshire lying west of the line defined by New Hampshire
Route 63 from the Massachusetts border north to Route 12; Route 12 north
to Route 12-A; Route 12-A north to Route 10; Route 10 north to Route
135; Route 135 north to U.S. Route 3; U.S. Route 3 north to the
intersection with the Connecticut River.

**Source.** 2003, 26:1. 2007, 298:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 209:6

 **209:6 Taking; Federal Duck Stamp Required. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall hunt, capture, kill, take, possess, buy or sell
any migratory game bird or part thereof, except during such time and in
such manner and numbers as may be prescribed by regulations promulgated
under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, an act of Congress approved July 3,
1918, which regulations are hereby made a part of the game law of the
state.
                                             
 II. No person who has attained the age of 16 years shall take any
migratory waterfowl (brant, wild ducks, geese and swans) unless at the
time of such taking he has on his person an unexpired federal migratory
bird stamp (commonly called a duck stamp) validated by his signature
written across the face of said stamp in ink. A person who has not
attained the age of 16 years is not required to have a duck stamp. Said
duck stamp shall be required in addition to a valid New Hampshire
hunting license obtained pursuant to RSA 214:1. Regulations promulgated
under the Federal Migratory Bird Hunting Stamp Act of 1934 are hereby
made a part of the game law of the state.

**Source.** 1935, 124:3. RL 243:5. RSA 209:6. 1975, 39:1, eff. May 16,
1975.

### Section 209:6-a

 **209:6-a Back Channel. –** The area known as Back Channel, a body
of tidal waters between the 2 New Castle bridges, so-called, and Goat
Island and Shapliegh Island to the north; and the Wentworth hotel
bridges, so-called, to the south; said body of water being bordered by
the town of New Castle to the east; and Sagamore Creek to the Sagamore
bridge, the city of Portsmouth and the town of Rye to the west; is
closed to all duck hunting or the discharge of firearms. This section
shall apply to all islands situated within the above stated boundaries.

**Source.** 1973, 472:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1973.

### Section 209:6-b

 **209:6-b Rules Relative to Migratory Birds. –**
                                             
 I. The fish and game department shall be exempt from the provisions
of RSA 541-A when setting the seasons and bag limits for migratory birds
as permitted in RSA 209:6 when federal regulations require that a rule
be adopted sooner than permitted by RSA 541-A. Such rules may be adopted
after whatever notice and hearing the agency finds to be practicable.
The agency shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that such rules are
made known to persons who may be affected by them.
                                             
 II. Rules adopted under this section shall be filed with the
director of legislative services and with the legislative committee on
administrative rules.

**Source.** 1985, 251:3, eff. June 7, 1985.

### Section 209:7

 **209:7 Pigeons. –** No person shall take or interfere with any
Antwerp or homing pigeon having the name of its owner stamped upon its
wing or tail, or wearing a ring or leg band with its registered number
stamped thereon, or any other distinguishing mark; nor shall any person
remove such distinguishing mark from any such pigeon.

**Source.** 1935, 124:3. RL 243:11.

### Section 209:8

 **209:8 Protected Birds. –** No person shall hunt, capture, kill,
take, possess, buy, or sell any protected bird or part thereof.

**Source.** 1935, 124:3. RL 243:6.

### Section 209:8-a

 **209:8-a Exceptions. –** A depredation permit is required before
any person may kill migratory birds for depredation control purposes.
Depredation permit applications for depredation permits shall be
submitted to the executive director of the fish and game department and
the appropriate special agent in charge, U.S. fish and wildlife service.
Any person may take protected birds for educational or scientific
purposes provided such person shall first obtain a written permit from
the executive director of fish and game for such purpose. Such permit
shall be in such form as the executive director of fish and game shall
prescribe and may be suspended or revoked by him at any time. The
provisions of RSA 214:30 to 33 inclusive shall apply to the permits
granted under the provisions of this section.

**Source.** 1959, 72:2. 1977, 247:12, eff. Aug. 19, 1977.

### Section 209:8-b

 **209:8-b Back Lake; Pittsburg. –** Notwithstanding any other
provisions of the law to the contrary, the hunting of wild birds upon or
within 50 feet inland from the shoreline of Back Lake in the town of
Pittsburg is hereby prohibited.

**Source.** 1973, 173:1, eff. July 27, 1973.

### Section 209:9

 **209:9 Golden and Bald Eagles. –** No person shall hunt, capture,
kill, take, or possess any golden or bald eagle and no person shall
molest or disturb the nest or young of any of said birds.

**Source.** 1939, 216:2. RL 243:7. RSA 209:9. 1977, 588:36, eff. Sept.
16, 1977.

### Section 209:10

 **209:10 Nests. –** No person shall take, or have in possession or
under control, or wantonly interfere with or destroy, any nest or eggs
of any game birds or protected birds.

**Source.** 1935, 124:3. RL 243:8.

### Section 209:11

 **209:11 Trapping, Etc. –** No wild bird or bird for which a closed
season is provided shall be trapped or snared or, if so taken,
possessed. Any trap, snare, or other device in which any bird may be
taken is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be summarily
destroyed or abated by any person. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to the setting of a trap on a pole for the purpose of taking
unprotected birds under a permit issued by the executive director.

**Source.** 1935, 124:3. RL 243:9.

### Section 209:12

 **209:12 Sale. –** The dead bodies of birds for which a closed
season is provided shall not be sold, offered for sale, or possessed for
sale, within this state, whether taken within or without the state,
except as permitted to duly authorized game breeders.

**Source.** 1935, 124:3. RL 243:10.

### Section 209:12-a

 **209:12-a Wild Turkey. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 (a) Establishing seasons and bag limits, and issuing wild turkey
permits.
                                             
 (b) Establishing registration stations and registration agent
fees for wild turkey.
                                             
 (c) Specifying the methods for taking and registering wild
turkeys.
                                             
 (d) The enhancement, protection, and propagation of wild
turkeys.
                                             
 II. No person shall possess at any time any wild turkey, or part
thereof, which has not been legally registered pursuant to this section.
This paragraph shall not apply to the possession of a wild turkey
between the time a person kills it and the time the wild turkey is
presented at a registration station.
                                             
 III. In addition to wild turkey licenses and permits issued under
RSA 214:9, XI, the executive director, with the consent of the
commission, may adopt rules under RSA 541-A, relative to issuing permits
for a special season for wild turkey, including bag limits, fees for
applications and permits, and the establishment of a lottery for
awarding the special permits.

**Source.** 1977, 459:1. 1979, 54:1. 1997, 9:3. 2005, 143:2, eff. July
1, 2005.

### Section 209:13

 **209:13 Penalties. –** Any person who violates any provision of RSA
209 shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1935, 124:3. RL 243:13. RSA 209:13. 1973, 531:51, eff. Oct.
31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.
