---
title: 'CHAPTER 212-B NONGAME SPECIES MANAGEMENT ACT'
---

TITLE XVIII
                                             
FISH AND GAME
=============

CHAPTER 212-B
                                             
NONGAME SPECIES MANAGEMENT ACT
------------------------------

### Section 212-B:1

 **212-B:1 Title. –** This chapter shall be known and may be cited as
the "Nongame Species Management Act''.

**Source.** 1988, 244:1, eff. June 29, 1988.

### Section 212-B:2

 **212-B:2 Findings and Declarations. –** The legislature finds and
declares that:
                                             
 I. New Hampshire's wildlife resources include more than 300
vertebrate species which normally breed in the state, and an additional
120 bird species which occur as transients, migrants, or wintering
populations. Of these 420 species, about 60 are considered furbearers,
game birds or mammals, or sport fish.
                                             
 II. Native wildlife constitutes an invaluable natural resource with
ecological, scientific, educational, historical, recreational, economic,
and aesthetic values to the citizens of New Hampshire.
                                             
 III. It shall be the policy of the state to maintain and manage this
resource for future generations.

**Source.** 1988, 244:1, eff. June 29, 1988.

### Section 212-B:3

 **212-B:3 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Nongame act'' means the federal Fish and Wildlife Conservation
Act of 1980, P.L. 96-366, as amended.
                                             
 II. "Executive director'' means the executive director of the fish
and game department.
                                             
 III. "Nongame species'' means all wildlife as defined in RSA
212-A:2, III except those listed as fur-bearing animals in RSA 207:1,
VIII; game animals in RSA 207:1, X; game birds in RSA 207:1, XI; small
game in RSA 207:1, XXVI; unprotected birds in RSA 207:1, XXIX; fish
defined under RSA 207:1, VI, and marine species regulated under RSA
211:62.

**Source.** 1988, 244:1. 1998, 252:8, eff. Aug. 24, 1998.

### Section 212-B:4

 **212-B:4 Adoption of Rules. –** The executive director, with the
consent of the commission, may adopt rules under RSA 541-A regulating
the taking, possession, and handling of nongame species. Such authority
shall extend to rules for the enhancement, protection, and propagation
of nongame species.

**Source.** 1988, 244:1, eff. June 29, 1988.

### Section 212-B:5

 **212-B:5 Conservation Programs. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director shall develop and implement a
comprehensive nongame species management program that may include, but
not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) Education of the public regarding New Hampshire's nongame
resources;
                                             
 (b) Research to determine the populations, distribution, future
trends, and needs of nongame species; and
                                             
 (c) Management measures to maintain and promote the health of
self-sustaining nongame populations.
                                             
 II. The executive director may establish such programs, including
acquisition of land or aquatic habitat or interests therein, as are
deemed necessary for the conservation of nongame species.
                                             
 III. In carrying out the programs authorized by this section, the
executive director may consult with other states having a common
interest in particular nongame species and may enter into agreements
with federal or other state agencies, other states, political
subdivisions of this state, or private corporations, organizations, or
persons with respect to programs designed to conserve nongame species,
including, where appropriate, agreements for administration and
management.

**Source.** 1988, 244:1, eff. June 29, 1988.

### Section 212-B:6

 **212-B:6 Fund Established; Continuing General Fund Appropriation to
Match Donations. –**
                                             
 I. The state treasurer shall establish a separate nonlapsing account
within the fish and game fund to be known as the nongame species account
to which moneys obtained by the fish and game department shall be
applied, including any federal moneys which become available from the
federal government, any state funds appropriated, and all donations
received. The moneys in this account shall be used for the development
and implementation of a comprehensive nongame species management
program.
                                             
 II. The fish and game department shall issue a certificate of
participation to any individual who donates not less than 
                                             $10 to the
nongame species account established in paragraph I. An amount equal to
the moneys donated during any fiscal year under this paragraph up to and
including a total of 
                                             $50,000 shall be transferred annually to the
special nongame species account. The governor is authorized to draw a
warrant for such amount out of any money in the treasury not otherwise
appropriated. This is a continuing appropriation.

**Source.** 1988, 244:1. 2003, 60:4. 2008, 120:22, eff. Aug. 2, 2008.
