---
title: CHAPTER 214 LICENSES
---

TITLE XVIII
                                             
FISH AND GAME
=============

CHAPTER 214
                                             
LICENSES
------------

Hunting, Fishing, and Trapping
------------------------------

### Section 214:1

 **214:1 License Required. –** No person, except as hereinafter
provided, shall at any time fish, hunt, trap, shoot, pursue, take or
kill freshwater fish, marine and estuarine finfish species, saltwater
smelt, saltwater shad, saltwater salmonoids, wild birds, or wild animals
in this state, without first procuring a proper and valid license to do
so, and then only in accordance with the terms of such license and
subject to all the provisions of this title. The licensee shall carry
such license on his or her person when so engaged, and the license shall
be subject to inspection on demand of any person.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. 1937, 188:25. 1941, 67:1. RL 247:1. RSA 214:1.
1955, 22:1. 1969, 12:1. 1983, 40:1. 1986, 214:17. 2009, 103:3, eff. Jan.
1, 2011; 144:134, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 214:1-a

 **214:1-a License. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2009, 103:12, II, and 2009,
144:143, II, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 214:1-b

 **214:1-b Pheasant Stamp or License Required. –** No person shall at
any time hunt, shoot, pursue, kill or take pheasants in this state
without first procuring, in addition to the applicable hunting license
required by RSA 214:1, a stamp or license to do so under RSA 214:9, X,
for the same period. If a stamp is issued, it must be permanently
affixed to the back of said hunting license and signed across the face
in a permanent manner with the applicant's signature. A person under the
age of 16 years may hunt, shoot, pursue, kill or take pheasants without
such a stamp or license provided that, while so doing, he is accompanied
by an adult who has procured such a stamp or license.

**Source.** 1975, 440:1. 1985, 291:27, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 214:1-c

 **214:1-c Wild Turkey Permit or License. –** No person shall at any
time hunt, shoot, pursue, kill or take wild turkey in this state without
first procuring, in addition to the applicable hunting license required
by RSA 214, a permit or license to do so under RSA 214:9, XI, or RSA
209:12-a, III, for the same period.

**Source.** 1977, 459:5. 1985, 291:28. 2001, 180:4. 2005, 143:3, eff.
July 1, 2005.

### Section 214:1-d

 **214:1-d State Migratory Waterfowl License Required. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall at any time hunt, shoot, pursue, kill, or take
migratory waterfowl without first procuring, in addition to the
applicable hunting license required by RSA 214 and the federal duck
stamp required by RSA 209:6, a license to do so under RSA 214:9, XII,
for the same period. A person under the age of 16 years may hunt, shoot,
pursue, kill, or take migratory waterfowl without such a license,
provided that, while so doing, he or she is accompanied by an adult who
has procured such a license. For the purpose of this section "migratory
waterfowl'' shall mean ducks, mergansers, coots, geese, and brant.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any provision of this section or RSA
214:9, XII shall be guilty of a violation and shall be guilty of a
separate offense for each migratory waterfowl bird taken.

**Source.** 1983, 173:1. 1985, 279:1-3. 1994, 151:2. 2007, 220:5, eff.
July 1, 2007; 298:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2008 at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 214:1-e

 **214:1-e Fishing Without a License. –** The executive director may
adopt rules under RSA 541-A establishing 2 days per year on which
persons normally required to hold a license under RSA 214:1 may fish by
angling only, in any public waters within the jurisdiction of the state
without a license, except that those anglers participating in a fishing
tournament on either day shall be required to possess a valid fishing
license.

**Source.** 1989, 101:1, eff. May 1, 1989. 2016, 135:1, eff. July 26,
2016.

### Section 214:1-f

 **214:1-f Wildlife Habitat Stamp or License. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall at any time take wild animals or wild birds in
this state without first procuring, in addition to any applicable
licenses required by title XVIII, a wildlife habitat stamp or license
under RSA 214:9, XV, for the same period. If a stamp is issued it shall
be signed across the face in a permanent manner with the applicant's
signature and shall be carried upon such person while engaged in taking
wild animals or wild birds. A person under the age of 16 years may take
wild animals or wild birds without such a stamp or license provided
that, while so doing, the person is accompanied by an adult who has
procured such stamp or license. This paragraph shall not apply to any
person who takes wild animals or wild birds under a complimentary
license, excluding any administrative fee, issued pursuant to RSA 214:3,
RSA 214:7-a, RSA 214:13, RSA 214:13-b, or RSA 214:13-c, or a lifetime
license issued pursuant to RSA 214:9-c or RSA 214:9-cc that was
purchased in a prior calendar year.
                                             
 II. A license to take any kind of wild animal or wild bird as
required by title XVIII shall not be issued, except for the
complimentary licenses listed under paragraph I, to any person who has
not purchased a wildlife habitat stamp or license. A person shall only
be required to purchase one wildlife habitat stamp or license under RSA
214:9, XV each year regardless of the number of licenses purchased by
that person during that year.
                                             
 III. For the purpose of this section, "wild animal'' shall not
include fish or marine species.
                                             
 IV. The executive director, with the approval of the commission,
shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the manner of
issuance of the wildlife habitat stamp or license, and may, with the
approval of the commission, provide for the reproduction, sale,
licensing, and other disposal of art created for the stamp. The art for
the stamp may be selected through an art contest administered by the
executive director with the approval of the commission. A stamp may be
issued only upon prior authorization by the legislature.
                                             
 V. The state treasurer shall establish a separate nonlapsing account
within the fish and game fund, to be known as the wildlife habitat
account, to which shall be credited all fees collected under RSA 214:9,
XV from the sale of wildlife habitat stamps and licenses and all
proceeds derived from the art created for the stamp under paragraph IV.
The state treasurer may accept public and private grants and donations
into the account.
                                             
 VI. The state treasurer shall invest the moneys in the wildlife
habitat account as provided by law. Interest received on investments
shall be credited to the account.
                                             
 VII. The wildlife habitat account is continually appropriated and
may only be used for the following purposes within the state of New
Hampshire:
                                             
 (a) The development, management, preservation, conservation,
restoration, and maintenance of wildlife habitat on both public and
private lands, with at least 50 percent of the annual revenue from stamp
and license sales dedicated to pay costs of labor and materials for
direct physical land management activities;
                                             
 (b) Obtaining land access to wildlife habitat areas;
                                             
 (c) The acquisition of easements upon private property for the
purposes of subparagraphs (a) and (b);
                                             
 (d) The acquisition of private land to protect critical wildlife
habitat, provided that the governing body of any municipality,
unincorporated town, or unorganized place in which the property is
located approves;
                                             
 (e) The promotion and production of the wildlife habitat stamp
and artwork; and
                                             
 (f) Providing information to the public on the location of
properties managed by the fish and game department.
                                             
 VIII. When stamp and license revenue is used to either obtain an
easement under subparagraph VII(c) or purchase land under subparagraph
VII(d), no condition shall be accepted which restricts hunting and
trapping on the associated land. This requirement shall not apply to
lands used for access purposes or if the executive director finds that
it is in the interest of the hunting and trapping community to allow
such a restriction. The executive director shall allow hunting and
trapping on such lands, as is permissible, but may prohibit for any
length of time the hunting or trapping on the whole or part of such
lands when it is necessary for the protection or propagation of a
wildlife species or for public safety reasons.
                                             
 IX. The executive director, with the approval of the commission,
shall expend the funds in the wildlife habitat account. Prior to the
expenditure of any funds, the fish and game department shall analyze the
proposed project and provide the executive director and the commission
with recommendations as to the project's usefulness and feasibility.
                                             
 X. The executive director shall submit to the fiscal committee and
the chairpersons of the house wildlife and marine resources committee
and the senate wildlife and recreation committee a detailed fiscal year
report by October 1 of each year, beginning with fiscal year 2000, with
sufficient information to be fully understood by the general court and
the public, summarizing the receipts and disbursements from the wildlife
habitat account and the public benefits derived from the disbursements
from it. Every fifth year, beginning in 2003, the annual report shall
provide an in-depth financial accounting and summary of work
accomplished in the previous 5 years, outlining all projects that are
completed, in process, and planned. All annual reports shall be made
available to the public after submission to the general court.

**Source.** 1998, 241:1. 2000, 256:3. 2006, 50:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 214:1-g

 **214:1-g Fisheries Habitat Fee; Account Established. –**
                                             
 I. A one dollar fisheries habitat fee shall be required to be paid
by all persons 16 years of age or older, in addition to each applicable
fishing or combination license required by Title XVIII, in order to take
fish in the fresh waters of this state. This paragraph shall not apply
to any person who takes fish under a complimentary license, excluding
any administrative fee, issued pursuant to RSA 214:3, RSA 214:7-a, RSA
214:13, RSA 214:13-b, or RSA 214:13-c, or a lifetime license issued
pursuant to RSA 214:9-c that was purchased in a prior calendar year.
                                             
 II. The state treasurer shall establish a separate nonlapsing
account within the fish and game fund, to be known as the fisheries
habitat account, to which shall be credited all fees collected under RSA
214:1-g, I. The state treasurer may accept public and private grants and
donations for deposit into the account.
                                             
 III. The state treasurer shall invest the moneys in the fisheries
habitat account as provided by law. Interest received on investments
shall be credited to the account.
                                             
 IV. The fisheries habitat account is continually appropriated and
may only be used for the following purposes within the state of New
Hampshire:
                                             
 (a) The development, management, preservation, conservation,
restoration, and maintenance of fisheries habitats in the water of the
state, with at least 50 percent of the annual revenue dedicated to pay
costs of labor and materials for direct aquatic management activities;
                                             
 (b) Obtaining access to fisheries habitat areas;
                                             
 (c) The acquisition of easements upon private property for the
purposes of subparagraphs (a) and (b);
                                             
 (d) The acquisition of private land to protect critical fisheries
habitat, provided that the governing body of any municipality,
unincorporated town, or unorganized place in which the property is
located approves;
                                             
 (e) Providing information to the public on the location of
fisheries managed by the fish and game department.
                                             
 V. When revenue is used to either obtain an easement under
subparagraph IV(c) or purchase land under subparagraph IV(d), no
condition shall be accepted which restricts fishing from or hunting and
trapping on the associated land. This requirement shall not apply to
lands used for access purposes or if the executive director finds that
it is in the interest of the fishing, hunting, and trapping community to
allow such a restriction. The executive director shall allow fishing
from and hunting and trapping on such lands, as is permissible, but may
prohibit for any length of time the fishing, hunting or trapping on the
whole or part of such lands when it is necessary for the protection or
propagation of a fish species or for public safety reasons.
                                             
 VI. The executive director, with the approval of the commission,
shall expend the funds in the fisheries habitat account. Prior to the
expenditure of any funds, the fish and game department shall analyze the
proposed project and provide the executive director and the commission
with recommendations as to the project's usefulness and feasibility.
                                             
 VII. The executive director shall submit to the fiscal committee and
the chairpersons of the house wildlife and marine resources committee
and the senate wildlife and recreation committee a detailed fiscal year
report by October 1 of each year, beginning with fiscal year 2000, with
sufficient information to be fully understood by the general court and
the public, summarizing the receipts and disbursements from the
fisheries habitat account and the public benefits derived from the
disbursements from it. Every fifth year, beginning in 2005, the annual
report shall provide an in-depth financial accounting and summary of
work accomplished in the previous 5 years, outlining all projects that
are completed, in process, and planned. All annual reports shall be made
available to the public after submission to the general court.

**Source.** 1999, 209:1. 2000, 256:4, eff. Aug. 11, 2000.

### Section 214:2

 **214:2 License Required; Exception. –**
                                             
 I. The provisions of RSA 214:1 shall not apply to resident land
owners while upon their own land or to the owner's children under 16
years of age when accompanied by the owner or another licensed person 18
years of age or over on such land, to persons fishing in ponds operated
and maintained in an aquaculture operation, to persons hunting on a
regulated shooting area, to persons under 16 years of age while fishing,
to persons under 16 years of age while hunting when accompanied by a
licensee 18 years of age or over, or to residents under 16 years of age
while trapping when accompanied by a licensee 18 years of age or over.
                                             
 II. Fishing licenses may be issued without charge to resident
legally blind persons, but no hunting licenses shall be issued to such
persons. A fishing license issued to a resident blind person shall be
effective during the remainder of the person's life unless sooner
suspended or revoked by the executive director. The executive director
may issue complimentary nonresident fishing licenses to legally blind
persons if the state in which the person is a resident provides a
reciprocal privilege for legally blind residents of this state. The
executive director shall determine the form of such complimentary
licenses. A complimentary nonresident fishing license under this
paragraph shall be effective for the lifetime of the applicant unless
sooner suspended or revoked by the executive director.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. RL 247:2. 1947, 163:1. 1951, 130:1. RSA 214:2.
1973, 72:21. 1983, 35:2. 1985, 291:12. 1990, 165:2. 2001, 180:5, eff.
July 1, 2001.

### Section 214:3

 **214:3 Members of the United States Army, Navy, Marines, Air Force,
and Coast Guard. –**
                                             
 I. Any resident of this state who is on regular active duty in the
United States army, navy, marines, air force, or coast guard and who is
permanently stationed outside of the state, may acquire at no charge,
upon application to the executive director and subject to the
restrictions of title XVIII, a special license to hunt and fish during
any period while on leave or furlough.
                                             
 II. Any nonresident who is on regular active duty in the United
States army, navy, marines, air force, or coast guard and who is
permanently stationed within the state, may purchase regular hunting and
fishing licenses or combination licenses, subject to the restrictions of
title XVIII, at the same fee as is charged a legal resident of the
state.
                                             
 III. The executive director shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A
relative to:
                                             
 (a) Establishing any restrictions on the use of a special license
issued under paragraph I.
                                             
 (b) The documentation required in order to qualify for a license
under this section.
                                             
 (c) The locations at which a license may be issued.

**Source.** 1953, 103:1. RSA 214:3. 1955, 100:1. 1957, 267:3. 1961,
161:1. 1969, 10:1. 1971, 204:1. 1977, 252:1. 1985, 291:13. 1986, 214:20.
1998, 21:1. 1999, 63:1, eff. July 20, 1999.

### Section 214:4

 **214:4 Military Personnel. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 291:29, I, eff.
Jan. 1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 214:4-a

 **214:4-a Nonresident Servicemen. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 291:29, II,
eff. Jan. 1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 214:5

 **214:5 Termination of Licenses. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 291:29, III,
eff. Jan. 1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 214:5-a

 **214:5-a Nonresident Student Hunting License. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985,
291:29, IV, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 214:5-b

 **214:5-b Nonresident Full-Time Students. –** A nonresident
full-time student in a public or private high school, postgraduate
program, or postsecondary educational institution in this state, may
purchase a nonresident student license for hunting or fishing issued
under the provisions of title XVIII, if qualified for such license, at
the fee charged to a resident for the respective license. For purposes
of this paragraph, a full-time student in a postsecondary educational
institution means a student who is registered for at least 12 credit
hours per semester. A nonresident full-time student shall, when
requested, show proof of his or her status by furnishing a valid student
identification card.

**Source.** 2014, 96:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2014.

### Section 214:6

 **214:6 Licenses for Aged Persons. –** Any resident of this state
who is over 65 years of age and who is receiving public aid may, upon
presentation of proof of such aid, make application to the executive
director of fish and game for a special license to take, and to
transport fish, under the restrictions of this title. Such license shall
be marked in such manner as the executive director may designate and
there shall be no fee for such license.

**Source.** 1953, 103:4. 2009, 103:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2011; 144:135, eff.
Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 214:6-a

 **214:6-a Apprentice Hunting License. –** Any person who wishes to
hunt but who has not completed a hunter education program or provided
proof of a previous hunting or archery license, as required in RSA
214:23-a, may purchase an apprentice hunting license. A person holding
an apprentice hunting license shall be allowed to hunt only when
accompanied by a properly licensed person who is 18 years of age or
over. The fees for an apprentice hunting license shall be as provided in
RSA 214:9, I for a resident apprentice hunting license, as provided in
RSA 214:9, VI for a nonresident apprentice hunting license, as provided
in RSA 214:9, VII-a for a nonresident small game apprentice hunting
license, or as provided in RSA 208:5, I for a resident or nonresident
archery license. The properly licensed person who is 18 years of age or
over accompanying the apprentice shall be fully accountable for any
damage incurred or for any violations which may be committed by the
apprentice while hunting. Any other permits or licenses for hunting
shall be purchased as required by the apprentice hunter. The apprentice
hunting license shall not be valid to take moose, shall not apply to the
3-day small game license, and shall not be used as proof of a previous
license under RSA 214:23-a, I(c) or II(c). An apprentice hunting license
may be purchased only once in the lifetime of the hunter.

**Source.** 2011, 46:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2012. 2012, 107:1, eff. July 28,
2012.

### Section 214:7

 **214:7 Issuance of Licenses; License Agents; Electronic Issuance.
–**
                                             
 I. Licenses, tags, stamps, or permits shall be issued by the
executive director through his agents under such agreements, and in such
form, as the executive director may prescribe. Licensees shall furnish
information concerning fish, game, or fur-bearing animals as the
executive director may require.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. 1937, 188:26. RL 247:3. 1947, 163:2. RSA 214:7.
1985, 291:14. 1986, 25:1. 2000, 47:2. 2008, 151:7, I, eff. June 6, 2008.

### Section 214:7-a

 **214:7-a Persons Over 68 Years of Age. –**
                                             
 I. Any resident of this state who is 68 years of age or over may
make application each year, to any authorized agent of the state for the
sale of freshwater fishing, hunting, or trapping licenses, for a special
license to fish in freshwaters and hunt or trap, under the restrictions
of this title. Such license may permit the use of a muzzleloading
firearm and bow and arrow. The executive director shall set the annual
fee for the special license established in this section by rule pursuant
to RSA 206:10, I. Said fee shall not exceed 50 percent of the regular
resident license fee for fishing in freshwaters, hunting, or trapping.
The license shall be marked in such manner as the executive director may
designate.
                                             
 II. Those individuals holding a special license under this section
as of June 30, 2015 shall be exempt from the requirement to apply for
said license annually. The special license held by these individuals
shall remain effective for the remainder of each individual's life, as
long as the individual remains a resident of the state, unless suspended
or revoked by the executive director.

**Source.** 1959, 254:1. 1963, 78:1. 1971, 535:1. 1985, 291:25. 1995,
39:1. 1998, 328:1. 2009, 103:10, eff. Jan. 1, 2011; 144:141, eff. Jan.
1, 2011. 2015, 186:32, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 214:7-b

 **214:7-b Minimum Residency Required. –** Any person who is
otherwise qualified for a resident hunting or fishing license or both,
issued without charge pursuant to the provisions of title XVIII, shall
furnish proof that he has resided within the state for at least 2 years
immediately preceding his application for said license and has not
during that time claimed a residence in any other state. Any person who
willfully makes a false statement relative to his residency in applying
for said license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1977, 498:1, eff. Sept. 12, 1977.

### Section 214:7-c

 **214:7-c Super Sporting License. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2006, 172:4, II,
eff. Jan. 1, 2007.
                                             ]

### Section 214:8

 **214:8 Form; Fees. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director shall prepare licenses, game tags,
permits, stamps, and such other forms as determined necessary to comply
with all licensing requirements of title XVIII. Such license, when
issued to the licensee, shall bear the date of issuance, and shall
contain the name, age, color of eyes, and residence of the licensee and
such other information, including affidavits, as may be requested by the
executive director. The license, to be valid, shall be countersigned by
the licensee on the face of the license in the space provided.
                                             
 II. The executive director shall set fees for the various license
types described in RSA 214:9 pursuant to RSA 206:10, I.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. RL 247:5. RSA 214:8. 1955, 277:2. 1959, 254:2.
1961, 32:1. 1973, 46:1. 1985, 291:16, eff. Jan. 1, 1986. 2015, 186:24,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 214:8-a

 **214:8-a Blood Type. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 291:29, V, eff. Jan. 1,
1986.
                                             ]

### Section 214:9

 **214:9 Application. –** To obtain any of the following licenses, an
applicant shall fill out and subscribe on a blank to be furnished by the
executive director and pay the agent the license fees, established under
RSA 214:8, II, and the agent fee as provided in RSA 214-A:4:
                                             
 I. Resident hunting license, which shall entitle the licensee to
hunt, shoot, kill, or take, except by the use of traps, and to transport
wild birds and wild animals under the restrictions of this title.
                                             
 II. Resident fishing license, which shall entitle the licensee to
kill, take, and transport all species of freshwater fish, under the
restrictions of this title.
                                             
 II-a. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II-b. One-day resident fishing license, which shall entitle the
licensee to kill, take, and transport all species of freshwater fish,
for said time only, under the restrictions of this title.
                                             
 III. Resident hunting and fishing license, which shall entitle the
licensee to hunt, shoot, kill, or take, except by use of traps, and to
transport wild birds, wild animals, and all species of freshwater fish
under the restrictions of this title.
                                             
 IV. Resident trapping license, which shall entitle the licensee to
take fur-bearing animals and coyote by the use of traps and sell and
transport them under the restrictions of this title.
                                             
 V. Resident minor's trapping license, which shall entitle the
licensee under 16 years of age to take fur-bearing animals and coyote by
the use of traps and sell and transport them under the restrictions of
this title.
                                             
 VI. Nonresident hunting license, which shall entitle the licensee to
hunt, shoot, kill, and take, except by the use of traps, and to
transport wild birds and wild animals under the restrictions of this
title.
                                             
 VI-a. Nonresident hunting and fishing license, which shall entitle
the licensee to hunt, shoot, kill, or take, except by use of traps, and
to transport wild birds, wild animals, and all species of freshwater
fish under the restrictions of this title.
                                             
 VII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VII-a. Nonresident small game license, which shall entitle the
licensee to hunt, shoot, or take small game as defined in RSA 207:1,
XXVI; provided, however, this license shall not authorize the taking of
fur-bearing animals as defined in RSA 207:1, VIII.
                                             
 VII-b. 3-day nonresident small game license, which shall entitle the
licensee to hunt, shoot, or take small game as defined in RSA 207:1,
XXVI, for 3 consecutive days; provided, however, this license shall not
authorize the taking of fur-bearing animals as defined in RSA 207:1,
VIII.
                                             
 VIII. Nonresident fishing license, which shall entitle the licensee
to kill, take, and transport all species of freshwater fish under the
restrictions of this title.
                                             
 VIII-a. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VIII-b. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VIII-c. 7-day nonresident fishing license, which shall entitle the
licensee to kill, take, and transport all species of freshwater fish,
for 7 consecutive days, under the restrictions of this title.
                                             
 VIII-d. 3-day nonresident fishing license, which shall entitle the
licensee to kill, take, and transport all species of freshwater fish,
for 3 consecutive days, under the restrictions of this title.
                                             
 VIII-e. One-day nonresident fishing license, which shall entitle the
licensee to kill, take, and transport all species of freshwater fish,
for one day, under the restrictions of this title.
                                             
 IX. Nonresident trapping license, which shall entitle the licensee
to take fur-bearing animals and coyote by the use of traps and sell and
transport them under the restrictions of this title. If the applicant's
state or province does not permit nonresident trappers, said applicant
shall be denied a nonresident license in this state.
                                             
 X. (a) Pheasant license or stamp, which shall entitle the licensee
to hunt, shoot, kill, and take, except by the use of traps, pheasants
during the open season.
                                             
 (b) The fee for such license or stamp shall be set by the
executive director pursuant to RSA 206:10, I.
                                             
 XI. Resident wild turkey license, which shall entitle the licensee
to hunt, shoot, kill, and take turkey, except by the use of traps.
                                             
 XI-a. Nonresident wild turkey license, which shall entitle the
licensee to hunt, shoot, kill, and take turkey, except by the use of
traps.
                                             
 XII. Migratory waterfowl license, which shall entitle the licensee
to hunt, shoot, kill, and take migratory waterfowl during such time and
in such manner and numbers as may be allowed under RSA 209:6.
                                             
 XIII. (a) Any recognized summer camp or educational facility
operated within the state may apply to the executive director of the
fish and game department for a group fishing license that may be
utilized by individual campers or students while participating in camp
or school approved activities. The fee for the license, the definitions,
requirements for participation, and criteria for obtaining the license
shall be determined by the executive director pursuant to rules adopted
under RSA 541-A.
                                             
 (b) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XIV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XV. If the applicant wishes to take wild animals, excluding fish and
marine species, or wild birds, a fee set by the executive director
pursuant to RSA 206:10, I, and the agent shall thereupon issue a
wildlife habitat stamp or license as provided in RSA 214:1-f. For any
year in which a stamp is issued, the agent shall be entitled to retain a
portion of the fee as set by the executive director pursuant to RSA
206:10, I for each wildlife habitat stamp sold and all stamps sold at
the department headquarters or any subagency thereof shall retain the
same portion of the fee which, notwithstanding RSA 214:1-f, V, shall be
credited to the general fish and game fund. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, there shall be no agent fee for a wildlife habitat
license issued pursuant to RSA 214:1-f.
                                             
 XVI. (a) Recreational saltwater license, which shall entitle the
licensee, 16 years of age or older, to take, possess, or transport
finfish from coastal and estuarine waters, under the restrictions of
this title, provided that any person participating in a recreational
saltwater fishing opportunity on a for-hire vessel, which is licensed
under subparagraph (b), shall be exempt from the license requirement of
this subparagraph.
                                             
 (b) A resident or nonresident owner or operator of a for-hire
vessel who wishes to provide recreational saltwater fishing
opportunities for persons taking finfish from coastal and estuarine
waters, shall pay a fee, set by the executive director pursuant to RSA
206:10, I, for each charter boat and each party boat, which shall
entitle the owner or operator of the licensed for-hire vessel to take,
possess, or transport finfish from coastal and estuarine waters, under
the restrictions of this title.
                                             
 (c) A nonresident holding a valid recreational saltwater license
or a for-hire charter or party boat saltwater license from Maine or
Massachusetts, shall be allowed to take, possess, or transport finfish
from New Hampshire coastal and estuarine waters, provided that the state
in which such person purchased a recreational saltwater license or in
which the for-hire vessel is registered allows an angler with a New
Hampshire recreational saltwater license or a saltwater for-hire vessel
with a for-hire license from New Hampshire to recreationally take,
possess, or transport finfish in that state's coastal and estuarine
waters.
                                             
 (d) In this paragraph:
                                             
 (1) "Coastal and estuarine waters'' means all waters within
the rise and fall of the tide, and water below any fishway or dam which
is normally the dividing line between tide water and fresh water, or
below any tidal bound which has been legally established in streams
flowing into the sea under the jurisdiction of the state.
                                             
 (2) "For-hire vessel'' means a party boat, charter boat, dive
boat, head boat, or other boat hired by persons to engage in
recreational saltwater fishing opportunities.
                                             
 (3) "Recreational saltwater fishing'' means taking of any
marine finfish, by any means for personal use only and which are not
sold.
                                             
 (4) "Charter boat'' means a vessel less than 100 gross tons
(90.8 metric tons) that meets the requirements of the U.S. Coast Guard
to carry 6 or fewer passengers for hire.
                                             
 (5) "Party boat'' or "head boat'' means a vessel that holds a
valid Certificate of Inspection issued by the U.S. Coast Guard to carry
passengers for hire.
                                             
 (e) The executive director shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A on
the further definitions, criteria, and requirements for obtaining the
licenses under this paragraph.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. 1937, 156:1. 1941, 67:2, 3. RL 247:6. 1947,
163:2, 3; 217:1-3, 5. 1949, 245:1. 1951, 49:1; 181:1-5. RSA 214:9. 1955,
105:1; 324:1-3. 1961, 32:2. 1965, 49:1-4. 1969, 7:1; 63:2. 1971, 545:1.
1973, 72:22; 348:3-7. 1975, 66:1; 70:1; 337:1; 440:2. 1977, 15:1; 252:2;
459:6. 1981, 89:1, 2; 366:1; 498:1, 2. 1983, 40:2-4; 47:1; 87:1; 173:2.
1985, 291:18, 19, 23. 1986, 214:7-11. 1989, 159:1-3. 1990, 48:2. 1991,
125:1. 1994, 131:1; 151:3; 372:3. 1995, 153:3. 1997, 10:15-18, 24, 25,
III-VIII. 1998, 241:2. 2001, 180:6; 252:11-32. 2005, 143:4; 153:1. 2007,
263:64; 298:3. 2008, 151:2, 3. 2009, 103:2, 5-9, eff. Jan. 1, 2011;
144:133, 136-140, eff. Jan. 1, 2011. 2011, 224:231, eff. July 1, 2011.
2015, 186:25, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 214:9-a

 **214:9-a Resident Aliens. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 148:6, VIII, eff.
July 21, 1981.
                                             ]

### Section 214:9-b

 **214:9-b Lost License; Duplicate. –** A person who loses or by
mistake or accident destroys his license may, upon payment of a fee of

                                             $5.00, receive a duplicate license if the applicant completes
affidavits setting forth the circumstances surrounding its loss or
destruction. The duplicate license shall entitle the licensee to engage
in all activities permitted on the original license.

**Source.** 1961, 162:1. 1965, 140:1. 1977, 252:3. 1985, 291:20, eff.
Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 214:9-c

 **214:9-c Lifetime Licenses. –**
                                             
 I. (a) The executive director, at the department of fish and game
headquarters only, shall issue lifetime hunting, freshwater fishing, or
combination hunting and freshwater fishing licenses similar to that
issued on an annual basis under RSA 214:9, III to any resident applicant
upon payment of the proper fee, which shall be established by the
executive director in accordance with the provisions of paragraph II.
                                             
 (b)(1) In addition, the executive director may issue lifetime
licenses to any resident under 16 years of age.
                                             
 (2) In addition further, the executive director may issue
discounted lifetime licenses to residents who have not yet reached their
first birthday. The executive director shall establish the discounted
amount of such lifetime licenses in rules adopted under RSA 541-A,
except that the fee for a combination hunting and freshwater fishing
lifetime license for a resident who has not yet reached his or her first
birthday shall be 
                                             $300.
                                             
 (3) The parent or legal guardian of the applicant shall be a
resident pursuant to RSA 207:1, XXIII. The hunting license or hunting
portion of the combination license shall not be valid until the licensee
has met the requirements of RSA 214:23-a. Upon meeting the requirements
of RSA 214:23-a, the licensee shall have the hunting license or the
combination hunting and fishing license validated at the fish and game
department headquarters only.
                                             
 II. The executive director shall obtain an actuarial table based on
an appropriate annuity from the commissioner of insurance and shall set
the fee for the various licenses annually on July 15 of each year for
the following year based on the age of the applicant. The fee for any
applicant under 16 years of age shall be the same as the fee for a
16-year-old applicant, except for newborns as provided in subparagraph
I(b)(2). In addition the applicant shall pay the agent's fee in
accordance with RSA 214-A:4.
                                             
 III. In no case shall any lifetime license issued be transferable or
any portion of the cost of the license refundable.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the monies received
from the sale of such lifetime licenses shall be deposited with the
state treasurer who shall keep the same in a separate fund to be known
as the prepaid fish and game license fund. The state treasurer shall
invest the monies in the fund and shall annually transfer to the fish
and game fund from the prepaid fish and game license fund an amount
equal to 9 percent of the principal balance in the fund each year and
any interest that accrues to the prepaid fish and game license fund in
excess of 5 percent.
                                             
 V. In addition, the state treasurer shall pay the amount of one
annual license fee to the fish and game fund from the proceeds of each
lifetime license sold during the current year, the balance going into
the prepaid fish and game license fund.
                                             
 VI. Licenses issued pursuant to this section shall entitle the
holder thereof to the same privileges and subject the licensee to the
same restrictions as a holder of an annual license.
                                             
 VII. The executive director shall issue a bear license and tag upon
application by the valid holder of a lifetime hunting or combination
license. Such license and tag shall be valid for the current bear season
only. The bear license and tag shall be issued at no charge and each
shall be of a type and design approved by the executive director.
Lifetime licensees holding bear licenses shall comply with all
provisions of RSA 208 relative to tagging, transportation and possession
of bear.
                                             
 VII-a. A person holding a valid lifetime fishing license or lifetime
combination hunting and fishing license, issued prior to January 1,
2011, may make an application for a saltwater license at no charge to be
issued by the executive director to fish for saltwater smelt, saltwater
shad, and saltwater salmonoids only. Such licenses shall be valid for a
calendar year only.
                                             
 VIII. The executive director shall, if necessary, adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the issuance and validation of the
lifetime licenses.

**Source.** 1981, 526:1. 1991, 221:1. 1999, 61:1. 2006, 17:1. 2008,
151:4. 2009, 103:11; 144:142. 2010, 17:1, eff. July 6, 2010. 2015, 36:1,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 214:9-cc

 **214:9-cc Lifetime Licenses for Bow and Arrow, Muzzleloader, and
Crossbow. –**
                                             
 I. (a) The executive director, at the department of fish and game
headquarters only, shall issue lifetime bow and arrow, muzzle loading
firearm, and crossbow licenses for each type of game taken similar to
that issued on an annual basis under RSA 208:5, RSA 208:5-a, or RSA
208:7-a, respectively, to any resident applicant upon payment of the
proper fee, which shall be established by the executive director in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph II. Lifetime bow and arrow,
muzzle loading firearm, and crossbow licenses shall be issued only to
residents who would be eligible to purchase annual licenses of the same
type.
                                             
 (b) In addition, the executive director may issue lifetime
licenses under this section to any resident under 16 years of age. The
parent or legal guardian of the applicant shall be a resident pursuant
to RSA 207:1, XXIII. The bow and arrow, muzzle loading firearm, and
crossbow licenses shall not be valid until the licensee has met all
requirements for the issuance of such license. Upon meeting the
requirements of RSA 214:23-a, the licensee shall have the license
validated at the fish and game department headquarters only.
                                             
 II. The executive director shall obtain an actuarial table based on
an appropriate annuity from the commissioner of insurance and shall set
the fee for the various licenses annually on July 15 of each year for
the following year based on the age of the applicant. The fee for any
applicant under 16 years of age shall be the same as the fee for a
16-year-old applicant. In addition the applicant shall pay the agent's
fee in accordance with RSA 214-A:4.
                                             
 III. In no case shall any lifetime license issued be transferable or
any portion of the cost of the license refundable.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the moneys received
from the sale of such lifetime bow and arrow, muzzle loading firearm,
and crossbow licenses shall be deposited with the state treasurer who
shall keep the same in the prepaid fish and game license fund. The state
treasurer shall annually transfer to the fish and game fund from the
prepaid fish and game license fund an amount equal to 9 percent of the
portion of the principal balance in the fund each year attributed to
lifetime bow and arrow, muzzle loading firearm, and crossbow licenses,
and any interest that accrues to such portion of the prepaid fish and
game license fund in excess of 5 percent.
                                             
 V. In addition, the state treasurer shall pay the amount of one
annual license fee to the fish and game fund from the proceeds of each
lifetime bow and arrow, muzzle loading firearm, and crossbow license
sold during the current year, the balance going into the prepaid fish
and game license fund.
                                             
 VI. Licenses issued pursuant to this section shall entitle the
holder thereof to the same privileges and subject the licensee to the
same restrictions as a holder of an annual license.
                                             
 VII. The executive director shall, if necessary, adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the issuance and validation of the
lifetime licenses.

**Source.** 2006, 50:1. 2008, 151:5, eff. June 6, 2008.

### Section 214:9-d

 **214:9-d Lost Game Tag. –** A person who loses or by mistake or
accident destroys his game tag may, upon payment of a fee of 
                                             $5,
receive a duplicate game tag if the applicant completes affidavits
setting forth the circumstances surrounding its loss or destruction.

**Source.** 1985, 291:30, eff. Jan. 1, 1987.

### Section 214:9-e

 **214:9-e Stamps or Permits may be Authorized. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director and the commission jointly may, after
notice and public hearing, issue stamps or permits for the taking of any
species of wildlife. A majority of the commission and the executive
director shall agree to take such action before it shall be authorized.
The decision to issue such stamp or permit shall be recorded in the
minutes of the commission which shall also indicate the agreement of the
executive director to such action. Notwithstanding RSA 214:1, the
purchase of such stamp or permit where authorized shall permit the
taking of such species and the purchase of such stamp or permit shall be
required before such species may be taken. The decision to authorize
such stamps or permits shall not be considered a rule subject to the
provisions of RSA 541-A.
                                             
 II. The executive director and the commission jointly may, after
notice and public hearing, rescind any action taken under paragraph I of
this section by following the same procedure specified in paragraph I of
this section for authorizing the issuance of a stamp or permit.
                                             
 III. If the issuance of a stamp or permit is authorized under the
provisions of this section a fee for such stamp or permit shall be
adopted by rule under RSA 541-A.
                                             
 IV. The state treasurer shall establish a separate nonlapsing
account within the fish and game fund for each such stamp or permit, to
which all fees collected by the fish and game department from such
stamps or permits shall be applied. The moneys in these accounts shall
be used, in accordance with RSA 212-A:15, exclusively for the
implementation of comprehensive management programs, including
education, research, protection and management, and are hereby
appropriated for said purpose.

**Source.** 1985, 291:32. 1994, 151:4, eff. May 23, 1994.

### Section 214:9-f

 **214:9-f Promotion Activities; Reductions in Fees Authorized. –**
The executive director, with approval of the commission, may take such
marketing actions to promote fisheries and wildlife resources, and
attract hunters and anglers to the state as deemed necessary, which may
include the reduction or the waiver of the fees for certain types of
licenses available to the public for specified periods of time and at
specified locations, to promote license sales for hunting, fishing, and
trapping in the state. This may include coordination of activities
between the public and private sectors and utilization of promotional
advertising, exhibits, brochures, technical assistance, and expertise as
necessary to develop and promote hunting, fishing, and other
wildlife-related activities within the state. A description of the
reductions, waivers, and activities under this section shall be included
in the biennial report of the department under RSA 206:9-a.

**Source.** 2005, 165:1, eff. June 21, 2005.

### Section 214:10,-11

 **214:10, 214:11 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1967, 414:3, eff. Jan. 1,
1968.
                                             ]

### Section 214:11-a

 **214:11-a Driver's License Required. –**
                                             
 I. No person is authorized to procure a resident license to hunt,
fish, or take clams or clam worms or oysters, without first exhibiting
to the person issuing the license a valid New Hampshire driver's license
or New Hampshire nondriver's picture identification card issued pursuant
to RSA 260:21, RSA 260:21-a, or RSA 260:21-b. Whenever the applicant is
under 18 years of age, the parent or guardian of the applicant shall be
a resident pursuant to RSA 207:1, XXIII.
                                             
 II. Any person who is no longer a legal resident of the state but
still retains a valid New Hampshire driver's license, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor if said person endeavors to obtain a resident fishing or
hunting license based on this driver's license.

**Source.** 1967, 414:1. 1973, 47:2. 1985, 291:33. 2003, 112:5. 2005,
28:1, eff. July 9, 2005. 2016, 71:5, eff. May 10, 2016.

### Section 214:11-b

 **214:11-b Requirements for Issuance of a Trapping License. –**
                                             
 I. No trapping license shall be issued to any resident or
non-resident person unless he presents to the person authorized to issue
such license either:
                                             
 (a) A certificate of competency as provided by RSA 210:25; or
                                             
 (b) Satisfactory proof that he has successfully completed a
trapper education course in any other state, province or country which
is equivalent to the course as established by RSA 210:25; or
                                             
 (c) Satisfactory proof that he or she has held a trapping license
issued to him or her in this state during any of the previous 3 years.
                                             
 II. In addition to penalties provided for in this chapter, the
executive director may require a person in violation of this section or
the trapping laws of the state to take the trapper education course
established in RSA 210:25 as a condition to retain or reinstate a
trapping license.

**Source.** 1990, 165:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1991. 2014, 155:2, eff. Jan. 1,
2015.

### Section 214:12

 **214:12 Penalty for False Receipt or Certificate and for False
Statements. –** Whoever makes any false statement for the purpose of
procuring a license shall be guilty of a violation and the person's
license may be revoked for a period not exceeding 3 months. All fines
collected for violation of the provisions of this section shall be
deposited in the fish and game fund.

**Source.** 1917, 229:2. 1921, 119:2; 120:6. PL 100:6, 21. 1933, 132:4.
1939, 120:4, 5. RL 116:4. RSA 214:12. 1967, 414:2. 1973, 47:1; 531:63.
1979, 80:1. 2003, 112:6, eff. Aug. 5, 2003.

### Section 214:12-a

 **214:12-a Licensee Agreements With Private Landowners; Exclusion
From Right-to-Know. –** Any agreement or record between a private
landowner and a person issued a fish and game license under this title,
which is provided to, or held by, the department or its staff, shall be
maintained confidentially and shall not be considered a public record
for purposes of RSA 91-A.

**Source.** 2003, 91:1, eff. Aug. 1, 2003.

### Section 214:13

 **214:13 Veterans, Totally and Permanently Disabled. –** If the
applicant for a fishing and hunting license is a resident of the state,
has received a discharge other than dishonorable from service in any war
or police action in which the United States has been engaged and is
totally and permanently disabled from such service-connected disability,
the executive director shall issue a special veteran's license to said
applicant. Said license shall be perpetual. The executive director shall
retain the records for such licenses for a period not less than 7 years.
Loss or destruction of the license after 7 years shall obligate the
licensee to re-establish eligibility. A 
                                             $10 administrative fee shall be
charged once, upon application to the executive director for such
license.

**Source.** 1947, 60:1. RSA 214:13. 1973, 318:1. 1996, 202:3, eff. Jan.
1, 1997.

### Section 214:13-a

 **214:13-a Nonresident Honorary Licenses. –** The executive director
may issue honorary hunting or fishing licenses to the President and Vice
President of the United States and to nonresident governors, fish and
game officials, accredited sportswriters and photographers, recognized
conservationists, and foreign ambassadors and dignitaries without
charge. During a calendar year there shall be no limit as to the number
of each type of honorary license so issued. The executive director shall
determine the form of such honorary licenses. The fish and game
commission shall periodically review the total issue of honorary
licenses hereunder, and may regulate the number thereof. The executive
director shall on or before January 15 in each year submit a complete
list, to the chairpersons of the house and senate standing committees
having jurisdiction over fish and game matters, containing the names,
addresses, and positions or titles of all persons to whom such an
honorary license has been issued and each such license issued shall be
consecutively numbered.

**Source.** 1955, 41:1. 1967, 50:1. 1995, 9:27. 2009, 7:3, eff. June 16,
2009.

### Section 214:13-b

 **214:13-b Reciprocity; Nonresident Licenses; Certain Persons. –**
The executive director may issue upon application complimentary
nonresident hunting and fishing licenses to a person from another state
who is suffering from paraplegia or who is suffering from the loss of,
or the loss of the use of, both lower extremities, or is a totally and
permanently disabled veteran, who would be eligible if a resident under
RSA 214:13, if the state in which said person is a resident provides a
reciprocal privilege for residents of this state who are similarly
suffering. The executive director shall determine the form of such
complimentary licenses. All such licenses shall be consecutively
numbered. A license issued under this section shall be effective for the
lifetime of the applicant unless sooner suspended or revoked by the
executive director.

**Source.** 1975, 152:1. 1986, 214:21. 1987, 62:4. 1989, 25:2, eff. June
3, 1989.

### Section 214:13-c

 **214:13-c Licenses for Certain Persons. –** The executive director
shall issue upon application resident hunting and fishing licenses to a
person who is both a resident of this state and is either suffering from
paraplegia or is suffering from the permanent loss of, or the permanent
loss of the use of, both lower extremities. The executive director shall
determine the form of such licenses. All such licenses shall be
consecutively numbered. A license issued under this section shall be
effective for the lifetime of the applicant unless sooner suspended or
revoked by the executive director. The executive director shall retain
the records for such licenses for a period not less than 7 years. Loss
or destruction of the license after 7 years shall obligate the licensee
to re-establish eligibility. A 
                                             $10 administrative fee shall be charged
once, upon application to the executive director for such license.

**Source.** 1989, 25:1. 1995, 9:28. 1996, 202:4, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 214:14-14-b

 **214:14 to 214:14-b Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 86:2, I-III,
eff. July 15, 1995.
                                             ]

### Section 214:14-c

 **214:14-c One-Day Licenses. –** The executive director is hereby
authorized to establish within state parks, in cooperation with the
department of resources and economic development, such license agencies
as he determines necessary to distribute a special one-day fishing
license for the purpose of fishing within state parks when the land
totally encompasses the entire lake or pond. Rules, fees, and licensing
procedures shall be adopted by the executive director in accordance with
RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1985, 291:17, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 214:14-d-14-g

 **214:14-d to 214:14-g Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 86:2, IV-VII,
eff. July 15, 1995.
                                             ]

### Section 214:14-h

 **214:14-h Residents and Patients at Certain Institutions;
Complimentary Fishing Permits. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director may issue, upon application, a
complimentary fishing permit to a state or county institution, nursing
home facility, or veterans hospital, or to a person who is both a
resident of the state and is:
                                             
 (a) A resident or patient at a state or county institution,
nursing home facility, or veterans hospital, or a person who is
developmentally disabled, as defined by RSA 171-A:2, V; or
                                             
 (b) A patient at a head injury treatment program.
                                             
 II. The executive director may adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A,
including, but not limited to:
                                             
 (a) Criteria for establishing medical need.
                                             
 (b) The basis of institutionalization, form of treatment, and
applicable facilities.
                                             
 (c) The number and form of the permits.
                                             
 (d) The supervision and use of the permit.
                                             
 (e) The time periods and other conditions of the permit.
                                             
 (f) Reporting requirements.
                                             
 (g) Any definitions.
                                             
 (h) Fee schedules for group or facility permits.

**Source.** 1995, 86:1, eff. July 15, 1995.

### Section 214:15

 **214:15 Agent's Accounting. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008, 151:7, II, eff.
June 6, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 214:16

 **214:16 Unused Blanks. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008, 151:7, III, eff. June
6, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 214:16-a

 **214:16-a Unused Game Tags. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008, 151:7, IV, eff.
June 6, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 214:17

 **214:17 Refusing Licenses; Appeal. –** The executive director and
his agents shall refuse to issue any license to hunt if it appears that
the applicant is not a suitable person to carry firearms. Any person who
has been refused a license by an agent shall have the right of appeal to
the executive director, whose decision, given after hearing, shall be
final. Any attempt to secure a license from another agency, after having
been refused by an agency and before appealing to the executive
director, and any attempt to secure a license from any source in the
same year that the executive director, on appeal, has decided that the
applicant is not a suitable person to carry firearms, shall be a
violation of the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. RL 247:9.

### Section 214:18

 **214:18 Suspension; Revocation. –** The executive director may
order the suspension of the license of any person in his discretion, and
without hearing, and may order the license delivered to him or his
representative whenever he has reason to believe that the holder thereof
is physically or mentally an improper or incompetent person to carry
firearms, or is handling firearms improperly, or so as to endanger human
life or property, or for any other cause that he may deem sufficient;
but such suspension shall not be for a longer period than 30 days unless
the executive director and the commission, after investigation and
hearing, so determine. The executive director may order any license to
be revoked after due hearing for any cause that he may deem sufficient.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. RL 247:10. 1951, 81:1, eff. April 20, 1951.

### Section 214:18-a

 **214:18-a Penalty for Throwing Refuse Into Public Waters or on
Neighboring Lands. –** Any person who shall violate those provisions of
RSA 265:102, I, which relate to the placing of refuse into or on the ice
over any public water, streams or watercourse or the approaches thereto
or land bordering the same may, in addition to the penalty provided in
RSA 265:102, IV, lose his fishing or hunting license for the current
year.

**Source.** 1955, 170:1. RSA 214:18-a. 1959, 306:6. 1977, 588:47. 1987,
344:4, eff. May 25, 1987.

### Section 214:18-b

 **214:18-b Suspension or Revocation in Another Jurisdiction. –** Any
person whose privilege to fish, hunt, trap, guide, take or land lobsters
and crabs, or engage in commercial marine fishing activities has been
suspended or revoked in any jurisdiction within the United States or
Canada shall be prohibited from purchasing a license for such activity
in this state during the period of revocation or suspension in the
prosecuting jurisdiction provided the offense for which the person has
been convicted is contained in title XVIII. If such person has
previously purchased a license for such activity, said license shall
become invalid and shall be suspended for the same period as determined
in the prosecuting jurisdiction. Such person shall immediately return
said license to the fish and game department. No person shall possess a
license which has been suspended under this section. Any person who
violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1989, 107:1. 2009, 11:1, eff. June 16, 2009.

### Section 214:19

 **214:19 Revocation or Suspension for Conviction. –**
                                             
 I. The executive director may revoke or suspend the license of any
person who has been found guilty in any court of a violation of any
provision of this title or any rule or regulation of the executive
director, or who has been found guilty in a municipal or district court
of a violation of RSA 163-B or RSA 635:2. Such revocation or suspension
shall not continue for more than one year from the date thereof, except
for a conviction under RSA 208:8, in which case the revocation or
suspension may be for a period not to exceed 5 years, or except for a
conviction under RSA 208:1-a, in which case the revocation or suspension
may be for a period not to exceed 2 years.
                                             
 II. The executive director shall revoke or suspend the license of
any person who has been found guilty in any court a second time within 5
years of the first finding of guilt, of a violation of any such laws or
regulations, for a period of not less than one, nor more than 3 years
from the date of such finding or conviction.
                                             
 III. The executive director shall revoke or suspend the license of
any person convicted of committing aggravated felonious sexual assault,
felonious sexual assault, or sexual assault pursuant to RSA 632-A:4,
I(a) or (b), or any similar statute in any other state, which occurred
while the person was engaged in any activity requiring the person to
carry a license as required in RSA 214:1. The period of revocation or
suspension under this paragraph for any felony conviction shall be not
less than 10 years and not more than life. The period of revocation or
suspension under this paragraph for any misdemeanor conviction that is a
first offense shall be not less than 5 years and not more than life. The
period of suspension under this paragraph for any second or subsequent
misdemeanor conviction shall be not less than 10 years and not more than
life.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. RL 247:11. 1951, 171:3. RSA 214:19. 1955, 62:2.
1965, 83:3. 1975, 103:1. 1977, 22:1. 1981, 146:5, VII. 2009, 11:4, eff.
June 16, 2009. 2015, 186:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 214:19-a

 **214:19-a Appeal of Conviction. –** Whenever any person convicted
of a violation of any provision of this title or any rule or regulation
of the executive director or of RSA 163-B, RSA 236:26, RSA 265:102 or
RSA 635:2 shall appeal, his license shall be suspended pending
disposition of the appeal. If the person so appealing is convicted, the
period of suspension shall be computed from the date of the original
conviction.

**Source.** 1959, 33:1. 1977, 22:2. 1981, 146:5, VIII, eff. Jan. 1,
1982.

### Section 214:19-b

 **214:19-b Conviction by Court of Another State. –** The executive
director may revoke the hunting license of any person who shall be
convicted of an offense similar to those described in RSA 207:37-a,
207:38, 208:8, or 214:20 by a court of any other state.

**Source.** 1996, 87:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 214:19-c

 **214:19-c Copies of Record. –** Copies of records of convictions
and notices of license revocations kept by the executive director of
this state and other states, certified by the executive director, shall
be deemed admissible to prove such revocations or convictions in court.

**Source.** 1996, 87:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 214:20

 **214:20 Hunting While Intoxicated. –** No person shall target
practice, hunt, take, or attempt to take wildlife in this state by the
use of a firearm, bow and arrow, crossbow and bolt, or any other
weapon:
                                             
 I. While such person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor
or any controlled drug, or any combination of intoxicating liquor and
controlled drugs; or
                                             
 II. While such person has an alcohol concentration of 0.08 or more
or in the case of a person under the age of 21, 0.02 or more.

**Source.** 1949, 67:1. RSA 214:20. 1973, 528:128. 1977, 316:1. 1981,
146:5, IX. 1989, 353:3. 1993, 48:1; 235:6. 1996, 87:2, eff. Jan. 1,
1997.

### Section 214:20-a

 **214:20-a Aggravated Hunting While Intoxicated. –** A person shall
be guilty of a violation of this section if in addition to violating the
provisions of RSA 214:20, that person is involved in an incident
resulting in serious bodily injury as defined in RSA 625:11 as a result
of that person's discharge of a firearm, bow and arrow, crossbow and
bolt, or any other weapon.

**Source.** 1965, 210:1. 1996, 87:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 214:20-b

 **214:20-b Penalties for Intoxicated Hunting. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of RSA 214:20
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any penalty provided by
law, such person's hunting license shall be revoked and the person shall
not be issued a license to hunt for a period of 3 years.
                                             
 II. Any person convicted of a violation of RSA 214:20-a shall be
guilty of a class B felony. In addition to any penalty provided by law,
such person's hunting license shall be revoked indefinitely.

**Source.** 1965, 210:1. 1996, 87:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 214:20-c

 **214:20-c Evidence. –** Upon complaint, information, indictment or
trial of any person charged with a violation of RSA 214:20 or 214:20-a,
the court may admit evidence of the defendant's alcohol concentration,
as defined in RSA 259:3-b, as shown by a chemical analysis of his
breath, urine, or blood. Evidence that there was, at the time alleged,
an alcohol concentration of 0.03 or less in prima facie evidence that
the defendant was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
Evidence that the defendant had, at the time alleged, an alcohol
concentration of greater than 0.03 but less than 0.08 is relevant
evidence but is not to be given prima facie effect in indicating whether
or not the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor, but
such fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining
the guilt or innocence of the defendant. Evidence that there was, at the
time alleged, an alcohol concentration of 0.08 or more is prima facie
evidence that the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating
liquor. In the case of a person under the age of 21 an alcohol
concentration of 0.02 or more is prima facie evidence that the defendant
was under the influence of intoxicating liquor. The foregoing provisions
of this section shall not be construed as limiting the introduction of
any other competent evidence bearing upon the question of whether or not
the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor.

**Source.** 1996, 87:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 214:20-d

 **214:20-d Implied Consent to Submit to Test to Determine Alcohol
Concentration. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who target practices, takes, or attempts to take
wildlife in this state by use of a firearm, bow and arrow, crossbow and
bolt, or any other weapon, shall be deemed to have given consent to
physical tests and examinations for the purpose of determining whether
that person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any
controlled drug or any combination of intoxicating liquor and controlled
drug, and to chemical infrared molecular absorption or gas chromatograph
test or tests of any or any combination of the following: blood, urine,
or breath, for the purposes of determining the controlled drug content
of the person's blood or alcohol concentration if arrested for any
offense arising out of acts alleged to have been committed while the
person was target practicing, hunting, taking, or attempting to take
wildlife, while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled
drugs or any combination of alcohol or controlled drugs or while having
an alcohol concentration of 0.08 or more, or in the case of a person
under the age of 21, 0.02 or more. The test or tests shall be
administered at the direction of a law enforcement officer having
reasonable grounds to believe the person to have been hunting, taking,
or attempting to take wildlife while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or any controlled drug, or any combination of intoxicating liquor
and controlled drug.
                                             
 II. A copy of the report of any such test shall be furnished by the
law enforcement agency to the person tested within 48 hours of receipt
of report by certified mail directed to the address shown on such
person's hunting license or other identification furnished by the
person. Results of a test of the breath shall be furnished immediately
in writing to the person tested by a certified breath-testing operator
conducting the test.
                                             
 III. When the incident involves a hunting or target practice
shooting, resulting in death or serious bodily injury to any person as
provided in RSA 214:20-l, the prerequisites of RSA 214:20-m shall not
apply.

**Source.** 1996, 87:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 214:20-e

 **214:20-e Refusal of Consent. –** If a person under arrest for a
violation of RSA 214:20 refuses upon the request of a law enforcement
officer to submit to a physical and/or chemical test designated by the
law enforcement officer as provided in RSA 214:20-d, none shall be
given, but the executive director shall revoke the person's hunting
license for a period of 5 years from the date of the alleged violation.
Any such revocation of a license shall be imposed in addition to any
penalties provided by law, subject to review as hereinafter provided,
and shall be imposed only upon the receipt by the executive director of
a sworn report of the law enforcement officer containing the following:
                                             
 I. That the law enforcement officer had reasonable grounds to
believe the arrested person had been target practicing, hunting, taking
or attempting to take wildlife while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor, controlled drugs or a combination thereof.
                                             
 II. The facts upon which the reasonable grounds to believe such are
based.
                                             
 III. That the person had been arrested.
                                             
 IV. That the person had refused to submit to the test upon the
request of the law enforcement officer.
                                             
 V. That the law enforcement officer informed the arrested person of
the person's right to have a similar test or tests conducted by a person
of the arrested person's own choosing.
                                             
 VI. That the law enforcement officer informed the arrested person of
the fact that refusal to permit the test or tests will result in license
revocation.

**Source.** 1996, 87:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 214:20-f

 **214:20-f Administration of Blood Alcohol Concentration Tests. –**
All and any alcohol concentration tests performed as authorized in RSA
214:20-d shall be conducted pursuant to the requirements of RSA 265-A:5,
relative to the testing of blood, urine, and breath.

**Source.** 1996, 87:3. 2006, 260:8, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 214:20-g

 **214:20-g Additional Tests. –** The provisions of RSA 265-A:7,
relative to the right of an arrested person to obtain additional tests,
shall apply to any person to whom RSA 214:20-d is applicable.

**Source.** 1996, 87:3. 2006, 260:9, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 214:20-h

 **214:20-h Effects of Evidence of Test for Alcohol Concentration.
–** The provisions of RSA 214:20 shall not limit the introduction of any
other competent evidence bearing on the question of whether a person
charged with the violation of 214:20 was under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or controlled drugs or any combination of
intoxicating liquor and controlled drug.

**Source.** 1996, 87:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 214:20-i

 **214:20-i Evidence of Refusal to Take Test for Alcohol
Concentration. –** If a person refuses to submit to a test as provided
in RSA 214:20-e, such refusal may be admissible into evidence in a civil
or criminal action or proceeding arising out of an act alleged to have
been committed by that person while target practicing, hunting, taking
or attempting to take wildlife, with a firearm, bow and arrow, cross bow
or bolt or other weapon, while under the influence of liquor or
controlled drugs or any combination of intoxicating liquor and
controlled drug.

**Source.** 1996, 87:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 214:20-j

 **214:20-j Official Record of Tests. –** The provisions of RSA
265-A:12, relative to notice to the court and the admissibility of the
official report of tests, shall govern admissibility of the official
records related to the tests taken pursuant to this RSA 214:20-d as well
as the notice required to compel the attendance of any person who
conducted such tests at trial.

**Source.** 1996, 87:3. 2006, 260:10, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 214:20-k

 **214:20-k Arrest Without a Warrant. –** Notwithstanding any other
statutory provisions of the law to the contrary, a law enforcement
officer may, without a warrant, arrest any person involved in any
shooting related directly to target practicing, hunting, taking, or
attempting to take wildlife, when that officer has probable cause to
believe that such person has violated the provisions of RSA 214:20 or
214:20-a.

**Source.** 1996, 87:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 214:20-l

 **214:20-l Blood Testing on Certain Hunting Fatalities. –** When
death or serious bodily injury occurs to any person in the course of a
hunting related shooting or the result of target practice, the person or
persons responsible shall be tested for blood alcohol content. A law
enforcement officer shall request a licensed physician, registered
nurse, certified physician's assistant, or qualified medical technician
or medical technologist to withdraw blood from each person involved,
provided that the officer has probable cause to believe that the person
responsible was under the influence of alcohol or a controlled drug or
any combination of controlled drug or alcohol. All tests made under this
section shall be conducted by the forensic science laboratory
established in RSA 106-B:2-a, or in any other laboratory capable of
conducting such tests which is licensed by the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services under the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act of 1988
as amended. A copy of any report of any such test shall be kept on file
by the medical examiner. The filed report is not a public record under
RSA 91-A. However, the report shall be made available to any person,
including their legal representative, who is or may be involved in a
civil, criminal or administrative action arising out of an accident in
connection with which the test was performed.

**Source.** 1996, 87:3. 1997, 158:1. 2003, 319:91, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 214:20-m

 **214:20-m Prerequisites to Tests. –**
                                             
 I. Before any test of a person's blood, urine or breath specified in
RSA 214:20-d is given, the law enforcement officer shall:
                                             
 (a) Inform the arrested person of such person's right to have a
similar test or tests made by a person of the arrested person's own
choosing.
                                             
 (b) Afford the person an opportunity to request such additional
test or tests.
                                             
 (c) Inform the person of the consequences of the refusal to
permit a test at the direction of the law enforcement officer.
                                             
 II. Before any post-arrest physical test specified in RSA 214:20-d
is given, the law enforcement officer shall inform the defendant of the
consequences of the defendant's refusal to comply with the law
enforcement officer's instructions for the post-arrest physical test.
                                             
 III. If the law enforcement officer fails to comply with the
provisions of this section, the test results shall be inadmissible as
evidence in any proceeding before any administrative officer or court of
this state.

**Source.** 1996, 87:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 214:20-n

 **214:20-n Incapacity to Give Consent. –** Any person who is dead,
unconscious, or who is otherwise in a condition rendering such person
incapable of refusing shall be deemed not to have withdrawn the consent
provided by RSA 214:20-d and the test or tests may be administered. The
provisions of RSA 214:20-n shall not apply to persons incapable of
giving consent as provided for in this section.

**Source.** 1996, 87:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 214:20-o

 **214:20-o Administrative Review. –** Upon revoking or denying a
hunting license of any person pursuant to RSA 214:20-b and 214:20-e the
executive director shall immediately notify the person in writing of
such revocation or denial. If, within 30 days of such notification, the
person so notified requests a hearing on the revocation or denial, the
department shall, within 10 days of the receipt of the request, afford
such person an opportunity for a hearing before the executive director
or designee. The scope of such a hearing shall cover the issues of
whether a law enforcement officer had reasonable grounds to believe the
person had been target practicing, hunting, taking, or attempting to
take wildlife while under the influence of alcohol or controlled drugs
or a combination of alcohol and controlled drugs; whether the person was
placed under arrest; whether the person refused to submit to a physical
or chemical test upon the request of the officer; whether the person was
informed that the privilege to hunt would be revoked or denied if such
person refused to submit to a test; and whether the person was informed
of such person's right to have a chemical test or tests made by a person
of such person's own choosing. The executive director shall order that
the revocation or determination that there should be a denial of
issuance be rescinded or sustained. A copy of such order shall be sent
to the person affected thereby.

**Source.** 1996, 87:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 214:21

 **214:21 Hunting, Etc. After Revocation; Eligibility for License.
–** No person who has had a license suspended or revoked shall take or
attempt to take the wildlife permitted to be taken by said license. A
person whose license has been revoked indefinitely or for a period of
time under any provision of this chapter shall be ineligible to purchase
a new license before the expiration of the stated period without the
prior written approval of the executive director. No person shall be
eligible to receive any license issued by the fish and game department
if he is in arrears for any fines or costs for a violation of the laws
relative to fish and game. Any person violating the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty
of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. 1941, 126:17. RL 247:12. RSA 214:21. 1961,
104:1. 1993, 280:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 214:21-a

 **214:21-a Hunting When in Default; Eligibility for License. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall hunt, fish, trap or engage in any activity
regulated by this title if such person is in default with any state
court for the violation of any section of title XVIII and such person's
license to hunt, fish, trap or engage in such activities shall be
suspended by the executive director.
                                             
 II. No person shall purchase any license issued by the department if
such person is in default with any state court for the violation of any
section of this title.
                                             
 III. Any person who has had a license suspended or revoked pursuant
to paragraph I of this section shall apply to the executive director
before such license shall be restored.
                                             
 IV. The executive director shall assess and collect a 
                                             $50
reinstatement fee against any person whose license is suspended as
permitted in paragraph I of this section prior to the reinstatement of
said license. This paragraph may be waived by the executive director for
just cause.
                                             
 V. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1993, 280:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 214:22

 **214:22 Ineligibility for Limited Period. –** The executive
director may in his discretion declare that a person who has been
convicted of fishing, hunting or trapping without a license shall be
ineligible to receive any license under the provisions of this title for
a period of not more than one year from the date of such conviction.

**Source.** 1949, 68:1, eff. Mar. 16, 1949.

### Section 214:22-a

 **214:22-a Nonresident Licenses Limited. –** No person shall hold a
nonresident hunting and fishing license and at the same time hold a
nonresident hunting license, nor shall any person at the same time hold
more than one of either of said licenses. Any person who shall procure a
nonresident hunting and fishing license while holding a nonresident
hunting license or a nonresident hunting and fishing license, or who
shall procure a nonresident hunting license while holding a nonresident
hunting license or a nonresident hunting and fishing license, shall be
guilty of a violation of this chapter.

**Source.** 1963, 77:1, eff. July 9, 1963.

### Section 214:23

 **214:23 Holding More Than One License. –** No person shall hold at
the same time a resident hunting and fishing license and a resident
hunting license, nor shall any person at the same time hold more than
one of either of said licenses. Any person who shall procure a resident
hunting and fishing license while holding a resident hunting license or
a resident hunting and fishing license, or who shall procure a resident
hunting license while holding a resident hunting license or a resident
hunting and fishing license, shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.

**Source.** 1953, 58:1, eff. Mar. 30, 1953.

Handling of Firearms and Archery Equipment
------------------------------------------

### Section 214:23-a

 **214:23-a Certificate of Completion Required. –**
                                             
 I. No hunting license shall be issued to or be purchased by any
resident or nonresident person unless the applicant presents to the
person authorized to issue such license either:
                                             
 (a) A certificate of completion from a basic hunter education
program as provided under this subdivision;
                                             
 (b) Satisfactory proof that the applicant has successfully
completed a basic hunter education program in this state, or any other
state, province, or country which is equivalent to the program provided
for by this chapter; or
                                             
 (c) Satisfactory proof that the applicant has previously had a
hunting license or equivalent, as determined by the executive director,
issued to the applicant in this state, or any other state, province, or
country.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, no archery license
shall be issued to or purchased by any resident or nonresident person
unless the applicant presents to the person authorized to issue such
license either:
                                             
 (a) A certificate of completion from a specialized bow hunter
education program as provided under this subdivision.
                                             
 (b) Satisfactory proof that the applicant has completed a
specialized bow hunter education program in this state or any other
state, province, or country which is equivalent to the program provided
for by this subdivision.
                                             
 (c) Satisfactory proof that the applicant has previously had an
archery license or equivalent, as determined by the executive director,
issued to the applicant in this state or any other state, province, or
country.
                                             
 III. An archery license shall not constitute satisfactory proof of a
previous hunting license and a hunting license shall not constitute
satisfactory proof of a previous archery license to fulfill the
requirements of this subdivision.
                                             
 IV. The executive director may suspend a person's certificate of
completion of basic hunter education program or specialized bow hunter
education program in accordance with rules adopted by the executive
director pursuant to RSA 541-A. The term of suspension shall be
determined by the executive director.

**Source.** 1961, 177:1. 1971, 87:1. 1973, 72:31. 1975, 115:1. 1977,
420:1. 1979, 34:1. 1988, 213:1. 1991, 22:1. 1996, 94:1, eff. Jan. 1,
1997. 2011, 70:1, eff. July 15, 2011.

### Section 214:23-b

 **214:23-b Program. –** The executive director, after consultation
with the commission, is authorized to establish programs for training
persons in the safe and responsible handling of any firearm and bow and
arrow used for hunting and for this purpose may cooperate with any
public or private association or organization having as one of its
objectives the promotion of safety in firearm and bow and arrow
handling. The executive director, after consultation with the
commission, shall prescribe the type of instruction, qualifications of
the instructors, and time and place of examination, the successful
completion of which shall qualify a person for the appropriate
certificate of completion.

**Source.** 1961, 177:1. 1988, 213:2. 1996, 94:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 214:23-c

 **214:23-c Instructors. –** Each instructor authorized by the
executive director to conduct the program for training in safe handling
of firearms shall be covered by liability insurance protecting him from
liability for damages during the time when instruction is being
furnished. The cost of such insurance shall be borne by the state and
shall be a charge against the fish and game fund.

**Source.** 1961, 177:1. 1977, 420:2, eff. July 1, 1977.

### Section 214:23-d

 **214:23-d Duplicate Certificate of Completion. –** The executive
director, after consultation with the commission, is authorized to
charge a fee for the issuance of a duplicate certificate of completion.
The amount of said fee shall be determined by the executive director and
the fee shall be credited to the fish and game fund. To receive a
duplicate certificate of completion, the applicant shall complete an
affidavit setting forth the circumstances surrounding its loss or
destruction.

**Source.** 1979, 25:1. 1988, 213:3, eff. June 28, 1988.

Fur Buyers
----------

### Section 214:24

 **214:24 License Required. –** No person except as hereinafter
provided, shall at any time engage in this state in the business of
buying the furs or skins of fur-bearing animals or the hides or skins of
deer, without first procuring a license so to do, and then only in
accordance with the terms of such license and subject to all the
provisions of this title.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. 1937, 188:23. RL 247:13.

### Section 214:25

 **214:25 Applications; Fees. –** The applicant, whether a resident
or nonresident, shall fill out and sign a blank to be furnished by the
executive director and pay a license fee set by the executive director
pursuant to RSA 206:10, I. The executive director shall thereupon issue
a fur buyer's license which shall entitle the licensee to buy and sell
the furs and skins of deer, coyotes, and fur-bearing animals lawfully
taken, and to sell and transport the same, under the restrictions of
this title. The executive director shall grant such licenses for the
entire state upon the payment of the applicable license fee.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. 1937, 156:2. 1939, 28:1. RL 247:14. RSA 214:25.
1969, 417:1. 1977, 252:6. 1986, 214:12. 1997, 10:19, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.
2015, 186:26, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 214:26

 **214:26 Records. –** Licensed dealers shall keep such records as
the executive director may require. Such records shall be open to
inspection by the executive director or his agents, and such dealer
shall, within 30 days after the expiration of his license, and upon
request of the executive director, file with the executive director a
sworn statement of such record or such part thereof as the executive
director may require.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. RL 247:15.

### Section 214:27

 **214:27 No License Required. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1969, 417:2, eff. Aug.
31, 1969.
                                             ]

### Section 214:28

 **214:28 Selling Outside of State. –** Every person selling or
shipping the furs or skins of fur-bearing animals to persons outside the
state, not licensed in this state, shall keep the same record and make
the same report required in this subdivision of licensed fur buyers.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. RL 247:17.

Special Licenses
----------------

### Section 214:29

 **214:29 Scientific Permits. –** The executive director may grant
scientific licenses, which may be revoked or suspended at any time, to
any person, governmental entity, or educational institution for bird
banding, scientific or research purposes, or other educational needs.
There will be an annual fee of 
                                             $25 for each scientific permit, and the
executive director shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A relative to the
conditions, qualifications, fee waivers, and all other criteria under
which a scientific permit may be granted.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. RL 247:18. 1997, 10:20, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 214:29-a

 **214:29-a Taxidermy. –** The executive director may grant licenses
which may be revoked or suspended at any time to any person desiring to
practice taxidermy, as defined under general provisions, RSA 207:1,
XXVII-a. The executive director shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A
relative to the fee for a taxidermy permit, and the conditions,
qualifications, and other criteria under which a taxidermy permit shall
be granted.

**Source.** 1997, 10:21, eff. Jan. 1, 1998. 2015, 186:27, eff. July 1,
2015.

### Section 214:30

 **214:30 Rights of Licensee. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1997, 10:25, IX, eff.
Jan. 1, 1998.
                                             ]

### Section 214:31

 **214:31 Applications for Licenses. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1997, 10:25, X,
eff. Jan. 1, 1998.
                                             ]

### Section 214:32

 **214:32 Reports by Holders. –** After the expiration of any license
provided for in this subdivision, or upon request of the executive
director, the holder of such license shall file a sworn statement, on
blanks supplied by the executive director, covering all his transactions
thereunder. The holder of each license shall keep a record of all
transactions under his license, and such record, together with all
plants and premises of the licensee, shall be open to inspection upon
demand of the executive director or his agents. Such licensee shall
answer any question relative to the ownership of any bird or animal, or
part thereof, found in his possession or under his control, or that has
passed through his hands, that may be asked by the executive director or
any of his agents.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. RL 247:21. RSA 214:32. 1981, 11:1, eff. May 10,
1981.

### Section 214:33

 **214:33 Federal Permit. –** Any person holding a scientific or
taxidermy permit must also hold such license or permit as is required
under federal laws.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. RL 247:22. 1997, 10:22, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

Sale of Freshwater Fishing Bait
-------------------------------

### Section 214:34

 **214:34 Licenses Required. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall take with the intent to sell, sell, or offer to
sell live fish or aquatic invertebrates for bait without first procuring
a license to do so.
                                             
 II. The applicant shall complete the prescribed application form
furnished by the executive director and pay the appropriate license fee
in addition to the 
                                             $1 agent's fee as provided in RSA 214-A:4.
                                             
 III. Fees for the following license types shall be set by the
executive director pursuant to RSA 206:10, I:
                                             
 (a) Retail.
                                             
 (b) Resident retail and wholesale.
                                             
 (c) Nonresident retail.
                                             
 (d) Nonresident wholesale.

**Source.** 1943, 129:1. 1951, 80:1. RSA 214:34. 1957, 267:2. 1981,
498:10. 1983, 252:1. 1990, 48:4. 2008, 151:6, eff. June 6, 2008. 2015,
35:2, 186:28, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 214:34-a

 **214:34-a Manner of Taking. –** Any person holding a bait dealer's
license may take smelt, minnows, shiners, suckers, chubs, or tommycod by
means of a dip net held in hand, a drop net not over 48 inches in
diameter, or by means of a square umbrella net not over 42 inches on a
side. Minnows, shiners, chubs and tommycod may also be taken by licensed
bait dealers in traps measuring not over 36 inches long with an opening
not to exceed 1- 1/2 inches in diameter. Suckers may also be taken in
traps not to exceed 50 inches in length and 30 inches in diameter with
an opening of not less than 3- 1/2 inches in diameter. Licensed dealers
may also take any of the species, except smelt, mentioned in this
section, by means of an ordinary commercial type minnow seine not over 4
feet in depth and not over 50 feet long, from such streams, lakes, and
ponds and at such times as are approved by the executive director.

**Source.** 1965, 347:1. 1983, 252:5, eff. Aug. 17, 1983.

### Section 214:34-b

 **214:34-b Equipment. –**
                                             
 I. Traps, nets, fish houses, holding boxes or other receptacles,
used to take, hold, or to keep live bait in public waters shall be
plainly marked with the name and address of the owner and user.
                                             
 II. Holes cut in the ice for the taking of bait shall be prominently
and plainly marked by a stake, brush, or other suitable device unless it
is covered by a bait house or in actual use.
                                             
 III. Bait houses using draglines shall not be placed or operated
within 25 feet of the bait house of another person.
                                             
 IV. Bait dealers shall remove any houses from the ice over any
public waters prior to ice-out. Any such bait house shall not be left on
any private property for more than 7 days without a written permit from
the landowner. Bait boxes, holding boxes or other receptacles, used to
hold live bait in navigable waters shall be removed from such waters
prior to ice-out.

**Source.** 1965, 347:1, eff. July 8, 1965.

### Section 214:34-c

 **214:34-c Molesting Gear. –** It is unlawful for any person, except
the executive director or his agent, to molest, pull, tend, or to
otherwise disturb any minnow or sucker trap, net, seine, bait house, or
other gear of any licensed bait dealer without the written permission of
the owner.

**Source.** 1965, 347:1, eff. July 8, 1965.

### Section 214:34-d

 **214:34-d Permit to Import. –** No fish of any description shall be
brought into this state for use as bait without first procuring a permit
from the executive director. Such permit shall be valid for no longer
than one year but no additional permit shall be required within that
period of time to import the same species of fish from the same source
of supply. Five days' notification of each intent to import shall be
filed with the executive director. The executive director shall set the
fee for such permits pursuant to RSA 206:10, I.

**Source.** 1965, 347:1. 1967, 49:1. 1986, 214:14, eff. Nov. 15, 1986.
2015, 186:29, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 214:34-e

 **214:34-e Season for Taking Baitfish. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1996, 108:20,
VII, eff. July 14, 1996.
                                             ]

### Section 214:35

 **214:35 Rules. –** The executive director shall have the authority,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, to adopt and enforce rules relative to bait
dealers dealing in live fish or aquatic invertebrates with the exception
of the daily bag limits and possession limits. The bag limits and
possession limits shall be as follows: A retailer may take 20 quarts per
day and hold a maximum of 100 quarts possession limit at any one time. A
wholesaler may take 100 quarts per day and hold a maximum of 200 quarts
possession limit at any one time. Nothing in this section shall affect
the sale of garden worms or night crawlers.

**Source.** 1943, 129:1. RSA 214:35. 1967, 73:1. 1983, 252:2, eff. Aug.
17, 1983. 2015, 35:3, eff. July 1, 2015.

Termination, Etc., of Licenses
------------------------------

### Section 214:36

 **214:36 Date of Expiration; Not Transferable. –** All licenses
provided for in this title shall expire on December 31 next following
their issuance, and shall not be transferable.

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. RL 247:23. RSA 214:36. 1971, 204:3, eff. Aug.
17, 1971.

Penalties
---------

### Section 214:37

 **214:37 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter where
another specific penalty is not provided shall be guilty of a violation
if a natural person or guilty of a misdemeanor if any other person.
                                             
 II. A person who furnishes to another person, or permits another
person to have or use, a license issued to himself or any other person,
or changes or alters such license or coupon, or uses a license or
license coupon issued to another person, or makes a false statement in
an application, or knowingly guides a hunter who does not have a license
as provided in RSA 214, shall be guilty of a violation.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1935, 124:7. 1937, 188:24. RL 247:24. RSA 214:37. 1959,
29:2. 1969, 8:1. 1971, 45:1. 1973, 530:60. 1981, 57:1. 1993, 280:3.
1994, 227:1. 2008, 151:7, V, eff. June 6, 2008.
