---
title: 'CHAPTER 215-D INTERSTATE WILDLIFE VIOLATORS COMPACT'
---

TITLE XVIII
                                             
FISH AND GAME
=============

CHAPTER 215-D
                                             
INTERSTATE WILDLIFE VIOLATORS COMPACT
-------------------------------------

### Section 215-D:1

 **215-D:1 Interstate Wildlife Violators Compact. –** The interstate
wildlife violators compact is hereby enacted into law and entered into
by the State of New Hampshire with any and all states legally joining
therein in accordance with its terms. The compact is substantially as
follows:

ARTICLE I Findings, Declaration of Policy and Purpose


                                             
 (a) The party states find that:
                                             
 (1) Wildlife resources are managed in trust by the respective
states for the benefit of all residents and visitors.
                                             
 (2) The protection of their respective wildlife resources can
be materially affected by the degree of compliance with state statute or
rule relating to the management of those resources.
                                             
 (3) The preservation, protection, management, and restoration
of wildlife contributes immeasurably to the aesthetic, recreational, and
economic aspects of these natural resources.
                                             
 (4) Wildlife resources are valuable without regard to
political boundaries; therefore, all persons should be required to
comply with wildlife preservation, protection, management, and
restoration statutes, rules, and other law of all party states as a
condition precedent to the continuance or issuance of any license to
hunt, fish, trap, or possess wildlife.
                                             
 (5) Violation of wildlife laws interferes with the management
of wildlife resources and may endanger the safety of persons and
property.
                                             
 (6) The mobility of many wildlife law violators necessitates
the maintenance of channels of communications among the various states.
                                             
 (7) A person who is cited for a wildlife violation in a state
other than the person's home state:
                                             
 (A) may be required to post collateral or bond to secure
appearance for a trial at a later date;
                                             
 (B) if unable to post collateral or bond, may be taken into
custody until the collateral or bond is posted; or
                                             
 (C) may be taken directly to court for an immediate
appearance.
                                             
 (8) The purpose of the enforcement practices described in
subparagraph (7) of this paragraph is to ensure compliance with the
terms of a wildlife citation by the person who, if permitted to continue
on the person's way after receiving the citation, could return to the
person's home state and disregard the person's duty under the terms of
the citation.
                                             
 (9) A person receiving a wildlife citation in the person's
home state is permitted to accept the citation from the officer at the
scene of the violation and to continue immediately on the person's way
after agreeing or being instructed to comply with the terms of the
citation.
                                             
 (10) The practice described in subparagraph (7) of this
paragraph causes unnecessary inconvenience and, at times, a hardship for
the person who is unable at the time to post collateral, furnish a bond,
stand trial, or pay the fine, and thus is compelled to remain in custody
until some alternative arrangement can be made.
                                             
 (11) The enforcement practices described in subparagraph (7)
of this paragraph consume an undue amount of law enforcement time.
                                             
 (b) It is the policy of the party states to:
                                             
 (1) Promote compliance with the statutes, rules, and other
applicable law relating to management of wildlife resources in their
respective states.
                                             
 (2) Recognize the suspension of wildlife license privileges or
rights of any person whose license privileges or rights have been
suspended by a party state and treat this suspension as if it had
occurred in the person's state.
                                             
 (3) Allow violators to accept a wildlife citation, except as
provided in paragraph (b) of article III of this compact, and be
released without delay whether or not the person is a resident in the
state in which the citation was issued, provided that the violator's
home state is party to this compact.
                                             
 (4) Report to the appropriate party state any conviction that
would subject a person to suspension and that is recorded against any
person whose home state was not the issuing state.
                                             
 (5) Allow the home state to recognize and treat a conviction
that would subject a person to suspension and that is recorded for their
residents and which occurred in another party state as if the conviction
had occurred in the home state.
                                             
 (6) Extend cooperation to its fullest extent among the party
states for obtaining compliance with the terms of a wildlife citation
issued in one party state to a resident of another party state.
                                             
 (7) Maximize effective use of law enforcement personnel and
information.
                                             
 (8) Assist court systems in the efficient disposition of
wildlife violations.
                                             
 (c) The purpose of this compact is to:
                                             
 (1) Provide a means through which the party states may
participate in a reciprocal program to effectuate policies enumerated in
paragraph (b) of this article in a uniform and orderly manner.
                                             
 (2) Provide for the fair and impartial treatment of wildlife
violators operating within party states in recognition of the person's
right of due process and the sovereign status of a party state.

ARTICLE II Definitions


                                             
 (a) The definitions in this article apply throughout this compact
and are intended only for the implementation of this compact:
                                             
 (1) "Citation'' means any summons, complaint, ticket, penalty
assessment, or other official document issued by a wildlife officer or
other peace officer for a wildlife violation containing an order which
requires the person to respond.
                                             
 (2) "Collateral'' means any cash or other security deposited
to secure an appearance for trial in connection with the issuance by a
wildlife officer or other peace officer of a citation for a wildlife
violation.
                                             
 (3) "Compliance'' with respect to a citation means the act of
answering the citation through appearance at a court, a tribunal, or
payment of fines, costs, and surcharges, if any, or both such appearance
and payment.
                                             
 (4) "Conviction'' means a conviction, including any court
conviction, of any offense related to the preservation, protection,
management, or restoration of wildlife which is prohibited by state
statute, rule, or other relevant law, or a forfeiture of bail, bond, or
other security deposited to secure the appearance by a person charged
with having committed any such offense, or payment of a penalty
assessment, or a plea of nolo contendere, or the imposition of a
deferred or suspended sentence by the court.
                                             
 (5) "Court'' means a court of law.
                                             
 (6) "Home state'' means the state of primary residence of a
person.
                                             
 (7) "Issuing state'' means the party state which issues a
wildlife citation to the violator.
                                             
 (8) "License'' means any license, permit, or other public
document that conveys to the person to whom it was issued the privilege
of pursuing, possessing, or taking any wildlife regulated by statute,
rule, or other relevant law of a party state.
                                             
 (9) "Licensing authority'' means the department within each
party state authorized by law to issue or approve licenses or permits to
hunt, fish, trap, or possess wildlife.
                                             
 (10) "Party state'' means any state which enacts legislation
to become a member of this wildlife compact.
                                             
 (11) "Personal recognizance'' means an agreement by a person
made at the time of issuance of the wildlife citation that the person
will comply with the terms of that citation.
                                             
 (12) "State'' means any state, territory, or possession of the
United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico, provinces of Canada, or other countries.
                                             
 (13) "Suspension'' means any revocation, denial, or withdrawal
of any or all license privileges or rights, including the privilege or
right to apply for, purchase, or exercise the benefits conferred by any
license.
                                             
 (14) "Terms of the citation'' means those conditions and
options expressly stated upon the citation.
                                             
 (15) "Wildlife'' means all species of animals, including but
not necessarily limited to mammals, birds, fish, reptiles, amphibians,
mollusks, and crustaceans, which are defined as "wildlife'' and are
protected or otherwise regulated by statute, rule, or other relevant law
in a party state. "Wildlife'' also means food fish and shellfish as
defined by statute, rule, or other relevant law in a party state.
Species included in the definition of "wildlife'' vary from state to
state and determination of whether a species is "wildlife'' for the
purposes of this compact shall be based on state law.
                                             
 (16) "Wildlife law'' means any statute, law, regulation,
ordinance, or administrative rule developed and enacted to manage
wildlife resources and the use thereof.
                                             
 (17) "Wildlife officer'' means any individual authorized by a
party state to issue a citation for a wildlife violation.
                                             
 (18) "Wildlife violation'' means any cited violation of a
statute, rule, or other relevant law developed and enacted to manage
wildlife resources and the use thereof.

ARTICLE III Procedures for Issuing State


                                             
 (a) When issuing a citation for a wildlife violation, a wildlife
officer shall issue a citation to any person whose primary residence is
in a party state in the same manner as if the person were a resident of
the home state and shall not require the person to post collateral to
secure appearance, subject to the exceptions contained in paragraph (b)
of this article, if the officer receives the person's personal
recognizance that the person will comply with the terms of the
citation.
                                             
 (b) Personal recognizance is acceptable:
                                             
 (1) If not prohibited by local law or the rules of the
department of fish and wildlife; and
                                             
 (2) If the violator provides adequate proof of the violator's
identification to the wildlife officer.
                                             
 (c) Upon conviction of a wildlife violation subject to suspension
or upon failure of a person to comply with the terms of a wildlife
citation, the appropriate official shall report the conviction or
failure to comply to the licensing authority of the party state in which
the wildlife citation was issued. The report shall be made in accordance
with procedures specified by the issuing state.
                                             
 (d) Upon receipt of the report of conviction or noncompliance
required by paragraph (c) of this article, the licensing authority of
the issuing state shall transmit to the licensing authority in the home
state of the violator the information in a form and content specified by
the fish and game department in rule.

ARTICLE IV Procedures for Home State


                                             
 (a) Upon receipt of a report of a failure to comply with the
terms of a citation from the licensing authority of the issuing state,
the licensing authority of the home state shall notify the violator,
shall initiate a suspension action in accordance with the home state's
enforcement procedures, and shall suspend the violator's license
privileges or rights until satisfactory evidence of compliance with the
terms of the wildlife citation has been furnished by the issuing state
to the home state licensing authority. Due process safeguards will be
accorded.
                                             
 (b) Upon receipt of a report of conviction of a wildlife
violation subject to suspension from the licensing authority of the
issuing state, the licensing authority of the home state shall enter
such conviction in its records according to current procedure and shall
treat such conviction as if it occurred in the home state for the
purposes of the suspension of license privileges and for the purposes of
the term of the suspension of privileges.
                                             
 (c) The licensing authority of the home state shall maintain a
record of actions taken and make reports to issuing states as provided
in rules adopted by the department of fish and wildlife.

ARTICLE V Reciprocal Recognition of Suspension


                                             
 All party states shall recognize the suspension of license
privileges or rights of any person by any party state as if the
violation on which the suspension is based had in fact occurred in the
person's state and would have been the basis for suspension of license
privileges or rights in his or her state.

ARTICLE VI Applicability of Other Laws


                                             
 Except as expressly required by provisions of this compact, nothing
herein shall be construed to affect the right of any party state to
apply any of its laws relating to license privileges to any person or
circumstance, or to invalidate or prevent any agreement or other
cooperative arrangements between a party state and a nonparty state
concerning wildlife law enforcement.

ARTICLE VII Compact Administrator Procedures


                                             
 (a) For the purpose of administering the provisions of this
compact and to serve as a governing body for the resolution of all
matters relating to the operation of this compact, a board of compact
administrators is established. The board of compact administrators shall
be composed of one representative from each of the party states to be
known as the compact administrator. The compact administrator shall be
appointed by the head of the licensing authority of each party state and
will serve and be subject to removal in accordance with the laws of the
state the administrator represents. A compact administrator may provide
for the discharge of the administrator's duties and the performance of
the administrator's functions as a board of compact administrators'
member by an alternate. An alternate may not be entitled to serve unless
written notification of the alternate's identity has been given to the
board of compact administrators.
                                             
 (b) Each member of the board of compact administrators shall be
entitled to one vote. No action of the board of compact administrators
shall be binding unless taken at a meeting at which a majority of the
total number of votes on the board of compact administrators are cast in
favor thereof. Action by the board of compact administrators shall be
only at a meeting at which a majority of the party states are
represented.
                                             
 (c) The board of compact administrators shall elect annually,
from its membership, a chairperson and vice chairperson.
                                             
 (d) The board of compact administrators shall adopt bylaws, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this compact or the laws of a party
state, for the conduct of its business and shall have the power to amend
and rescind its bylaws.
                                             
 (e) The board of compact administrators may accept for any of its
purposes and functions under this compact all donations and grants of
money, equipment, supplies, materials, and services, conditional or
otherwise, from any state, the United States, or any governmental
agency, and may receive, utilize, and dispose of the same.
                                             
 (f) The board of compact administrators may contract with or
accept services or personnel from any governmental or intergovernmental
agency, individual, firm, corporation, or any private nonprofit
organization or institution.
                                             
 (g) The board of compact administrators shall formulate all
necessary procedures and develop uniform forms and documents for
administering the provisions of this compact. All procedures and forms
adopted pursuant to board of compact administrators' action shall be
contained in the rules adopted by the fish and game department.

ARTICLE VIII Entry Into Compact and Withdrawal


                                             
 (a) This compact shall become effective when it has been adopted
by at least 2 states.
                                             
 (b)(1) Entry into the compact shall be made by an act or
resolution of ratification executed by the authorized officials of the
applying state and submitted to the chairperson of the board of compact
administrators.
                                             
 (2) The act or resolution shall include statements that in
substance are as follows:
                                             
 (A) A citation of the authority by which the state is
empowered to become a party to this compact;
                                             
 (B) Agreement to comply with the terms and provisions of
the compact; and
                                             
 (C) That compact entry is with all states then party to the
compact and with any state that legally becomes a party to the compact.
                                             
 (3) The effective date of entry shall be specified by the
applying state, but shall not be less than 60 days after notice has been
given by the chairperson of the board of compact administrators or by
the secretariat of the board of compact administrators to each party
state that has received the resolution from the applying state.
                                             
 (c) A party state may withdraw from this compact by official
written notice to the other party states, but a withdrawal shall not
take effect until 90 days after notice of withdrawal is given. The
notice shall be directed to the compact administrator of each member
state. No withdrawal shall affect the validity of this compact as to the
remaining party states.

ARTICLE IX Amendments to the Compact


                                             
 (a) This compact may be amended from time to time. Amendments
shall be presented in resolution form to the chairperson of the board of
compact administrators and may be initiated by one or more party
states.
                                             
 (b) Adoption of an amendment shall require endorsement by all
party states and shall become effective 30 days after the date of the
last endorsement.
                                             
 (c) Failure of a party state to respond to the compact
chairperson within 120 days after receipt of the proposed amendment
shall constitute endorsement.

ARTICLE X Construction and Severability


                                             
 This compact shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate the
purposes stated herein. The provisions of this compact shall be
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, or provision of this
compact is declared to be contrary to the constitution of any party
state or of the United States, or the applicability thereof to any
government, agency, individual, or circumstance is held invalid, the
compact shall not be affected thereby. If this compact shall be held
contrary to the constitution of any party state thereto, the compact
shall remain in full force and effect as to the remaining states and in
full force and effect as to the state affected as to all severable
matters.

ARTICLE XI Compact Title


                                             
 This compact shall be known as the wildlife violator compact.
                                             
 A. COMPACT ADMINISTRATOR
                                             
 The compact administrator for New Hampshire shall be the executive
director of the New Hampshire fish and game department or a designated
representative of the executive director. The duties of the compact
administrator shall be deemed a regular part of the duties of the office
of the executive director of fish and game.
                                             
 B. RULEMAKING
                                             
 The fish and game department may adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A
to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
                                             
 C. PENALTIES
                                             
 (a) Notwithstanding any other section of this title, the
executive director may suspend a New Hampshire hunting, fishing, or
trapping license of a person convicted of a wildlife violation in a
state party to the compact, provided that the wildlife violation would
have been the basis for suspension of license privileges in New
Hampshire.
                                             
 (b) No person whose license, privilege, or right to hunt, fish,
trap, possess, or transport wildlife, having been suspended or revoked
pursuant to this chapter, shall be issued a license to hunt, fish, or
trap in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (c)(1) Prior to suspending a New Hampshire hunting, fishing, or
trapping license of a person under paragraph (a) of this section, the
executive director shall notify the person in writing. A suspension
shall be deemed effective:
                                             
 (I) When given if notice is made in person; or
                                             
 (II) Three days after the deposit of notice in the United
States mails, if notice is made in writing.
                                             
 (2) A person receiving notice under paragraph (a) of this
section may, within 30 days of the date notice is given, request a
hearing before the executive director on whether the requirements for
suspension or penalty have been met. The requesting person may present
evidence and arguments at the hearing only regarding whether:
                                             
 (I) A participating state suspended the person's
privileges;
                                             
 (II) There was a conviction in the participating state;
                                             
 (III) The person failed to comply with the terms of a
citation issued for a wildlife violation in a participating state; or
                                             
 (IV) A conviction in a participating state could have led
to a license suspension or penalty in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (3) At the hearing, the executive director or a hearing
officer designated by the executive director may:
                                             
 (I) Administer oaths;
                                             
 (II) Issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses; and
                                             
 (III) Admit all relevant evidence and documents, including
notifications from participating states.
                                             
 (4) Following a hearing under this paragraph, the executive
director or a designated hearing officer may, based on the evidence,
affirm, modify, or rescind the suspension of a license or the assessment
of a penalty.
                                             
 (5) A suspension of a license under this chapter is a civil
suspension, and a decision of the commissioner or hearing officer under
this section shall not be appealable.
                                             
 D. WITHDRAWAL FROM COMPACT
                                             
 Withdrawal of New Hampshire from the compact, as authorized under
article VIII of the compact, shall be by an act or resolution of the
general court.

**Source.** 2013, 163:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.
