---
title: 'CHAPTER 270-D BOATING AND WATER SAFETY ON NEW HAMPSHIRE PUBLIC WATERS'
---

TITLE XXII
                                             
NAVIGATION; HARBORS; COAST SURVEY
=================================

CHAPTER 270-D
                                             
BOATING AND WATER SAFETY ON NEW HAMPSHIRE PUBLIC WATERS
-------------------------------------------------------

### Section 270-D:1

 **270-D:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Boat'' means every description of watercraft other than
seaplanes, capable of being used or used as a means of transportation on
the water and which is primarily used for noncommercial purposes, or
leased, rented, loaned or chartered to another for such use.
                                             
 II. "Commercial vessel'' means any vessel carrying passengers for
hire as a common carrier of passengers or property.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
safety.
                                             
 IV. "Director'' means the director of the division of state police,
department of safety.
                                             
 V. "Division'' means the division of state police, department of
safety.
                                             
 VI. "Headway speed'' means 6 miles per hour or the slowest speed
that a boat can be operated and maintain steerage way.
                                             
 VI-a. "Inflatable tube'' means an inflatable device manufactured and
designed for the specific purpose of towing persons behind a motorboat.
Such device shall be manufactured with a point of attachment for a tow
line in addition to any safety handles, ropes, or lines, for each person
being towed.
                                             
 VII. "Motorboat'' means any vessel being propelled by machinery,
whether or not such machinery is the principal source of propulsion.
                                             
 VIII. "No wake area'' means an area where a boat is to be operated
only at headway speed.
                                             
 IX. "PFD'' means a personal flotation device of a type approved by
the United States Coast Guard.
                                             
 X. "Person'' means person as defined in RSA 21:9.
                                             
 XI. "Vessel'' means any type of watercraft used or capable of being
used as a means of transportation on water, except a seaplane.
                                             
 XII. "Wake'' means any disturbance created on the surface of the
water as a result of combined vessel motion and hull displacement.
                                             
 XIII. "Water skiing'' means a person being towed behind a moving
motorboat on skis or on aquatic equipment designed for towing an
aquaplane or any other device, including bare feet of a person, but
excluding a person being towed on an inflatable tube or in another boat
or motorboat.

**Source.** 1990, 171:1. 1995, 273:2, eff. July 1, 1995. 2011, 224:268,
eff. July 1, 2011. 2012, 168:2, 3, eff. June 7, 2012.

### Section 270-D:2

 **270-D:2 General Rules for Vessels Operating on Water. –**
                                             
 I. Vessels shall be operated at headway speed only, while passing
under all bridges.
                                             
 II. (a) It shall be the duty of each vessel to keep to the right
when vessels are approaching each other head on.
                                             
 (b) When the courses of vessels are so far to the starboard of
each other as not to be considered as approaching head on, they shall
keep to the left.
                                             
 III. When vessels are crossing courses or approaching each other in
an oblique direction which may involve risk of collision, the vessel
which has the other on its starboard side shall keep out of the way of
the other, allowing the latter vessel to keep its course and speed.
                                             
 IV. When vessels are running in the same direction and the vessel
which is astern desires to pass the other, it shall do so only when
sufficient distance between the vessels is available to avoid danger of
collision, and at such a speed that its wake will not endanger the boat
being passed or its occupants. No person operating a vessel shall
abruptly change its course without first determining that it can safely
be done without crossing immediately ahead of another vessel.
                                             
 V. If, when vessels are approaching each other, either vessel fails
to understand the course or intention of the other from any cause, such
vessel or vessels shall immediately slow to a speed barely sufficient
for steerage until the vessels have safely passed each other. If it
appears the danger of collision is imminent both vessels shall stop or
reverse and not proceed until such danger has been averted.
                                             
 VI. (a) To provide full visibility and control and to prevent their
wake from being thrown into or causing excessive rocking to other boats,
barges, water skiers, aquaplanes or other boats, rafts or floats, all
vessels shall maintain headway speed when within 150 feet from:
                                             
 (1) Rafts, floats, swimmers.
                                             
 (2) Permitted swimming areas.
                                             
 (3) Shore.
                                             
 (4) Docks.
                                             
 (5) Mooring fields.
                                             
 (6) Other vessels.
                                             
 (b) These requirements shall not apply when:
                                             
 (1) Starting skiers from shore, docks or floats, as long as
neither the boat nor the skier is endangering the life or safety of any
person.
                                             
 (2) A vessel is in the federal deepwater shipping channel of
the Piscataqua River between navigation buoys R2, Wood Island at the
mouth of the river and R12, opposite the Sprague Terminal.
                                             
 (c) The operator of a towing boat shall be responsible for
compliance with this paragraph.
                                             
 (d) The requirements of RSA 270-D:2, VI(a)(3) shall not apply to
a vessel in the waters of the Androscoggin River from the Errol Dam to
Umbagog Lake or in the waters of the Magalloway River within the state
of New Hampshire.
                                             
 VI-a. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VII. When a vessel is given the right-of-way, such vessel shall hold
its course and maintain such speed as the circumstances prudently
permit.
                                             
 VIII. When a vessel is required to keep out of the way of another,
it shall, if necessary, slacken its speed, stop, or reverse, and avoid
crossing ahead of any other vessel.
                                             
 IX. Canoes, kayaks, rowboats, sailboats, and swimmers shall be given
the right-of-way. This requirement shall not be construed to allow
deliberate impediment of motorboats by canoes, kayaks, rowboats,
sailboats, and swimmers.
                                             
 X. (a) No person shall operate a vessel on Lake Winnipesaukee at a
speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the existing
conditions and without regard for the actual and potential hazards then
existing. In all cases, speed shall be controlled so that the operator
will be able to avoid endangering or colliding with any person, vessel,
object, or shore.
                                             
 (b) Where no hazard exists that requires lower speed for
compliance with subparagraph (a), the speed of any vessel in excess of
the limit specified in this subparagraph shall be prima facie evidence
that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful:
                                             
 (1) 30 miles per hour during the period from 1/2 hour after
sunset to 1/2 hour before sunrise; and
                                             
 (2) 45 miles per hour at any other time.
                                             
 (c) The speed limitations set forth in subparagraph (b) shall not
apply to vessels when operated with due regard for safety under the
direction of the peace officers in the chase or apprehension of
violators of the law or of persons charged with, or suspected of, any
such violation, nor to fire department or fire patrol vessels, nor to
private emergency vessels when traveling to emergencies. This exemption
shall not, however, protect the operator of any such vessel from the
consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety of others.
                                             
 (d) The speed limitations set forth in subparagraph (b) shall not
apply to boat racing permitted under RSA 270:27.
                                             
 XI. Any conviction under this section shall be reported to the
commissioner of the department of safety, division of motor vehicles,
and shall become a part of the motor vehicle driving record of the
person convicted.

**Source.** 1990, 171:1. 1994, 78:1. 1995, 191:2, 3. 2002, 272:13. 2008,
331:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2009. 2010, 41:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2011; 222:2, eff.
Aug. 27, 2010.

### Section 270-D:2-a

 **270-D:2-a Boaters Guide. –** The department of safety, division of
state police, shall publish the New Hampshire Boaters guide.

**Source.** 1996, 269:1. 2002, 254:4, eff. July 1, 2002. 2011, 224:269,
eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 270-D:2-b

 **270-D:2-b Revolving Fund Established. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2002, 254:5,
II, eff. July 1, 2002.
                                             ]

### Section 270-D:2-c

 **270-D:2-c Boating Safety Checklist. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall rent a vessel for operation on any waters of this
state, including tidal and coastal waters and all inland waters, unless
the rental operator initials a rental safety checklist, prepared by the
department of safety, which certifies the rental operator's knowledge of
boating safety laws and which certifies that the rental operator
possesses a safe boater education certificate or its equivalent. In
addition, no person shall rent or lease any motorized watercraft to
another person without providing the renter or lessee with written
instructions on operating the watercraft in accordance with New
Hampshire law, and reviewing with the renter or lessee such written
instructions and the guidelines on New Hampshire navigation laws
provided by the division.
                                             
 II. (a) The rental safety checklist shall include, but shall not be
limited to, knowledge of the following provisions of the marine laws:
                                             
 (1) Safe passage.
                                             
 (2) DWI.
                                             
 (3) Headway speed.
                                             
 (4) Safety equipment.
                                             
 (5) Navigational lights requirements.
                                             
 (b) The checklists shall include a provision which states that
the rental operator is responsible for anyone who operates the vessel in
accordance with RSA 270-D.
                                             
 III. The rental safety checklist shall include a provision in which
the operator acknowledges that the director may require the operator to
attend a boat safety course, as provided in RSA 270:46-a, for violating
any of the boating laws or rules of the division.

**Source.** 1996, 245:3. 2002, 272:11. 2007, 101:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 270-D:3

 **270-D:3 Motorboats Towing Water Skiers and Aquaplanes. –**
                                             
 I. (a) No person shall operate a motorboat while towing water
skiers, aquaplanes, or similar devices unless another person is present
in the motorboat who is physically able to observe and assist the person
or appurtenance being towed. The observer shall be 13 years of age or
older.
                                             
 (b) For water skiers only, an observer shall not be required if
the motorboat is a tow boat that has been approved by the American Water
Ski Association and operated by a person at least 18 years of age. The
motorboat shall be equipped with a wide-angle mirror having a viewing
surface of at least 48 square inches and operated within a slalom course
approved by the American Water Ski Association. The course shall have a
valid state police permit.
                                             
 II. The operator of the motorboat shall be responsible for
compliance with the navigation requirements under this subdivision for
both the vessel and the person or appurtenance being towed. In addition,
any person being towed by a motorboat shall comply with all navigation
rules.
                                             
 III. No more than 6 persons may be towed on one or more inflatable
tubes and no more than 2 persons may be towed on water skis, aquaplanes,
or other devices from the same motorboat at the same time. When 3 or
more persons are being towed, 2 observers, in addition to the operator,
shall be in the towing vessel. Such observers shall be 13 years of age
or older. Notwithstanding this paragraph, more than 2 skiers may be
towed if a special permit is issued by the director.
                                             
 IV. Except in connection with water events and exhibitions
authorized by the director, no towing of water skiers, aquaplanes or
similar devices shall be conducted during the period between sunset and
sunrise.
                                             
 V. No person shall be towed on water skis or other appurtenances
unless the person is wearing a Coast Guard approved type 1, 2, or 3 PFD,
except when directly participating or competing in an American Water Ski
Association approved event or exhibition, authorized by a special permit
issued by the director of state police.

**Source.** 1990, 171:1. 1994, 200:1, eff. May 24, 1994. 2011, 224:270,
eff. July 1, 2011. 2012, 168:1, eff. June 7, 2012. 2015, 26:1, eff. July
6, 2015.

### Section 270-D:4

 **270-D:4 Permit for Water Events. –** Any person who undertakes any
of the following activities on the public waters of the state shall
first obtain a permit from the commissioner, subject to such conditions
as he shall establish by rule:
                                             
 I. Sponsor a water event, including but not limited to, a carnival
or exhibition.
                                             
 II. Place a water ski jump.
                                             
 III. Tow a kit glider or parasail.
                                             
 IV. Tow more than 2 skiers.

**Source.** 1990, 171:1, eff. June 26, 1990.

### Section 270-D:4-a

 **270-D:4-a Participation in Water Event; Failure to Disperse;
Penalties. –** Any person who participates in a water event for which a
permit has not been issued as required by RSA 270-D:4, shall be guilty
of a violation and fined not less than 
                                             $100. Any person who continues
to participate in or refuses to disperse from the location of such an
event after being ordered by a marine patrol officer or other local,
county, or state law enforcement officer to cease participation and
disperse shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2006, 283:4, eff. June 15, 2006.

### Section 270-D:5

 **270-D:5 Overloading. –** No vessel shall be operated while
carrying passengers or cargo beyond its safe carrying capacity, taking
into consideration weather and other operating conditions.

**Source.** 1990, 171:1, eff. June 26, 1990.

### Section 270-D:6

 **270-D:6 Inspections. –** All vessels afloat on public waters may
be inspected by the commissioner or his duly authorized representative,
to determine their seaworthiness and safety equipment at any time. No
person shall allow any vessel which fails to pass such inspection to be
used or operated on the waters of this state until brought into
compliance.

**Source.** 1990, 171:1, eff. June 26, 1990.

### Section 270-D:7

 **270-D:7 Riding on Gunwales, Bow and Transom. –** No person shall
operate a motorboat or ride as a passenger in a motorboat while sitting
on either the starboard or port gunwales or the transom, and no person
shall straddle the bow while the motorboat is in operation underway.

**Source.** 1990, 171:1, eff. June 26, 1990.

### Section 270-D:7-a

 **270-D:7-a Shore Lights. –** No person shall display, at any point
on the shore visible from the water, any lights that resemble in color
or configuration the required navigation lights of any vessel.

**Source.** 2006, 283:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 270-D:8

 **270-D:8 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, regarding:
                                             
 I. Special permits to be issued under RSA 270-D:4.
                                             
 II. Inspection of vessels under RSA 270-D:6.

**Source.** 1990, 171:1, eff. June 26, 1990.

### Section 270-D:9

 **270-D:9 Penalties. –** Any person who violates any provisions of
this chapter or any rule adopted under RSA 270-D:8 shall be guilty of a
violation.

**Source.** 1990, 171:1, eff. June 26, 1990.

Safe Boater Education
---------------------

### Section 270-D:10

 **270-D:10 Certificate Required. –**
                                             
 I. No person born on or after the dates provided in this section
shall operate a motorized vessel with any type of power motor in excess
of 25 horsepower on the public waters of this state without first
obtaining a certificate of boating safety education in accordance with
this subdivision:

     Date of Birth Certificate Required
     January 1, 1983 January 1, 2002
     January 1, 1977 January 1, 2003
     January 1, 1973 January 1, 2004
     January 1, 1967 January 1, 2005
     January 1, 1963 January 1, 2006
     January 1, 1957 January 1, 2007
     All January 1, 2008


                                             
 II. The commissioner may enter into contracts with individuals,
public or private corporations or institutions for assistance in
developing, assisting, and conducting safe boater education courses.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall establish minimum requirements for the
qualification of safe boater education instructors. The minimum
requirements shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
                                             
 (a) The instructor shall be 18 years of age or older.
                                             
 (b) The instructor shall have at least 2 years of recent boating
experience.
                                             
 (c) The instructor shall hold a certificate evidencing successful
completion of a safe boater education course that meets or exceeds the
requirements of this subdivision, a certificate from the United States
Coast Guard, or a certificate from the United States Power Squadron.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner may appoint one or more training specialists
who shall assist in establishing safe boater education courses
throughout the state, support and implement program guidelines and
supervise instructors.
                                             
 V. In establishing the safe boater education course of instruction
and examination pursuant to this section, the commissioner may offer a
correspondence course through electronic or other means that is
consistent with the applicable standard of competency and safety
established by this section.

**Source.** 2000, 52:3. 2002, 272:2, eff. May 18, 2002.

### Section 270-D:11

 **270-D:11 Possession Required; Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Any person required to have a safe boater education certificate
shall:
                                             
 (a) Possess the certificate when operating a motorized vessel
with any type of power motor in excess of 25 horsepower on the public
waters of the state.
                                             
 (b) Present the certificate upon the demand of a marine patrol
officer.
                                             
 II. No person charged with a violation of this section shall be
convicted if, within a period of 48 hours, the person presents to the
officer evidence that he or she held a valid safe boater education
certificate which was in effect at the time of the violation.
                                             
 III. Enforcement of this section shall be accomplished only as a
secondary action when an operator of a motorized or registered vessel
has been cited, charged with, or issued a written warning for a
violation or some other offense, or as a primary action when an operator
is involved in an accident.
                                             
 IV. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine of 
                                             $50 for a first offense and 
                                             $250 for
any subsequent offense.

**Source.** 2000, 52:3. 2002, 272:3, eff. May 18, 2002. 2011, 149:1,
eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 270-D:12

 **270-D:12 Exemption. –** A person who is licensed by the state of
New Hampshire or the United States Coast Guard to operate a commercial
vessel shall be exempt from the requirements of this subdivision.

**Source.** 2000, 52:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

### Section 270-D:13

 **270-D:13 Issuance of Safe Boater Education Certificate. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner or designee shall issue a safe boater education
certificate to a person 16 years of age or older who:
                                             
 (a) Passes a safe boater education course approved by the
commissioner in accordance with the criteria of the National Association
of State Boating Law Administrators. A classroom course shall provide a
minimum of 8 hours of instruction. Passage of a safe boater education
course shall require successful completion of a proctored examination
administered by a person authorized by the commissioner in accordance
with rules adopted by the commissioner. The minimum passing grade for
the examination shall be 80 percent; or
                                             
 (b) Passes a safe boater equivalency examination administered by
persons approved to offer boating safety education courses. The minimum
passing grade for the examination shall be 80 percent. A certificate
issued to a person passing the equivalency examination shall specify
that the certificate is issued as evidence of satisfactory completion of
a safe boater examination and entitles the holder to operate a vessel on
the public waters of New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. Once issued, the certificate of safe boater education shall be
valid for the lifetime of the person and may not be revoked by the
department of safety or a court without cause and a hearing in
accordance with RSA 541-A.
                                             
 III. The commissioner, or designee, shall replace a lost or
destroyed certificate upon written request of the person entitled
thereto and payment of the prescribed fee, and such copy shall have the
same form and effect as the original.
                                             
 IV. Any person who successfully completes a safe boater education
course or safe boater equivalency examination after reaching the age of
15 shall be issued a safe boater education certificate upon attaining
the age of 16.

**Source.** 2000, 52:3. 2002, 272:4, 5. 2006, 283:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.
2010, 42:1, eff. May 18, 2010.

### Section 270-D:14

 **270-D:14 Temporary Certificate. –** The commissioner, or designee,
shall issue a temporary certificate of safe boating education to a
person 16 years of age or older who passes a temporary safe boater
examination administered by the department or its agents and approved by
the commissioner. The temporary certificate of safe boater education
shall be valid for up to 14 days and shall entitle the holder only to
operate a vessel on the public waters of New Hampshire. No person shall
receive more than one temporary certificate of safe boating education in
any calendar year. Any dealer or renter of boats or employee thereof,
who has passed the boating safety education course as provided in RSA
270-D:13, I(a) and is approved by the commissioner, may administer the
temporary safety examination and issue a temporary certificate. If the
commissioner finds that a person administering a temporary safe boater
examination has assisted the person taking the examination, the
commissioner shall permanently revoke the authority of the administrator
to issue certificates and administer examinations.

**Source.** 2000, 52:3. 2002, 272:6. 2006, 283:5, eff. June 15, 2006.

### Section 270-D:15

 **270-D:15 Certificate Not Required. –** A person shall not be
required to obtain a certificate of boating safety education if the
person holds a certificate from any state indicating successful
completion of boating safety education that meets or exceeds the
requirements of this subdivision, a certificate from the United States
Coast Guard Auxiliary, a certificate from the United States Power
Squadron, or a Canadian certificate approved by Transport Canada and
approved by the National Association of State Boating Law
Administrators.

**Source.** 2000, 52:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2002. 2010, 42:2, eff. May 18,
2010.

### Section 270-D:16

 **270-D:16 Education Material. –** Upon request, the commissioner or
agent authorized by the commissioner shall provide safe boater education
materials to persons who plan to take the safe boater education course.

**Source.** 2000, 52:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

### Section 270-D:17

 **270-D:17 Fees. –**
                                             
 I. (a) The department shall charge a fee of 
                                             $10 for issuing a safe
boater education certificate.
                                             
 (b) The fee for a temporary certificate shall be 
                                             $10.
                                             
 II. (a) The department may charge a fee for offering a safe boater
education course or exam. The fee shall not exceed the costs incurred by
the department in offering the course or exam.
                                             
 (b) Agents of the department may charge a fee for offering a safe
boater education course or exam. The commissioner shall establish by
rule the maximum fees that may be charged by agents.
                                             
 III. The total of all fees that a person may be required to pay
under this section shall not exceed 
                                             $50.
                                             
 IV. Fees collected by the department under this section shall be
paid into the navigation safety fund established under RSA 270-E:6-a.

**Source.** 2000, 52:3. 2002, 272:7. 2006, 283:6, eff. June 15, 2006.

### Section 270-D:18

 **270-D:18 Insurance Discount. –** The insurance commissioner may
adopt rules under RSA 541-A requiring admitted insurers to provide a
reduction in premium rates for vessel liability insurance to qualified
vessel operators who provide proof of successful completion of an
approved safe boater education course.

**Source.** 2000, 52:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

### Section 270-D:19

 **270-D:19 Voluntary Attendance. –** Nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit any person who is 16 years of age or older from attending a
safe boater education course approved by the commissioner under this
subdivision and obtaining a safe boater education certificate upon
successful completion of the safe boater education course, prior to
dates indicated on the phase-in schedule.

**Source.** 2000, 52:3. 2002, 272:8, eff. May 18, 2002.

### Section 270-D:20

 **270-D:20 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Approval of boating safety education courses.
                                             
 II. Criteria for boating safety equivalency examinations.
                                             
 III. The enforcement of provisions of this subdivision and the rules
adopted pursuant to it.

**Source.** 2000, 52:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.
