---
title: 'CHAPTER 270-A USE OF HOUSEBOATS'
---

TITLE XXII
                                             
NAVIGATION; HARBORS; COAST SURVEY
=================================

CHAPTER 270-A
                                             
USE OF HOUSEBOATS
-----------------

### Section 270-A:1

 **270-A:1 Definitions. –** The following words and phrases as used
in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise:
                                             
 I. "Person'' means any individual, firm, co-partnership, company,
association or joint-stock association, including any trustee,
administrator, executor, receiver, assignee or other personal
representative thereof.
                                             
 II. "Houseboat'' means any ship, boat, raft, float, catamaran or
marine craft of any description upon or within which are located
sleeping and toilet facilities, regardless of whether such facilities
are of a permanent or temporary nature.
                                             
 III. "Overnight period'' means the period of time between the
termination of daylight in the evening to the earliest dawn in the next
morning.
                                             
 IV. "Mooring'' means beaching, grounding, or tying of a houseboat to
the shore of any of the inland surface waters of the state, and the
anchoring of a houseboat on any of the inland surface waters of the
state.

**Source.** 1967, 412:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1968.

### Section 270-A:2

 **270-A:2 Where Overnight Mooring Permitted. –** A houseboat may be
beached or grounded, or tied to the shore of any of the inland surface
waters of the state for an overnight period, or any part of an overnight
period, only when on or at a location owned, leased, or otherwise under
the control of the owner or operator of the houseboat or by permission
of the owner, lessee, or person otherwise in control of such location.
An unoccupied houseboat may be anchored on the inland surface waters of
the state for an overnight period, or any part of an overnight period,
only in an area reasonably adjacent to a location owned, leased, or
otherwise under the control of the owner or operator of the houseboat or
by permission of the owner, lessee, or person otherwise in control of
such location.

**Source.** 1967, 412:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1968.

### Section 270-A:3

 **270-A:3 Where Overnight Mooring Prohibited. –** No houseboat shall
be beached or grounded, or tied to the shore of any of the inland
surface waters of the state for an overnight period or any part of an
overnight period, except as permitted in RSA 270-A:2 or in cases of
emergency. No houseboat shall be anchored on any of the inland surface
waters of the state for an overnight period or any part of an overnight
period except as permitted in RSA 270-A:2 or in cases of emergency.

**Source.** 1967, 412:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1968.

### Section 270-A:4

 **270-A:4 Notification of Mooring of Houseboats Required. –** The
owner, lessee, or person otherwise in control of a location at or
adjacent to which one or more houseboats are anchored, beached, grounded
or tied to the shore for an overnight period, or for any part of an
overnight period, shall promptly thereafter give notice of this fact, in
writing, to the New Hampshire department of environmental services,
stating the number of houseboats moored at such location and the dates
of such mooring. Any person who owns or controls a location at which
spaces are rented or leased to the general public for the purpose of
mooring houseboats at such location, shall keep a log of all houseboats
moored at such locations, the name of the owner or other person in
control of such houseboats, the registration number of the houseboat,
and the dates of such mooring, which log shall be available for
inspection at all reasonable times by any agent of the New Hampshire
department of environmental services. When a houseboat is to be moored
at the same location for an extended period of time, one written
notification of such fact stating the period of time the houseboat will
be so moored to the New Hampshire department of environmental services
shall be sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this section. Such
written notification shall not be required if the owner of the houseboat
furnishes such information on his application for registration of the
houseboat to the director of the division of motor vehicles in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 270:4.

**Source.** 1967, 412:1. 1986, 202:6, I(a). 1996, 228:108, eff. July 1,
1996.

### Section 270-A:5

 **270-A:5 Penalty for Overnight Mooring at a Prohibited Location.
–** If any person shall violate any provision of this chapter relative
to mooring a houseboat overnight in a prohibited location, he shall be
guilty of a violation. Each night of mooring a houseboat in a prohibited
location shall be considered a separate violation.

**Source.** 1967, 412:1. 1973, 531:90, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 270-A:6

 **270-A:6 Penalty for Failure to Give Required Notification of
Mooring. –** If any person shall violate any provision of this chapter
relative to giving the required notification of mooring to the New
Hampshire department of environmental services, upon conviction thereof,
he shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1967, 412:1. 1973, 531:91. 1986, 202:6, I(a). 1996, 228:108,
eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 270-A:7

 **270-A:7 Additional Penalty. –** In addition to the penalties
provided in RSA 270-A:5 and 6, the court may revoke the New Hampshire
registration certificate and the right to obtain such a certificate for
any houseboat or motor used for propelling such houseboat in violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter, for a period not to exceed one
year from the date of conviction.

**Source.** 1967, 412:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1968.
