---
title: CHAPTER 272 COAST SURVEY
---

TITLE XXII
                                             
NAVIGATION; HARBORS; COAST SURVEY
=================================

CHAPTER 272
                                             
COAST SURVEY
------------

### Section 272:1

 **272:1 Entry on Land. –** Any person employed under an act of the
Congress of the United States, passed February tenth, 1807, and the
supplements thereto, may enter upon lands within this state for the
purpose of exploring, surveying, triangulating, leveling or doing any
other act which may be necessary to effect the objects of such acts, and
may erect any works, buildings, stations, or appendages requisite for
that purpose, doing no unnecessary damage thereby.

**Source.** 1846, 337:1. CS 146:1. GS 132:1. GL 146:1. PS 1:6. PL 1:6.
RL 2:1.

### Section 272:2

 **272:2 Assessment of Damages. –** If the parties interested cannot
agree upon the amount to be paid for the damages caused by doing any of
the acts aforesaid either of them may petition the superior court for
the county in which the land entered upon is situate for an assessment
of the damages, and the court shall thereupon assess them by a jury or
other method, as the parties may agree.

**Source.** 1846, 337:2. CS 146:2. GS 132:2. GL 146:2. PS 1:7. PL 1:7.
RL 2:2.

### Section 272:3

 **272:3 Tender. –** The person so entering upon land as aforesaid
may tender to the party injured sufficient amends therefor, and, if the
damages finally assessed do not exceed the amount so tendered, the
person so entering shall recover his costs; and in all other cases the
party injured shall recover his costs.

**Source.** 1846, 337:3. CS 146:3. GS 132:3. GL 146:3. PS 1:8. PL 1:8.
RL 2:3.

### Section 272:4

 **272:4 Property of Survey Protected. –** If any person shall
wilfully deface, injure, or remove any signals, monuments, buildings, or
any appendage thereto, used or constructed under and by virtue of the
acts of Congress aforesaid, he shall be fined 
                                             $50 and shall also be
liable for all damages sustained by the United States.

**Source.** 1846, 337:4. CS 146:4. GS 132:4. GL 146:4. PS 1:9. PL 1:9.
RL 2:4.
