---
title: 'CHAPTER 105-C POLICE COMMISSIONS'
---

TITLE VII
                                             
SHERIFFS, CONSTABLES, AND POLICE OFFICERS
=========================================

CHAPTER 105-C
                                             
POLICE COMMISSIONS
------------------

### Section 105-C:1

 **105-C:1 Establishment Authority. –** Any town which adopts this
chapter may establish a police commission, consisting of 3
commissioners, who shall have been residents of the town for at least 3
years immediately preceding the date of their election or appointment.

**Source.** 1981, 277:1, eff. June 16, 1981.

### Section 105-C:2

 **105-C:2 Referendum. –** The following questions shall be submitted
to the voters of a town on the regular ballot for the election of town
officers if a petition is presented to the selectmen in accordance with
RSA 39:3 requesting the same:
                                             
 I. "Shall the government of the police department of the town of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ be entrusted to a police commission?''
                                             
 II. "If so, shall such police commissioners be chosen by:
                                             
 (a) Popular election at town election; or
                                             
 (b) Appointment of the governor with consent of the council?''

**Source.** 1981, 277:1, eff. June 16, 1981.

### Section 105-C:3

 **105-C:3 Establishment. –**
                                             
 I. If a majority of those voting in a town in any town election
answer the question posed in RSA 105-C:2, I in the affirmative and
select the method of establishment set out in RSA 105-C:2, II(a), the
voters of such town shall, at the next succeeding annual town election,
elect such a police commission. The term of office of each such
commissioner shall be for 3 years, except that of the first commission
elected under this chapter in any town, one member shall be elected to
serve a term of one year and one member shall be elected to serve a term
of 2 years. Any vacancy occurring on the commission shall be filled by
appointment of the board of selectmen until the next regular annual town
meeting.
                                             
 II. If a majority of those voting in a town in any town election
answer the question posed in RSA 105-C:2, I in the affirmative and
select the method of establishment set out in RSA 105-C:2, II(b), the
governor, with the consent of the council, shall promptly appoint such a
commission. The term of office of each such commissioner shall be for 3
years, except that of the first commission appointed under this chapter
in any town, one member shall be appointed to serve a term of one year
and one member shall be appointed to serve a term of 2 years. Any
vacancy occurring on the commission shall be filled by appointment of
the governor, with the approval of the council, for the duration of the
unexpired term.
                                             
 III. No person holding office as a selectman, treasurer, collector
of taxes, auditor, highway agent, or head of a police department shall
be elected or appointed as a police commissioner under this section.

**Source.** 1981, 277:1, eff. June 16, 1981.

### Section 105-C:4

 **105-C:4 Duties; Powers. –** It shall be the duty of the police
commissioners to appoint such police personnel, including police
officers, staff, constables and superior officers, as they deem
necessary and to fix such persons' compensation. The commissioners shall
make and enforce all rules necessary for the operation of the police
force in the manner most beneficial to the public interest. The
commissioners may at any time remove police personnel for just cause and
after a hearing satisfying the requirements of due process, which cause
shall be specified in an order of removal except that special police
officers appointed and designated as such shall serve at the pleasure of
the commission and may be removed for other than just cause.

**Source.** 1981, 277:1, eff. June 16, 1981.

### Section 105-C:5

 **105-C:5 Prohibition; Police in Office. –** After the election and
qualification of the police commissioners under this chapter, no chief
of police, police officers, constables or superior officers shall be
appointed in any town adopting this chapter except as provided in this
chapter. Any chief of police, police officer, constable, or superior
officer in office on the date the commission has been duly established,
shall be deemed to have been appointed by the commission, subject to the
terms and conditions of his original appointment.

**Source.** 1981, 277:1, eff. June 16, 1981.

### Section 105-C:6

 **105-C:6 Compensation. –** Police commissioners shall serve without
compensation but shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in
the discharge of official duties.

**Source.** 1981, 277:1, eff. June 16, 1981.

### Section 105-C:7

 **105-C:7 Option to Rescind Action. –** Any town which has voted to
establish a police commission under this chapter may rescind such action
by submission of an article in the town warrant as provided in RSA 39:3.

**Source.** 1981, 277:1, eff. June 16, 1981.
