---
title: 'CHAPTER 105-D BODY-WORN CAMERAS'
---

TITLE VII
                                             
SHERIFFS, CONSTABLES, AND POLICE OFFICERS
=========================================

CHAPTER 105-D
                                             
BODY-WORN CAMERAS
-----------------

### Section 105-D:1


                                             


                                             [RSA 105-D:1 effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **105-D:1 Definitions. –**
                                             
 In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Body-worn camera'' or "BWC'' means an electronic camera system
for creating, generating, sending, receiving, storing, displaying, and
processing audiovisual recordings that may be worn about the person of a
law enforcement officer.
                                             
 II. "Community caretaking function'' means a task undertaken by a
law enforcement officer in which the officer is performing an
articulable act unrelated to the investigation of a crime. It includes,
but is not limited to, participating in town halls or other community
outreach, helping a child find his or her parents, providing death
notifications, dealing with individuals asking for directions or other
assistance, and performing in-home or hospital well-being checks on the
sick, elderly, or persons presumed missing.
                                             
 III. "In uniform'' means a law enforcement officer who is wearing
any officially authorized uniform designated by a law enforcement
agency, or a law enforcement officer who is visibly wearing articles of
clothing, a badge, tactical gear, gun belt, a patch, or other insignia
that he or she is a law enforcement officer acting in the course of his
or her duties.
                                             
 IV. "Law enforcement officer'' or "officer'' means any person
employed by a law enforcement agency.
                                             
 V. "Law enforcement agency'' or "agency'' means a state, county,
municipality, special district, security service or police of the
community college system of New Hampshire and the university system of
New Hampshire, security service of the legislative or judicial branch,
unit of local government police department or any other entity
authorized by law to employ law enforcement officers or exercise police
authority.
                                             
 VI. "Law enforcement-related encounters or activities'' include, but
are not limited to, traffic stops, pedestrian stops, arrests, searches,
interrogations, investigations, pursuits, crowd control, traffic
control, non-community caretaking interactions with an individual while
on patrol, or any other instance in which the officer is enforcing the
laws of the municipality, county, or state. The term does not include:
                                             
 (a) Activities when the officer is completing paperwork alone or
is in the presence of another law enforcement officer or officers; or
                                             
 (b) Community caretaking functions.
                                             
 VII. "Recording'' means the process of capturing data or information
stored on a recording medium.
                                             
 VIII. "Recording medium'' means any recording medium for the
retention and playback of recorded audio and video including, but not
limited to, VHS, DVD, hard drive, cloud storage, solid state, digital,
flash memory technology, or any other electronic medium.
                                             
 IX. "Subject of the recording'' means any law enforcement officer or
any suspect, victim, detainee, conversant, injured party, witness, or
other similarly situated person who appears on the recording, and shall
not include people who only incidentally appear on the recording.

**Source.** 2016, 322:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 105-D:2


                                             


                                             [RSA 105-D:2 effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **105-D:2 Use of Body-Worn Cameras. –**
                                             
 I. This chapter shall apply to any law enforcement agency that
elects to equip its law enforcement officers with body-worn cameras. All
BWCs shall be operated in a manner consistent with the provisions of
this chapter. Every law enforcement agency that elects to equip its
officers with BWCs shall adopt policies and procedures relating to the
use of BWCs and the retention and destruction of data consistent with
this chapter.
                                             
 II. Officers shall only use BWCs issued by their respective law
enforcement agencies. BWC equipment and all data, images, and video
captured, recorded, or otherwise produced by the equipment are the
property of the officer's law enforcement agency and shall be subject to
the restrictions in this chapter.
                                             
 III. Officers who are assigned BWCs shall successfully complete an
agency-approved training program to ensure proper use and operations.
                                             
 IV. Officers shall only use BWCs while in uniform.
                                             
 V. Officers shall activate the video and audio components of BWCs
and start recording upon arrival on scene of a call for service or when
engaged in any law enforcement-related encounter or activity, or, if so
required by local policy, upon activation of lights and siren; provided,
however, that in those cases set forth in subparagraphs VII(d) and (e),
and paragraph IX in which an individual has a right not to be recorded,
officers shall inform an individual of this option. If a citizen then
declines to be recorded, the officer shall deactivate the audio and
video functions. The officer shall document the reason why the camera
was not activated in the associated police report. If exigent
circumstances exist which prevent the BWC from being activated as set
forth above, the device must be turned on as soon as practicable.
                                             
 VI. Recordings shall be specific to an incident. Officers shall not
indiscriminately record entire duties or patrols.
                                             
 VII. A BWC shall not be used to record any of the following:
                                             
 (a) Communications with other police personnel except to the
extent such communications are incidental to a permissible recording.
                                             
 (b) Encounters with police personnel or individuals whom the
officer knows are acting in an undercover capacity or as confidential
informants respectively, unless expressly directed to be included as
part of the investigation.
                                             
 (c) Intimate searches, when otherwise permitted by the agency's
strip-and-body-cavity search policy.
                                             
 (d) An interview with a crime victim unless his or her express
consent has been obtained before the recording is made. Any recording
obtained shall be consistent with the New Hampshire attorney general's
model protocol for response to adult sexual assault cases, the New
Hampshire attorney general's domestic violence protocol for law
enforcement, the New Hampshire attorney general's stalking protocol for
law enforcement, and the New Hampshire attorney general's child abuse
and neglect protocol, as applicable. This subparagraph may be waived
upon approval of the head of the law enforcement agency or his or her
designee when the parent or legal guardian is the subject of the
investigation to which a juvenile is a victim or witness.
                                             
 (e) Interactions with a person seeking to report a crime
anonymously. In such an instance, the law enforcement officer shall, as
soon as practicable, ask the person seeking to remain anonymous if the
person wants the officer to use the officer's BWC. If the person
responds negatively, the law enforcement officer shall deactivate the
audio and video functions.
                                             
 (f) While on the grounds of any public, private, or parochial
elementary or secondary school, except when responding to an imminent
threat to life or health or a call for service.
                                             
 (g) When on break or otherwise engaged in personal activities.
                                             
 (h) In any instance when it is believed that an explosive device
may be present and electrostatic interference from the BWC may trigger
the device.
                                             
 VIII. Officers shall inform an individual that he or she is being
recorded as soon as practicable. When notification is not made, the
recording officer shall note the reason for non-notification within the
associated report.
                                             
 IX. In locations where an individual has a reasonable expectation of
privacy, such as a residence, a restroom, or a locker room, a citizen
may decline to be recorded unless the recording is being made while
executing an arrest warrant, or a warrant issued by a court, or the
officer is in the location pursuant to a judicially-recognized exception
to the warrant requirement. Officers shall inform an individual of this
option. If a citizen then declines to be recorded, the officer shall
deactivate the audio and video functions, and any images shall, as soon
as practicable, be permanently distorted or obscured. The officer shall
document the reason why the camera was not activated in the associated
police report.
                                             
 X. Once activated, the BWC shall remain activated until the event is
completed in order to ensure the integrity of the recording unless
otherwise provided in this section.
                                             
 XI. If an officer fails to activate the BWC, fails to record the
entire contact, interrupts the recording, or if the BWC malfunctions,
the officer shall document why a recording was not made, was
interrupted, or was terminated as part of the associated police report.
                                             
 XII. Except as authorized in this section, no person, including
without limitation officers and their supervisors, shall edit, alter,
erase, delete, duplicate, copy, subject to automated analysis or
analytics of any kind, including but not limited to facial recognition
technology, share, display, or otherwise distribute in any manner any
BWC recordings or portions thereof. This paragraph shall not apply to
the sharing of a still image captured by the BWC to help identify
individuals or vehicles suspected of being involved in a crime.
                                             
 XIII. Recorded images and sound made from an agency-issued BWC shall
be for law enforcement purposes only. All access to this data shall be
audited to ensure that authorized users only are accessing the data for
law enforcement purposes only. All access to BWC data shall be
authorized by the head of the law enforcement agency and only for the
purposes set forth in this chapter.
                                             
 XIV. If an officer is suspected of wrongdoing or involved in an
officer-involved shooting or other use of deadly force, the agency may
limit or restrict an officer from viewing the video file.
                                             
 XV. All recordings shall be securely stored no later than the end of
each shift, or as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable, in
conformity to the most recent security policy of the Criminal Justice
Information Services (CJIS) of the criminal justice information services
division of the Federal Bureau of Investigation of the United States
Department of Justice. Recordings shall not be divulged or used by a law
enforcement agency for any commercial or other non-law enforcement
purpose. Where a law enforcement agency authorizes a third party to act
as its agent in storing recordings, the agent shall not independently
access, view or alter any recording, except to delete videos as required
by law or agency retention policies. Neither the agency nor its agent
shall subject any recording to analysis or analytics of any kind,
including without limitation facial recognition technology and data
mining.
                                             
 XVI. Recordings made by a BWC shall be permanently destroyed by
overwriting or otherwise no sooner than 30 days and no longer than 180
days from the date the images were recorded, except that such recording
shall be retained by the law enforcement agency that employs the officer
whose BWC made the recording, or an authorized agent thereof, for a
minimum of 3 years if:
                                             
 (a) The recording captures images involving any of the
following:
                                             
 (1) Any action by a law enforcement officer that involves the
use of deadly force or deadly restraint.
                                             
 (2) The discharge of a firearm, unless for the destruction of
an animal.
                                             
 (3) Death or serious bodily injury.
                                             
 (4) An encounter about which a complaint has been filed with
the police department within 30 days after the encounter.
                                             
 (b) The recording is being retained by the law enforcement agency
as evidence in a civil or criminal case or as part of an internal
affairs investigation or as part of an employee disciplinary
investigation.
                                             
 XVII. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph XVI:
                                             
 (a) If there is any other legal requirement for retaining the
recording, including but not limited to litigation, a pending criminal
case, or a valid court or administrative order, then the recording shall
be retained only as long as is legally required; and
                                             
 (b) The chief law enforcement officer of the agency may designate
the recording as a training tool, provided that a person's image and
vehicle license plate numbers shall first be permanently deleted,
distorted, or obscured, or the person has been given an opportunity in
writing to decline to have his or her image and/or vehicle license plate
number to be so used. A recording so designated and prepared may be
viewed solely by officers for training purposes only.
                                             
 XVIII. Any recording undertaken in violation of this chapter or any
other applicable law shall be immediately destroyed and, whether
destroyed or not, shall not be admissible as evidence in any criminal or
civil legal or administrative proceeding, except in a proceeding against
an officer for violating the provisions of this chapter. In a proceeding
against an officer for violating the provisions of this chapter, the
recording shall be destroyed at the conclusion of the proceeding and all
appeals.

**Source.** 2016, 322:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.
