---
title: 'CHAPTER 106-I RESPONSES TO INCIDENTS IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS'
---

TITLE VII
                                             
SHERIFFS, CONSTABLES, AND POLICE OFFICERS
=========================================

CHAPTER 106-I
                                             
RESPONSES TO INCIDENTS IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS
---------------------------------------------

### Section 106-I:1

 **106-I:1 Mass Critical Incidents; Requests for Response; Authority
of Officers. –** Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, a law
enforcement officer who responds to a mass critical incident in another
jurisdiction, in response to a request by the highest ranking on-duty
police officer of the requesting jurisdiction, shall have authority to
make arrests and shall have full police powers for the duration of the
incident, unless terminated by the law enforcement authority in the
requesting jurisdiction. The request for assistance must be received
directly from the highest ranking officer or indirectly through a law
enforcement dispatch center. For purposes of this section, a mass
critical incident includes such events as a natural disaster, riot,
hazardous material incident, an act of terrorism, or widespread personal
injury or loss of life.

**Source.** 2003, 252:1, eff. July 14, 2003.

### Section 106-I:2

 **106-I:2 Emergency Declared by Governor; Authority of Officers.
–**
                                             
 I. For the duration of any state of emergency declared by the
governor because of a natural disaster, riot, or act of terrorism,
notwithstanding any law to the contrary:
                                             
 (a) The governor, the commissioner of safety, or the
commissioner's designee, may request assistance from a duly trained and
certified state, county, or local law enforcement officer from New
Hampshire or from any other state, county, or local law enforcement
agency;
                                             
 (b) A uniformed law enforcement officer who responds to the
request for assistance shall have the authority to make arrests and
shall have full police powers, under the supervision, direction, and
control of New Hampshire state, county, or local law enforcement
officers; and
                                             
 (c) The authority of a law enforcement officer who responds to
the request for assistance shall continue until terminated by New
Hampshire law enforcement authorities or by law enforcement authorities
in the jurisdiction of the responding officer.
                                             
 II. A law enforcement officer who responds to the request for
assistance, and who is acting under the supervision, direction, and
control of New Hampshire law enforcement authorities, shall have the
same privileges and immunities as an officer in the jurisdiction of the
state of emergency.

**Source.** 2006, 280:1, eff. Aug. 14, 2006.
