---
title: |
    CHAPTER 106-F PRIVATE INVESTIGATIVE AGENCIES, BAIL ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES,
    AND SECURITY SERVICES
---

TITLE VII
                                             
SHERIFFS, CONSTABLES, AND POLICE OFFICERS
=========================================

CHAPTER 106-F
                                             
PRIVATE INVESTIGATIVE AGENCIES, BAIL ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES, AND SECURITY SERVICES
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 106-F:1

 **106-F:1 Declaration of Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is
to:


                                             [Paragraph I effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph I set
out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. Provide reasonable supervision of private investigative agencies
and their employees, security guard services and their employees, and
individuals licensed as private investigators and security guards doing
business in this state.


                                             [Paragraph I effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph I set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. Provide reasonable supervision of private investigative agencies
and their employees, security guard services and their employees, and
individuals licensed as private investigators, security guards, and bail
recovery agents doing business in this state.
                                             
 II. Ensure the honesty, good character and integrity of individuals,
licensees, and license holders.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1. 1991, 308:32. 2010, 292:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.
2016, 196:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 106-F:2

 **106-F:2 Exclusions. –** The following are excluded from the
provisions of this chapter:
                                             
 I. Insurance adjusters licensed as such.
                                             
 II. Consumer reporting agencies and their employees who are engaged
solely in the business of assembling or evaluating consumer credit
information for a consumer reporting agency as defined in RSA 359-B:3,
VI.
                                             
 III. Police officers, except as provided in RSA 106-F:2-a, or fire
investigators of the United States and the state, county, city, or town,
while assigned to duty by and performing as officers of their respective
law enforcement or fire service agencies.
                                             
 IV. Any unarmed security employee who is a direct employee of a
business which is not a security guard agency and who is employed by
that business to secure its premises while so employed, including but
not limited to store detective and watchmen.
                                             
 V. Towing or wrecking companies engaged in the repossession of
vehicles.
                                             
 VI. Firefighters employed by the state or any political subdivision
providing fire watch or fire protection services at public events.
                                             
 VII. Persons engaged solely in collecting or acquiring data for the
purpose of motor vehicle or other accident or occurrence reconstruction
or scientific analysis.
                                             
 VIII. Persons engaged in reporting or providing information to an
accredited news publication, media, or news outlet.
                                             
 IX. Persons employed or contracted by a commercial or legal entity
to provide, for internal use or dissemination, gross population data or
information relating to patterns of general population behavior,
criminal or societal activity, or other information that does not
include the collection of personally identifiable information, including
but not limited to voter preference polls, demographic surveys, or
business or academic research.
                                             
 X. Persons serving subpoenas or summonses for attorneys as provided
by statute.
                                             
 XI. Persons conducting management studies or performance evaluations
of municipal, county, or state government agencies or providing
recruitment and hiring services for such agencies under contract to
governing bodies of those agencies.
                                             
 XII. Attorneys, and employees of their law firms acting as their
agents, exercising legal rights to investigate on behalf of their
clients.
                                             
 XIII. A certified public accountant who holds an active permit
issued by any state or a public accounting firm registered in any state,
and the employees of such certified public accountant or firm.
                                             
 XIV. The employees of any nationally or state chartered financial
institution, as defined in RSA 161-C:2, VI-b, and any company controlled
by, or under common control with, or hired by, the financial institution
with respect to the investigation of the identity, identifying
information, financial condition, and background of customers,
employees, or service providers to comply with, or to audit or evaluate
its performance under, the requirements of federal and state laws and
regulations.
                                             
 Provided, however, that nothing in this section shall preclude a
person otherwise qualified from licensure under this chapter.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1. 1983, 459:2. 1985, 338:1. 1992, 139:1. 1996,
37:1. 2010, 292:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 106-F:2-a

 **106-F:2-a Prohibition. –** No person who is a sworn law
enforcement officer employed by the state of New Hampshire, any of its
political subdivisions, any other state or its political subdivisions,
or the federal government shall be issued or hold a private investigator
license or agency license, under this chapter.

**Source.** 1996, 37:2. 2010, 292:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 106-F:3

 **106-F:3 Rulemaking; Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of safety shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA
541-A, relative to the:
                                             
 (a) Form of original and renewal licenses and applications
therefor;
                                             
 (b) Examination procedures for license applications;
                                             
 (c) Requisite standards of applicant and licensee integrity and
reputation for honesty;
                                             
 (d) Use of fees for administration and enforcement of this
chapter;
                                             
 (e) Revocation of licenses; and
                                             
 (f) Creation of an advisory board to review complaints and
licensing issues.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of safety shall have the authority to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, which authority shall not be restricted
by RSA 106-B:15.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1. 1981, 389:1. 1987, 124:6, I(a). 2010, 292:5,
eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 106-F:3-a


                                             


                                             [RSA 106-F:3-a effective until January 1, 2017; see also RSA 106-F:3-a
set out below.
                                             ]

 **106-F:3-a Advisory Board. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established an advisory board to review
complaints and licensing issues relative to private investigative
agencies and security services. Each member shall be appointed by the
governor and approved by the council. A member shall continue to serve
until a successor is appointed by the governor and council. Members of
the board shall serve without compensation. Members shall each serve a
term of 3 years. No appointed member shall be eligible to serve more
than 3 full consecutive terms, provided that for this purpose only a
period actually served which exceeds 1/2 of the 3-year term shall be
deemed a full term. Initial appointments made by the governor shall be
staggered for terms of one, 2, or 3 years.
                                             
 II. The board shall consist of:
                                             
 (a) Three members licensed in New Hampshire as investigators and
who have been so licensed for the last 5 years, one of whom shall be
engaged in the practice of accident reconstruction or the practice of
bail recovery.
                                             
 (b) Two members of the general public who are not and have never
been licensed in New Hampshire or another jurisdiction as investigators
and who are not the spouse of any such person and who do not have and
never have had a material interest in either provision of private
investigation services or an activity directly related to private
investigation, including representation of the board or profession for a
fee at any time during the 5 years preceding their appointments.
                                             
 (c) One member of the law enforcement community.
                                             
 (d) The commissioner of the department of safety, or designee.
                                             
 III. The board shall elect a chairperson from its members. The board
shall hold its first meeting no later than 90 days after the effective
date of this section.


                                             [RSA 106-F:3-a effective January 1, 2017; see also RSA 106-F:3-a set
out above.
                                             ]


                                             
**106-F:3-a Advisory Board.** --
                                             
 I. There is hereby established an advisory board to review
complaints and licensing issues relative to private investigative
agencies, bail recovery agent services, and security guards and security
services. Each appointed member shall be appointed by the governor and
approved by the council. A member shall continue to serve until a
successor is appointed by the governor and council. Members of the board
shall serve without compensation. Appointed members shall each serve a
term of 3 years. No appointed member shall be eligible to serve more
than 3 full consecutive terms, provided that for this purpose only a
period actually served which exceeds 1/2 of the 3-year term shall be
deemed a full term. Initial appointments made by the governor shall be
staggered for terms of one, 2, or 3 years.
                                             
 II. The board shall consist of:
                                             
 (a) Three members licensed in New Hampshire as investigators and
who have been so licensed for the last 5 years.
                                             
 (b) Two members of the general public who are not and have never
been licensed in New Hampshire or another jurisdiction as investigators,
private security guards, or bail recovery agents and who are not the
spouse of any such person and who do not have and never have had a
material interest in either provision of private investigation services,
private security services, or bail recovery services, or an activity
directly related to private investigation, private security services, or
bail recovery services, including representation of the board or
profession for a fee at any time during the 5 years preceding their
appointments.
                                             
 (c) One member of the law enforcement community.
                                             
 (d) One member licensed in New Hampshire as a private security
guard or bail recovery agent and who has been so licensed for the last 3
years.
                                             
 (e) The commissioner of the department of safety, or designee.
                                             
 III. The board shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from
its members.

**Source.** 2010, 292:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2011. 2016, 196:3, eff. Jan. 1,
2017.

### Section 106-F:4

 **106-F:4 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Applicant'' means any person who makes application to engage in
any activity regulated under this chapter.
                                             
 II. "Armed'' security guard or private investigator means a person
or entity who offers to perform or performs, in association with the
services provided, physical protection to persons or property through
the use of firearms. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a licensee
holding a valid license to carry a pistol or revolver pursuant to RSA
159:6 from possessing or carrying a firearm for his or her personal
protection as otherwise provided by law, except as subject to the
provisions of RSA 106-F:8-a.


                                             [Paragraph III effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph III
set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 III. "Bail enforcement agent'' means any person engaging for pay or
reward in the business of the location or recovery of escaped persons
who have defaulted on bail bond.


                                             [Paragraph III effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph III set
out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 III. "Bail recovery agent'' shall have the same meaning as that term
is defined in RSA 597:7-b, I(b).
                                             
 IV. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
safety.
                                             
 V. "Doing business'' means advertising in New Hampshire or
soliciting work, clients, or customers in or from New Hampshire.
                                             
 VI. "Employee'' means an individual employed by a private
investigative agency or an individual employed by a security guard
service or bail recovery service performing the duties of a private
investigator or a security guard for the said private investigative
agency, bail recovery service, or security guard service.
                                             
 VII. "Full-time'' means engaged in the business of security or
private detective as the primary occupation.
                                             
 VIII. "Individual'' means an individual licensed as a private
investigator or security guard who is not an employee and who has no
employees.
                                             
 IX. "Licensee'' means a licensed private investigative agency or
security guard service.
                                             
 X. "License holder'' means an employee of a licensee.
                                             
 XI. "Private investigator'' means a person not excluded by RSA
106-F:2 engaged in conducting investigations, including but not limited
to:
                                             
 (a) Unsolved crimes.
                                             
 (b) Insurance claims or matters for attorneys in anticipation of
civil litigation.
                                             
 (c) Clandestine surveillance.
                                             
 (d) Locating missing persons.
                                             
 (e) Locating lost, concealed, or stolen property.
                                             
 (f) Locating escaped felons or wanted persons subject to reward
for capture.
                                             
 XII. "Private investigative agency'' means the business, within or
from the state of New Hampshire, of offering or providing by legal
means, for a fee or other compensation, to other persons or businesses,
the service of collecting information on the identity, character and
characteristics, reputation, conduct, background history, movements,
whereabouts, affiliations, or transactions of any other living person or
any business or legal entity or organization, for a fee, hire, or reward
information on the identity, conduct, movements, whereabouts,
affiliations, transactions, reputation, or character of any person, or
otherwise making inquiries or collecting evidence, for a private rather
than a public interest. This shall not preclude a licensee under this
chapter from pursuing investigation of matters arising in this state in,
another state, or political subdivision except as provided by the law of
the other state or political subdivision.
                                             
 XIII. "Security guard'' means any person contracted to any entity
for the purpose of providing protection of individuals or their property
or assets from injury or theft and includes but is not limited to crowd
control, fire watch, access control, the safe transport of money or
valuable documents, personal protection, or body guard services, but
shall not require the licensing of persons from other states temporarily
accompanying national political candidates on visits to the state or
persons providing temporary security to entertainers at live
performances.
                                             
 XIV. "Security guard service'' means any business entity, except as
provided in RSA 106-F:2, that furnishes or employs security guards or
other persons for the protection of individuals or their property from
injury or theft and includes, but is not limited to, services providing
for the safe transport of money or valuable documents and security
patrols of homes, businesses, or industrial plants. Such service may use
the terms "security,'' "safety,'' "control'' or like terms leading the
public to look to the individual as a person of authority. A person
engaged in so-called "executive protection'' or providing body guard
services shall be classified as a security guard.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1. 1981, 389:2, 3. 1990, 146:3. 1991, 308:33.
2010, 292:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2011. 2016, 196:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 106-F:5

 **106-F:5 License Required; Registration of Foreign Corporations.
–**


                                             [Paragraph I effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph I set
out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. No person shall engage in the business of a private investigative
agency, security guard agency, or bail enforcement agency without
obtaining a private investigative, security guard, or bail enforcement
agency license from the commissioner of safety and no person shall
engage in the business of a security guard service or bail enforcement
service without obtaining a security guard service or bail enforcement
service license from the commissioner of safety.


                                             [Paragraph I effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph I set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. No person shall engage in the business of a private investigative
agency, security guard agency, or bail recovery agency without obtaining
a private investigative, security guard, or bail recovery agency license
from the commissioner of safety and no person shall engage in the
business of private investigative service, security guard service, or
bail recovery service without obtaining a license from the commissioner
of safety.


                                             [Paragraph II effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph II
set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 II. No person shall become an employee of a private investigative
agency, a security guard agency, or a bail enforcement agency without
first obtaining a license to do so from the commissioner of safety.


                                             [Paragraph II effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph II set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 II. No person shall become an employee of a private investigative
agency, a security guard agency, or a bail recovery agency without first
obtaining a license to do so from the commissioner of safety.
                                             
 III. Any out-of-state applicant incorporated under the laws of any
other state, desiring to do business in this state pursuant to this
chapter, shall be deemed to be a foreign corporation and shall be
required to register under and comply with the provisions of RSA 293-A.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1. 1987, 124:6, I(a). 1990, 146:1, 2. 2010, 292:8,
eff. Jan. 1, 2011. 2016, 196:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 106-F:6

 **106-F:6 Application for License; Confidentiality. –** All
information provided by an applicant for an original or renewal license
under this chapter, other than the application date and the mailing
address of the applicant, shall be kept confidential, unless such
information is requested by a law enforcement agent engaged in the
performance of his or her authorized duties. An applicant for any
license issued under this chapter shall include the following in his or
her application:
                                             
 I. The name and address of the firm applying for a license, or the
name and address and date and place of birth of the applicant if an
individual, and all partners, officers, and major stockholders.
                                             
 II. The name, residence, mailing address, and date and place of
birth of the person primarily responsible for managing and conducting
the business in this state.
                                             
 III. For an original license, the names of at least 3 unrelated
persons to whom inquiry can be made concerning the applicant's character
as to integrity and reputation for honesty.
                                             
 IV. For an original or renewal license, the applicant's record of
felony convictions and misdemeanor convictions in this or any other
state or nation that have not been pardoned or annulled, information as
to whether any prior or similar licenses were ever revoked or suspended
in this or any other state, Canadian province, or nation, and disclosure
of any claim or lawsuit regarding conduct as a licensee, or any domestic
violence protective order.


                                             [Paragraph V effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph V set
out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 V. In the case of an applicant for an armed security guard or armed
private investigator or bail enforcement agent license, 2 sets of the
applicant's fingerprints taken at state police headquarters.


                                             [Paragraph V effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph V set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 V. In the case of an applicant for an armed security guard or armed
private investigator or armed bail recovery agent license, 2 sets of the
applicant's fingerprints taken at state police headquarters.


                                             [Paragraph VI effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph VI
set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 VI. Two photographs of the applicant taken at state police
headquarters to be used for a photo license card issued by the
commissioner of safety identifying the private investigator, bail
enforcement agent, or security guard and by whom he or she is employed.


                                             [Paragraph VI effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph VI set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 VI. Two photographs of the applicant taken at state police
headquarters to be used for a photo license card issued by the
commissioner of safety identifying the private investigator, bail
recovery agent, or security guard and by whom he or she is employed.


                                             [Introductory paragraph of paragraph VII effective until January 1,
2017; see also introductory paragraph of paragraph VII set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 VII. In addition to the requirements of paragraphs I-VI, applicants
for private investigator or bail enforcement agent licenses shall meet
the following qualifications:


                                             [Introductory paragraph of paragraph VII effective January 1, 2017; see
also introductory paragraph of paragraph VII set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 VII. In addition to the requirements of paragraphs I-VI, applicants
for private investigator or bail recovery agent licenses shall meet the
following qualifications:
                                             
 (a) Be a resident of the United States.
                                             
 (b) Be at least 18 years of age.
                                             
 (c) Have no record of felony convictions of any type or
conviction of a misdemeanor associated with theft, honesty, fraud, use
or sale of controlled substances, misdemeanor crimes of violence that in
the judgment of the commissioner of safety would cast doubt on the
applicant's future good behavior, domestic violence, or abuse of any
type, or an active domestic violence protective order in New Hampshire
or any other jurisdiction in the United States, its possessions, or
territories.
                                             
 (d) Except for employees, possess:
                                             
 (1) A minimum of 4 years' experience as a full-time law
enforcement officer with a federal, state, county, college or
university, or municipal police department, director of security or
senior officer of a company or corporation, or licensed security
service, full-time adjuster, risk manager, or claims investigator for an
insurance carrier or adjusting company; or
                                             
 (2) An associate of science degree or bachelor of science
degree in criminal justice or fire service from an accredited college or
university, certification from the American Society for Industrial
Security as a certified professional investigator, or certification from
the National Association of Legal Investigators as a certified legal
investigator and employment as a full-time investigator for a private
investigative agency for at least 2 years; or
                                             
 (3) A minimum of 4 years' employment as a full-time
investigator for a licensed private investigator or private
investigative agency; or
                                             
 (4) A minimum of 4 years' experience as a full-time
firefighter and certification by the International Association of Arson
Investigators; or
                                             
 (5) Certification by the American Society for Industrial
Security in security operations, and 2 years experience providing such
services; or
                                             
 (6) Certification by the American Society for Industrial
Security in executive protection, and 2 years experience providing such
services.
                                             
 (e) Provide verifiable documentation of his or her qualifications
at the time of application for a license.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1. 1981, 389:4. 1987, 124:6, I(a); 205:1. 1990,
146:4, 5. 1991, 308:34. 1992, 139:3. 2010, 292:9, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.
2016, 196:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 106-F:7

 **106-F:7 Issuance of License; Identification Card. –**


                                             [Paragraph I effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph I set
out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. Following review of the application and the applicant's
references, and investigation into the character, competency, and
integrity of the applicant, the commissioner shall as soon as
practicable issue a license or renewal license in the form prescribed by
the commissioner to the applicant, or notify the applicant of denial of
the application. Notification of licensure or the denial of a license
shall be forwarded to local law enforcement in the community in which
the licensee resides. Prior to approval of any armed private
investigator, bail enforcement, or security license issued under this
chapter, the applicant shall submit to a fingerprint examination
conducted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the department of
safety shall be authorized to use the records of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation in the screening of applicants. The applicant shall be
responsible for the cost of any background investigation or criminal
records check required under this section.


                                             [Paragraph I effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph I set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. Following review of the application and the applicant's
references, and investigation into the character, competency, and
integrity of the applicant, the commissioner shall as soon as
practicable issue a license or renewal license in the form prescribed by
the commissioner to the applicant, or notify the applicant of denial of
the application. Notification of licensure or the denial of a license
shall be forwarded to local law enforcement in the community in which
the licensee resides. Prior to approval of any armed private
investigator, bail recovery agent, or security license issued under this
chapter, the applicant shall submit to a fingerprint examination
conducted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the department of
safety shall be authorized to use the records of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation in the screening of applicants. The applicant shall be
responsible for the cost of any background investigation or criminal
records check required under this section.
                                             
 II. All persons licensed under this chapter shall carry
identification cards developed under rules adopted by the commissioner
pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 III. Applications for license renewals shall be reviewed subject to
the provisions of RSA 541-A:30.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner shall notify an applicant of an application
denial in writing, including a complete statement of the reasons for
denial. An applicant may request a hearing on such denial within 15 days
of receipt of the notice of denial. Not later than 30 days following
receipt of a timely request for hearing, the commissioner shall hold a
hearing on the denial, and shall notify the applicant of the time, date
and place of such hearing in writing. Hearings under this section shall
be held pursuant to the contested case provisions of RSA 541-A:31-36.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1. 1981, 389:5. 1983, 459:3. 1985, 338:2. 1987,
124:6, I(a). 1990, 146:6. 1994, 412:11. 2002, 280:1. 2010, 292:10, eff.
Jan. 1, 2011. 2016, 196:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 106-F:8

 **106-F:8 License Application and Renewal Fees. –**


                                             [Paragraph I effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph I set
out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. The fee for a private investigative agency license or a security
guard service license shall be 
                                             $150 for an agency or service employing
one person licensed under this chapter and 
                                             $500 for an agency or
service employing more than one such person. A person may hold one or
more types of license at any given time, provided that a separate fee
shall be paid for each license so held. Licenses shall be valid for 2
years after the date of issue and shall be renewed every 2 years
thereafter, upon application and payment of the fee and submission of
certified evidence that the surety bond remains in force. The
application for renewal shall be submitted at least 15 days before the
expiration of the previously granted license.


                                             [Paragraph I effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph I set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. The fee for a private investigative agency license, a bail
recovery service license, or a security guard service license shall be

                                             $150 for an agency or service employing one person licensed under this
chapter and 
                                             $500 for an agency or service employing more than one such
person. A person may hold one or more types of license at any given
time, provided that a separate fee shall be paid for each license so
held. Licenses shall be valid for 2 years after the date of issue and
shall be renewed every 2 years thereafter, upon application and payment
of the fee and submission of certified evidence that the surety bond
remains in force. The application for renewal shall be submitted at
least 15 days before the expiration of the previously granted license.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of safety shall set a reasonable fee, not
exceeding 
                                             $50, which the commissioner shall adopt by rule under RSA
541-A, to cover the expenses of licensing individuals under this
chapter. Such fee shall be paid by the service or agency employing such
employee and shall be paid before the license is issued. Such licenses
shall be valid for 2 years after the date of issue and shall be renewed
upon the completion and filing of an application for renewal which meets
the requirements of this chapter submitted at least 15 days before the
expiration of the previously granted license.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of safety shall set a reasonable fee, which he
or she shall adopt by rule under RSA 541-A, to cover the expenses of the
record check and investigation provided in RSA 106-F:7. The fee shall be
charged to the applicant.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1. 1983, 459:4. 1985, 338:3. 1987, 124:6, I(a).
1990, 146:7. 2010, 292:11, eff. Jan. 1, 2011. 2016, 196:8, eff. Jan. 1,
2017.

### Section 106-F:8-a


                                             


                                             [RSA 106-F:8-a effective until January 1, 2017; see also RSA 106-F:8-a
set out below.
                                             ]

 **106-F:8-a Firearm Proficiency. –**
                                             
 I. All armed security guards, armed private investigators, and armed
bail enforcement agents shall meet minimum requirements in the
proficiency in the use of firearms at least once per year. The
requirements shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) The practical police course or the tactical revolver course,
with a minimum qualification score of 75 percent.
                                             
 (b) Shotgun familiarization course required for all security
officers and bail enforcement agents whose employers issue, or have as
part of their equipment, shotguns.
                                             
 (c) Four hours of instruction, to include firearms techniques and
safety, laws on the use of deadly force, and the moral and ethical use
of force. Only qualified firearms instructors shall be used to certify
the successful completion of the requirements.
                                             
 II. Individuals shall be considered for qualification if they
successfully complete one of the following courses:
                                             
 (a) Police standards and training council firearms instructor
school;
                                             
 (b) F.B.I. firearms instructor school;
                                             
 (c) Smith & Wesson or SIG Sauer firearms instructor school;
                                             
 (d) National Rifle Association police firearms instructor
course;
                                             
 (e) Equivalent courses as determined by the commissioner of
safety on an individual basis.


                                             [RSA 106-F:8-a effective January 1, 2017; see also RSA 106-F:8-a set
out above.
                                             ]


                                             
**106-F:8-a Licensee Proficiency.** --
                                             
 I. All armed security guards, armed private investigators, and armed
bail recovery agents shall meet minimum requirements in the proficiency
in the use of firearms upon initial licensure and at least once per
year. The requirements shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) The practical pistol or revolver course or the tactical
revolver or pistol course, as determined by the commissioner for the
weapon being carried, with a minimum qualification score of 75 percent.
                                             
 (b) Shotgun familiarization course required for all security
officers and bail recovery agents whose employers issue, or have as part
of their equipment, shotguns, and a rifle qualification course if a
rifle is part of their equipment.
                                             
 (c) Four hours of instruction, to include firearms techniques and
safety, laws on the use of deadly force, and the moral and ethical use
of force. Only qualified firearms instructors shall be used to certify
the successful completion of the requirements.
                                             
 II. Individuals shall be considered for firearms instructor
certification if they successfully complete one of the following
courses:
                                             
 (a) Police standards and training council firearms instructor
school or a firearms instructor school accredited by the police officer
standards and training agency of another state, the F.B.I. firearms
instructor school, the Smith and Wesson, Sig Sauer, or Ruger firearms
instructor schools, the National Rifle Association police firearms
instructor course; or
                                             
 (b) An equivalent course as determined by the commissioner of
safety on an individual basis.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of safety may adopt, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
certain initial and continuing education requirements for licensed
security guards, private investigators, and bail recovery agents,
including but not limited to the statutory and case laws on the use of
force, the laws of arrest by non-law enforcement personnel, and other
issues relative to their respective occupations after consultation with
the advisory board, and may certify individuals or entities including
professional associations and employees of agencies deemed qualified to
provide such training or education to licensees.

**Source.** 1985, 338:4. 1987, 124:6, I(a). 2010, 292:12, eff. Jan. 1,
2011. 2016, 196:9, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 106-F:9

 **106-F:9 Surety Bond. –** The surety bond required by this section
shall be so conditioned that the person bonded shall conduct his or her
business in a lawful and honest manner without committing, compounding,
aiding or abetting the commission of any criminal offense. Said bond
shall be filed with and kept by the secretary of state and shall be
subject to being sued upon by the attorney general of the state in the
name of the state or sued upon by any person injured by a breach of any
condition of such bond designed to protect such person. The principal
sum of the bond shall be 
                                             $50,000, which shall be increased by 
                                             $50, 000
for each additional type of license held by any person licensed under
this chapter.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1. 1990, 146:8. 2001, 239:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2001.

### Section 106-F:10

 **106-F:10 Disposition of Fees. –** All fees collected under this
chapter shall be paid into the general fund of the state.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1, eff. Sept. 16, 1977.

### Section 106-F:11

 **106-F:11 Employees. –**


                                             [Paragraph I effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph I set
out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. A person licensed under this chapter may employ agents or guards
as such licensee deems necessary. The licensee shall be responsible for
the conduct of any such employees who shall be covered under the
licensee's surety bond.


                                             [Paragraph I effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph I set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. A person licensed under this chapter may employ agents,
investigators, or guards as such licensee deems necessary. The licensee
shall be responsible for the conduct of any such employees who shall be
covered under the licensee's surety bond.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of safety may disapprove the employment of any
individual for just cause. Appeal from such decision shall be permitted
as set forth in RSA 106-F:15.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1. 1987, 124:6, I(a). 2010, 292:13, eff. Jan. 1,
2011. 2016, 196:10, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 106-F:12

 **106-F:12 Notice of Change. –**
                                             
 I. A licensee shall notify the commissioner of safety of the
discharge or termination of any employee licensed under the provisions
of this chapter and also any change in the membership of the firm or in
the officers or directors of any association or corporation or any
change in the address of any office or the location of such business,
within 10 business days after such change. Failure to give such
notification shall be sufficient cause for suspension of the licensee's
license.
                                             
 II. Any license holder who changes his place of employment from one
agency to another shall within 10 business days notify the commissioner
of safety in person as to the identity of his new employer, and a new
photo license shall be issued at no cost to license holder.
                                             
 III. Any license holder who is arrested and charged with any felony
or misdemeanor or becomes subject to a domestic violence protective
order shall notify the commissioner of safety of the charge and the
circumstances within one business day of the issuance of the order or
the arrest.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1. 1987, 124:6, I(a). 1990, 146:9. 2010, 292:14,
eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 106-F:13

 **106-F:13 Restrictions; Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. No trade name or designation shall be used which implies any
association with any municipal, county, state, or federal government or
agency thereof. No licensee shall use a badge of any kind for
identification purposes, except a security guard, who, if he or she
wears any type of badge, shall wear one badge on the left breast of his
or her uniform and one on his or her cap while on duty as a security
guard. The word "police'' shall not be used in any way, on any seal,
card, badge, or advertisement by the licensee.
                                             
 II. No person shall:
                                             
 (a) Provide any service requiring licensure under this chapter
who is not licensed under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Falsely represent that a person holds a valid license issued
under this chapter.
                                             
 (c) Possess a license or identification card issued to another
person under this chapter.
                                             
 (d) Engage in advertising or the use of any seal or card which,
in the opinion of the commissioner, may tend to mislead the public.
                                             
 III. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor if a natural
person and a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1. 1990, 146:10. 2010, 292:15, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 106-F:13-a

 **106-F:13-a Obligation to Report Certain Criminal Violations. –**
                                             
 I. All felonies observed or revealed by or to persons licensed under
this chapter shall be immediately reported to the New Hampshire state
police, the closest law enforcement agency having jurisdiction, or the
attorney general's office.
                                             
 II. A licensee who reports criminal activity to state or local
police or a county sheriff shall be immune from civil liability for
making a report or information available to law enforcement provided it
is made in good faith and with reasonable belief in its veracity and is
in compliance with this chapter.
                                             
 III. A licensee who is employed or contracted and supervised by an
attorney shall not be required to report any of his or her work product
which would violate the privilege of confidentiality between the
attorney and his or her client.

**Source.** 1990, 146:11. 2010, 292:16, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 106-F:13-b

 **106-F:13-b Other Provisions. –**
                                             
 I. Except as permitted under RSA 173-B:5-a and RSA 633:3-a, III-d,
no licensee or license holder shall engage in activity or stand in the
stead or as agent or representative of a person or legal entity that is
judicially or statutorily prohibited from making inquiry or having
contact, or otherwise legally barred from the activity requested of or
performed by the licensee or license holder. A representation made by
the engaging person or legal entity, taken in good faith, that no such
prohibition exists shall be an affirmative defense regarding a violation
of this section. A licensee who becomes aware of a prohibition shall
immediately desist from further prohibited activity; shall not provide
information gained through the prohibited activity to another person;
and, if such information has been provided, shall have a duty to notify
any aggrieved person.
                                             
 II. No person licensed under this chapter shall be required to
reveal other than by judicial order information on the subject, nature,
or substance of an investigation or work product to any other person if
by doing this he or she would violate the rights and interests of a
person engaging the services of the licensee, except to the limited
extent that may be needed to dispel the suspicions of a law enforcement
officer investigating a report of loitering, prowling, or other
suspicious activity pursuant to RSA 644:6, and except to the
commissioner of safety or authorized agent when required in an
investigation of improper or illegal conduct by the licensee.

**Source.** 2010, 292:17, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 106-F:14

 **106-F:14 Suspension or Revocation; Cessation of Operation. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of safety may revoke or suspend a license issued
under this chapter, after a hearing, if the licensee:
                                             
 (a) Violates any provision of this chapter or any rules adopted
under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Is convicted of fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation, or a
felony of any type, or a misdemeanor associated with theft, dishonesty,
physical assault, violation of a protective order, abuse of any type, or
use of or sale of illegal drugs in New Hampshire or any other
jurisdiction in the United States, its possessions, or territories.
                                             
 (c) Suffers from any diagnosable mental illness to an extent that
would cast doubt on the licensee's ability to carry out his or her
essential job functions in a manner not dangerous to himself or herself
or the public, or to faithfully comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
                                             
 (d) Makes a material misstatement in a license application or
application for license renewal.
                                             
 II. Unless a license revocation or suspension issued under this
section is appealed, the licensee shall immediately cease operations for
the time period ordered in the suspension notice, or permanently if his
license has been revoked. The licensee shall immediately notify all its
clients of such revocation or suspension. The licensee shall forward a
copy of each such notification to the commissioner, and keep a copy of
each such notification in its business records.
                                             
 III. Any license suspended or revoked under this section shall be
surrendered to the commissioner within 72 hours of receipt of the notice
of suspension or revocation by the licensee, subject to the provisions
of RSA 106-F:15.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1. 1987, 124:6, I(a). 1990, 146:12. 2010, 292:18,
eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 106-F:15

 **106-F:15 Appeal. –** All decisions by the commissioner of safety
affecting licensing shall be mailed by certified mail to the applicant's
last known address. Appeals from such decisions to the superior court
shall be permitted as a matter of right, if taken within 30 days after
the date received. In any such appeal the right to trial by jury shall
be obtained, if requested in advance. No appeal taken from a decision of
the commissioner of safety shall suspend the operation or effect of such
decision unless so ordered by a justice of the superior court.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1. 1987, 124:6, I(a), eff. July 1, 1987.

### Section 106-F:15-a

 **106-F:15-a Exemptions. –** Nothing in this chapter shall require
the licensure of persons employed by any federal or state agency or any
city or town as an investigator. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to require licensure under this chapter for persons engaged in
interviewing parties or witnesses in any legal matter.

**Source.** 1990, 146:13, eff. Jan. 1, 1991.

### Section 106-F:16


                                             


                                             [RSA 106-F:16 effective until January 1, 2017; see also RSA 106-F:16
set out below.
                                             ]

 **106-F:16 Penalty. –**
                                             
 Any person who engages in business as a private investigative
agency, bail enforcement agency, or security guard service without first
having obtained a license therefor or who violates any other provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for a natural person
and a felony for any other person.


                                             [RSA 106-F:16 effective January 1, 2017; see also RSA 106-F:16 set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**106-F:16 Penalty.** --
                                             
 Any person who engages in business as a private investigative
agency, bail recovery agency, or security guard service without first
having obtained a license therefor or who violates any other provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for a natural person
and a felony for any other person.

**Source.** 1977, 582:1. 1991, 308:35. 2010, 292:19, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.
2016, 196:11, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.
