---
title: 'CHAPTER 186-B EDUCATION AND TRAINING OF THE BLIND'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 186-B
                                             
EDUCATION AND TRAINING OF THE BLIND
-----------------------------------

### Section 186-B:1

 **186-B:1 Statement of Purpose. –** To enable the state to more
effectively provide services to the blind of all ages in the state, it
is the intent of this chapter to place the functions of education,
training, vocational rehabilitation, and related services of the blind
under one administration. By this transfer of functions, all of the
responsibility for the education and training of all disabled children
in the state becomes the responsibility of the department of education.

**Source.** 1970, 34:1. 1990, 140:2, X, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 186-B:2

 **186-B:2 Appointment of Blind Services Administrator. –**

                                             [Repealed 1994, 379:24, I, eff. June 9, 1994.
                                             ]

### Section 186-B:3

 **186-B:3 Program for Blind Established. –**
                                             
 I. The department of education shall establish a program for the
education, training, and vocational rehabilitation for the blind of all
ages, whether or not they are eligible for aid to the needy blind under
the department of health and human services.
                                             
 II. The department of education shall develop or cooperate with
other agencies in providing services to the blind, including the
locating of blind persons, vocational guidance and training of the
blind, placement of blind persons in employment, instruction of the
adult blind in their homes and other services to blind persons. In
connection with assistance to needy blind persons the board of education
shall give due consideration to the special needs associated with the
condition of blindness and, in cooperation with the department of health
and human services, shall: (a) adopt rules stating in terms of
ophthalmic measurements the amount of visual acuity which an applicant
may have and be eligible for assistance and providing for an examination
by an ophthalmologist or physician skilled in diseases of the eye or by
an optometrist, whichever the individual may select, in making the
determination whether the individual is eligible and fixing the fee for
such examination; (b) establish the procedure for securing competent
medical examination; (c) designate or approve a suitable number of
ophthalmologists or physicians skilled in diseases of the eye, and
optometrists, who must be duly licensed or registered under the laws of
this state and actively engaged in the practice of their professions, to
examine applicants and recipients of aid to determine their eligibility
for assistance; (d) fix the fees to be paid for medical examination from
funds available to the department of health and human services.

**Source.** 1970, 34:1. 1983, 291:1. 1994, 379:7. 1995, 310:175, 181,
eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 186-B:4

 **186-B:4 Aid to the Blind. –** The department of education shall
furnish aid to the blind of the state, as follows:
                                             
 I. The blind services program, bureau of vocational rehabilitation,
shall prepare and maintain a register of the blind in the state, which
shall describe their condition, cause of blindness, capacity for
education and industrial training, and such other data as deemed
appropriate.
                                             
 II. The blind services program, bureau of vocational rehabilitation,
shall provide information and industrial aid for the blind, and for this
purpose may furnish materials and tools to any blind person. The bureau
may assist blind persons engaged in home industries in marketing their
products, in finding employment, and in developing home industries. The
bureau may ameliorate the condition of the blind by devising means to
facilitate the circulation of books, by promoting visits among the aged
or helpless blind in their homes, and by such other methods as are
expedient. However, the bureau shall not undertake the permanent support
or maintenance of any blind person.
                                             
 III. The blind services program, bureau of vocational
rehabilitation, shall furnish assistance to such blind persons, in such
amounts and at such asylums, schools, or other institutions designed for
the purpose of industrial aid to the blind as the department of
education directs.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner of education at the commissioner's discretion
may contribute to the support of the blind persons from New Hampshire
receiving instruction in industrial institutions outside the state.
                                             
 V. The commissioner of education with approval of the state board
may appoint other officials and agents necessary to assist in carrying
into effect the provisions of this chapter, subject to rules of the
division of personnel.

**Source.** 1970, 34:1. 1986, 12:4; 41:16. 1994, 379:8, eff. June 9,
1994.

### Section 186-B:5

 **186-B:5 Industrial Workshop and Homework Program. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1986, 41:29, IV, eff. April 3, 1988.
                                             ]

### Section 186-B:6

 **186-B:6 Aid to the Blind; Transfer of Functions. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1994, 379:24, II, eff. June 9, 1994.
                                             ]

### Section 186-B:7

 **186-B:7 Transfer of State Agency for Blind; Position Abolished.
–** 
                                             [Repealed 1994, 379:24, II, eff. June 9, 1994.
                                             ]

### Section 186-B:8

 **186-B:8 Nesmith Fund. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby appropriated annually the entire income derived
from the Nesmith Trust Fund to be expended by the department of
education for the aid, support, maintenance and education of the
indigent blind of the state of New Hampshire. The governor is authorized
to draw his warrants which shall be a charge against the Nesmith Fund.
                                             
 II. In the event that the annual income derived from said Nesmith
Fund shall be less than 
                                             $4,800, there is hereby appropriated from the
general fund of the state a sum equal to the difference between the
amount of income from the Nesmith Fund and 
                                             $4,800 which shall be added
to the income and expended by the department of education for the aid,
support, maintenance and education of the indigent blind to comply with
the terms of the trust under the will of John Nesmith. The governor is
authorized to draw his warrant for said sum out of any monies in the
treasury not otherwise appropriated.

**Source.** 1970, 34:1. 1972, 31:2, eff. March 17, 1972.

Vending Facilities Operated by Blind Persons
--------------------------------------------

### Section 186-B:9

 **186-B:9 Purpose. –** For the purpose of providing blind persons
with remunerative employment, enlarging the economic opportunities of
the blind and stimulating the blind to greater efforts in striving to
make themselves self-supporting, blind persons licensed under this
subdivision shall be authorized to operate vending facilities on state
property.

**Source.** 1975, 260:1, eff. Aug. 5, 1975.

### Section 186-B:10

 **186-B:10 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Blind person'' means a person whose central acuity does not
exceed 20/200 in the better eye with correcting lenses or whose visual
acuity, if better than 20/200 is accompanied by a limit to the field of
vision in the better eye to such a degree that its widest diameter
subtends an angle of no greater than 20 degrees. In determining whether
an individual is blind, there shall be an examination by a physician
skilled in diseases of the eye, or by an optometrist, whichever the
individual shall select.
                                             
 II. "Blind services'' means the administrative unit for the blind
services program within the bureau of vocational rehabilitation,
department of education.
                                             
 III. "State property'' means any building or land owned, leased or
controlled by the state.
                                             
 IV. "Vending facility'' means a vending machine, cafeteria, snack
bar, cart service, shelter, counter or any other facility for the
vending of newspapers, periodicals, confections, tobacco products, foods
or beverages, or any combination of them, whether dispensed
automatically or manually, and which are prepared on or off the
property.
                                             
 V. "Vending machine income'' means receipts other than those of a
blind licensee from the operation of vending machines on state property,
after cost of goods sold, where the machines are operated, serviced or
maintained by, or with the approval of the state, or commissions paid
other than to a blind licensee by a commercial vending concern which
operates, services or maintains vending machines on state property for,
or with the approval of the state.

**Source.** 1975, 260:1. 1981, 403:2. 1986, 41:17. 1994, 379:9, eff.
June 9, 1994.

### Section 186-B:11

 **186-B:11 Duties. –** Blind services shall:
                                             
 I. Survey the vending facility opportunities on all state property;
                                             
 II. Establish, whenever feasible, vending facilities on state
property to the extent that such facilities do not adversely affect the
interests of the state;
                                             
 III. License blind persons for the operation of vending facilities
on state property;
                                             
 IV. Provide vending facility equipment and an adequate initial stock
of suitable articles to licensed blind persons;
                                             
 V. Provide the necessary training and supervision to licensed blind
persons;
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VII. Conduct mandatory training seminars for operators of its
vending facilities, which shall address topics concerning the management
of vending facilities, including, but not limited to, the following:
                                             
 (a) Customer relations,
                                             
 (b) Marketing techniques,
                                             
 (c) Personnel hiring and training,
                                             
 (d) Inventory control,
                                             
 (e) New products,
                                             
 (f) Machine repair and maintenance, and
                                             
 (g) Accounting.

**Source.** 1975, 260:1. 1985, 232:3. 1994, 379:24, III, eff. June 9,
1994.

### Section 186-B:11-a

 **186-B:11-a Rulemaking Authority; Board of Education. –** The state
board of education shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, to carry
out the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1994, 379:10, eff. June 9, 1994.

### Section 186-B:12

 **186-B:12 Licenses. –** Blind services shall issue a license for
the operation of a vending facility only to a blind person who is able,
with such disability, to operate a vending facility. In issuing any
license, blind services shall give preference to a blind person who is a
resident of this state. Each license issued shall be for an indefinite
period, but may be terminated by blind services if it is satisfied that
the facility is not being operated in accordance with rules adopted by
the board of education under RSA 186-B:11-a.

**Source.** 1975, 260:1. 1990, 140:2, XI. 1994, 379:11, eff. June 9,
1994.

### Section 186-B:13

 **186-B:13 Vending Facilities. –**
                                             
 I. No person in control of the maintenance, operation and protection
of any state property may offer or grant to any other party a contract
or concession to operate a vending facility unless:
                                             
 (a) He has notified blind services and has attempted to make an
agreement with blind services for a licensed blind person to operate a
vending facility; and
                                             
 (b) He has determined in good faith that blind services is not
willing to establish a vending facility on such property.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. Blind services, with the cooperation of the person in control
of the maintenance, operation and protection of any state property,
shall select the type of location of the vending facility to be provided
and the person to operate such facility.
                                             
 IV. If blind services determines that a vending facility operated by
a full-time licensed blind person is not feasible on any state property,
blind services may install vending machines on such property with income
accruing pursuant to RSA 186-B:14.
                                             
 V. The contract for the operation of any vending facility shall
specify that it shall be operated at a reasonable cost consistent with a
fair return, high quality food and reasonable prices.
                                             
 VI. This section shall not apply to Franconia Notch state park,
Mount Sunapee state park and Mount Washington state park; nor shall it
apply to any state property which operates its own vending facility
unless the person in control of the maintenance, operation and
protection of the property contracts with blind services to operate the
vending facility.

**Source.** 1975, 260:1. 1981, 403:1. 1994, 379:24, IV, eff. June 9,
1994.

### Section 186-B:14

 **186-B:14 Vending Machine Income. –**
                                             
 I. If a new vending machine or a replacement for an existing vending
machine is installed after August 5, 1975, on any state property,
vending machine income shall accrue to the licensed blind person
operating a vending facility on the same property, or if none, to blind
services. The licensed blind person or blind services shall be
responsible for servicing and maintaining the vending machines from
which vending machine income is received.
                                             
 II. Vending machine income which accrues to blind services pursuant
to paragraph I may be used to:
                                             
 (a) Purchase new equipment and replace existing equipment for new
and existing vending facilities;
                                             
 (b) Purchase initial stock and supplies;
                                             
 (c) Provide training services; and
                                             
 (d) Establish retirement funds, health insurance contributions,
paid sick leave and vacation time for licensed blind persons.
                                             
 III. If vending machine income which accrues to blind services
pursuant to paragraph I is limited, it may be used to earn federal funds
on a matching basis.

**Source.** 1975, 260:1, eff. Aug. 5, 1975.

### Section 186-B:15

 **186-B:15 Appeal. –** Any person aggrieved by a decision of blind
services under this subdivision may apply for rehearing and appeal
pursuant to RSA 541.

**Source.** 1975, 260:1, eff. Aug. 5, 1975.
