---
title: 'CHAPTER 188-F COMMUNITY COLLEGE SYSTEM OF NEW HAMPSHIRE'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 188-F
                                             
COMMUNITY COLLEGE SYSTEM OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
-----------------------------------------

### Section 188-F:1

 **188-F:1 Community College System of New Hampshire Established. –**
The community college system of New Hampshire is hereby established and
made a body politic and corporate, the main purpose of which shall be to
provide a well-coordinated system of public community college education
offering, as a primary mission, technical programs to prepare students
for technical careers as well as general, professional, and transfer
programs, and certificate and short term training programs which serve
the needs of the state and the nation. The colleges of the community
college system of New Hampshire are authorized to grant and confer in
the name of the colleges all such degrees, literary titles, honors, and
distinctions as other community colleges may of right do. The community
college system of New Hampshire shall include, but is not limited to,
colleges in Berlin, Claremont, Concord, Laconia, Manchester, Nashua, and
Portsmouth. The community college system may also include regional
academic centers that make quality educational opportunities accessible
to New Hampshire residents.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007. 2010, 199:1, eff. Aug. 20,
2010. 2011, 35:1, eff. July 8, 2011.

### Section 188-F:1-a

 **188-F:1-a Transfer Authorized. –** All functions, powers, duties,
books, papers, records, and property of every kind, tangible and
intangible, real and personal, possessed, controlled, or used by the
former department of regional community-technical colleges as of the
effective date of this section are hereby transferred to and vested in
the board of trustees of the community college system of New Hampshire
established in RSA 188-F:4. Nothing in this section shall transfer real
property commonly associated with the McAuliffe-Shepard discovery center
or the police standards and training council.

**Source.** 2011, 199:1, eff. Aug. 19, 2011; 224:362, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 188-F:2

 **188-F:2 Governance. –** The community college system of New
Hampshire shall be governed by a single board of trustees which shall be
its policy-making and operational authority. The board of trustees shall
be responsible for ensuring that the colleges operate as a well
coordinated system of public community college education.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 188-F:3

 **188-F:3 Legislative Oversight. –**
                                             
 I. The general court finds that because of the importance of public
community college education, elected officials should be aware of the
activities and needs of the community college system, exercising their
responsibility for legislative oversight through (1) the consideration
by the appropriate legislative committees of proposed legislation
pertaining to the community college system; and (2) the consideration of
reports filed by the community college system of New Hampshire pursuant
to this chapter.
                                             
 II. The general court also recognizes the need to protect the
institutions of the community college system of New Hampshire from
inappropriate external influence which might threaten the academic
freedom of faculty members or otherwise inhibit the pursuit of academic
excellence. To this end, the general court has delegated broad authority
to the board of trustees who shall be responsible for managing the
community college system of New Hampshire in a manner which promotes
academic excellence and serves the educational needs of the people of
New Hampshire.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 188-F:3-a

 **188-F:3-a Prohibition on Preferential Treatment and
Discrimination. –**
                                             
 I. Within the state's community college system, there shall be no
preferential treatment or discrimination in recruiting, hiring,
promotion, or admission based on race, sex, national origin, religion,
or sexual orientation.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding paragraph I:
                                             
 (a) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as prohibiting
bona fide qualifications based on sex which are reasonably necessary to
the normal operation of public employment, public education, or public
contracting.
                                             
 (b) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as invalidating
any court order or consent decree which is in force as of the effective
date of this section.

**Source.** 2011, 227:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 188-F:3-b

 **188-F:3-b Identification Cards. –** If a college of the community
college system issues identification cards to students, all cards issued
after January 1, 2014 shall bear a date of issuance.

**Source.** 2013, 278:3, eff. July 24, 2013.

### Section 188-F:4

 **188-F:4 Board of Trustees; Community College System of New
Hampshire. –** The governance of the community college system of New
Hampshire shall be vested in a single board of trustees composed as
follows:
                                             
 I. The governor, the chancellor and the vice-chancellor of the
community college system, the president of each college within the
community college system, and the commissioners of the departments of
resources and economic development, employment security, and education,
all of whom shall be nonvoting members.
                                             
 II. The following voting members who shall be appointed by the
governor with the advice and consent of the council:
                                             
 (a) Four members from the fields of business and industry.
                                             
 (b) One member who shall be a high school vocational/technical
education director.
                                             
 (c) One member who shall be an alumnus of one of the colleges
within the community college system.
                                             
 (d) One member from the field of education.
                                             
 (e) One member from the health care profession.
                                             
 (f) Two members from the building or mechanical trades who
represent labor.
                                             
 (g) One member from the community service sector.
                                             
 (h) One member from the law enforcement community.
                                             
 (i) Eight members from the general public.
                                             
 (j) Two members who shall be New Hampshire residents and who are
full-time students enrolled in one of the colleges within the community
college system. The student trustees shall be voted from the colleges
within the community college system of New Hampshire locations
proceeding in alphabetical order and shall be elected by the student
body of the campus responsible for providing the student trustee. The
student trustees shall serve a one-year term commencing June 1 of the
year for which the student was elected and ending May 31 of the next
year. In the event that a student trustee ceases for any reason to
attend the school from which the student was elected, the chancellor of
the community college system of New Hampshire shall declare a vacancy in
that student trustee position, and the next school in order shall elect
the student trustee who shall serve for the remainder of the
predecessor's term and an additional one-year term immediately
thereafter.
                                             
 (k) One member from the technology sector.
                                             
 (l)(1) One member who shall be an employee of the community
college system of New Hampshire. Such trustee position shall rotate
among the institutions within the community college system of New
Hampshire, proceeding in alphabetical order beginning with the college
that is first alphabetically. The institutions within the community
college system of New Hampshire, through an election at an
all-college/institutional forum, shall nominate a slate of 3 employees,
that shall not include members of the community college system
leadership team (SLT), whose names shall be forwarded to the governor
who shall choose one for the nomination. The employee-trustee shall
serve a 2-year term. In the event the employee-trustee is unable for any
reason to serve the entire term, the chairman of the board of trustees
shall declare a vacancy in that employee-trustee position. Upon
expiration or vacancy of such term, the next institution in order shall
nominate a slate of 3 employees, not to include a member of the SLT,
whose names shall be forwarded to the governor for consideration.
                                             
 (2) For purposes of this paragraph, "community college system
leadership team (SLT)'' means and is comprised of the chancellor, vice
chancellor, president of each community college, and the chancellor's
senior staff associated with statewide policy and operational
coordination as identified in the handbook for administrative,
managerial, professional and operating support staff exempt from the
collective bargaining process, as approved by the community college
system of New Hampshire board of trustees.
                                             
 III. (a) The terms of office for appointed and elected members,
except for the student and employee members, shall be 4 years unless
otherwise specified in this section, and shall end on June 30, except
for the student and employee members.
                                             
 (b) In cases where the terms of office of the members of the
board of trustees do not expire in successive years, the governor, with
the advice and consent of the council may, in making any appointment or
filling any vacancy to such office, appoint any person for a period less
than the full term or up to one year greater than the full term in order
to adjust the terms of each member so that terms of office of no more
than 5 members per year will expire.
                                             
 IV. At least one voting member shall be from each executive council
district.
                                             
 V. Each member, except the student member, shall hold office until a
successor is appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term only, except as provided in RSA 188-F:4, II(j) and
subparagraph III(b). The appointment of successors for the filling of
vacancies for unexpired terms shall be by appointment or election in the
same manner as the original appointment.
                                             
 VI. All board members shall be New Hampshire residents.
                                             
 VII. Except for the governor and locally elected municipal
officials, no person who holds elected public office shall serve on the
board.
                                             
 VIII. Board members shall not be eligible to participate in a vote
when the board member has recused himself or herself from participation
because he or she has a pecuniary or personal interest or other conflict
of interest.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007. 2008, 133:1, 3, eff. June
3, 2008. 2016, 299:1-3, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 188-F:5

 **188-F:5 Operation of Board of Trustees. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall elect its own chairperson and vice-chairperson
annually.
                                             
 II. The board shall choose a secretary, who shall keep a record of
proceedings, and a treasurer, who shall give a bond satisfactory to the
trustees for the faithful discharge of duties as treasurer. The trustees
may, in their discretion, require a bond for any other persons employed
by or administering the affairs of the community college system. Said
trustees shall determine the amount and sufficiency of the surety of
said treasurer's bond or any other bonds required under this section.
                                             
 III. Twelve voting members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business, but not less than 12 affirmative votes shall be
required to elect the chancellor of the community college system.
                                             
 IV. The board shall meet at such times and places as it may
determine, but shall hold regular meetings no less than once every 3
months. The chairperson shall call special meetings upon the written
request of any 5 board members or upon the chairperson's own motion.
                                             
 V. Members shall receive no compensation for their services but
shall be reimbursed for expenses reasonably incurred by them in the
performance of their duties.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007. 2008, 133:2, eff. June 3,
2008.

### Section 188-F:6

 **188-F:6 Authority of the Board of Trustees. –** The trustees shall
have the management and control of all the property and affairs of the
community college system, all of its colleges, divisions, and
departments. In addition to this authority, the trustees are authorized
to:
                                             
 I. Develop and adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and
the conduct of business and to adopt an official seal and alter it as
necessary or convenient.
                                             
 II. Oversee the administration of the community college system of
New Hampshire and its colleges, divisions, departments, and regional
academic centers, to determine the organizational structure and
operational policies and procedures for the community college system,
and to render the final decision on the closure of any college or
regional academic center.
                                             
 III. (a) Appoint and fix the compensation of a chancellor of the
community college system of New Hampshire who shall serve as the chief
executive officer of the community college system, as the community
college system's primary liaison with the general court and other
elements of state government, and as chief spokesperson for the
community college system. The chancellor shall be qualified by education
and experience and shall serve at the pleasure of the board.
                                             
 (b) Approve the nomination by the chancellor, and fix the
compensation of a vice-chancellor who shall be qualified by education
and experience and who shall serve at the pleasure of the chancellor.
                                             
 (c) Approve the nomination by the chancellor, and fix the
compensation of a president of each community college system of New
Hampshire college, who shall be the chief academic and administrative
officer of his or her institution. The president, who shall report to
the chancellor, shall be the chief executive officer of his or her
college, and shall have the authority for and be responsible for the
general administration and supervision of all operations of that
college, and shall have such other duties as the board of trustees may
determine. The president shall be qualified by education and experience
and shall serve at the pleasure of the board.
                                             
 (d) Appoint and fix the compensation and duties of such other
community college system of New Hampshire administrators as are needed
to provide a well-coordinated system of public higher education.
                                             
 (e) Employ and prescribe the duties of personnel as may be
necessary to carry out the purposes for which the community college
system of New Hampshire has been created.
                                             
 IV. Accept legacies and other gifts to or for the benefit of the
community college system.
                                             
 V. Accept any moneys accruing to the community college system and
its colleges, or moneys appropriated by or received from the United
States government or the state of New Hampshire, including federal
financial aid, and any grant moneys from state or federal governmental
agencies, public or private corporations, foundations or organizations
for the benefit and support of the community college system.
                                             
 VI. Prepare and adopt a biennial operating budget for presentation
to the governor and the general court. Each college within the community
college system of New Hampshire and the chancellor's office shall be
considered a separate division and budgetary unit. The community college
system of New Hampshire shall submit its budget in accordance with RSA
9:4-e and at the same time as state agencies. All claims to be presented
for the issuance of warrants submitted by the colleges and the system
office of the community college system of New Hampshire shall be
pre-audited by the community college system of New Hampshire, and such
certification shall be sufficient evidence for the director of the
division of accounting services to fulfill such responsibilities
relative to the debt incurred by the community college system of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 VII. Prepare and adopt a biennial capital improvements budget for
presentation to the governor and the general court.
                                             
 VIII. Receive, expend, allocate, and transfer funds within the
community college system of New Hampshire as necessary to fulfill the
purposes of the community college system. The trustees shall have no
authority over any funds appropriated to the police standards and
training council or to the McAuliffe-Shepard discovery center, which
shall not be commingled with any funds of the community college system
of New Hampshire.
                                             
 IX. Invest any funds not needed for immediate use, including any
funds held in reserve, in property and securities in which fiduciaries
in the state may legally invest funds.
                                             
 X. Establish and collect tuition, room and board, and fees, and to
set policies related to these and other charges, including fees for the
reasonable use of community college system of New Hampshire facilities.
                                             
 XI. Enter into any contracts, leases, and any other instruments or
arrangements that are necessary, incidental, or convenient to the
performance of its duties and responsibilities.
                                             
 XII. Acquire consumable supplies, materials, and services through
cash purchases, sole-source purchase orders, bids, or contracts as
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.
                                             
 XIII. Acquire by purchase, gift, lease, or rent any property, lands,
buildings, structures, facilities, or equipment necessary to fulfill the
purposes of this chapter.
                                             
 XIII-a. Enter into a contract for the sale of real property with the
prior approval of the long range capital planning and utilization
committee and governor and council, provided that the state shall retain
the right of first refusal in any proposed sale of real property. This
paragraph shall not apply to real property acquired by the community
college system of New Hampshire after the effective date of this
paragraph.
                                             
 XIV. Grant or otherwise transfer utility easements.
                                             
 XV. Authorize and enter any contracts, leases, and any other
instruments or arrangements that are necessary, incidental, or related
to the construction, maintenance, renovation, reconstruction, or other
necessary improvements of community college system of New Hampshire
buildings, structures, and facilities.
                                             
 XVI. Develop and adopt personnel policies and procedures for the
community colleges. The board of trustees shall determine the
qualifications, duties, and compensation of its employees and shall
allocate and transfer personnel within the community college system of
New Hampshire as necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.
                                             
 XVII. Appoint or identify college or program advisory committees to
advise the community colleges with respect to strategic directions,
general, professional, career, and training policies and programs and
their modification to meet the needs of the state's economy and the
changing job market.
                                             
 XVIII. Adopt principles of effective self-governance and to assess
board processes, policies, and operations in light of such principles.
                                             
 XIX. Delegate duties and responsibilities as necessary for the
efficient operation of the community college system of New Hampshire and
to do other acts or things necessary or convenient to carry out the
powers and duties set forth in this chapter.
                                             
 XX. By and with the consent of the governor and council, borrow on
the credit of the community college system of New Hampshire in
anticipation of income for the purpose of forwarding its building
program, not exceeding 
                                             $500,000 in any one fiscal year. All amounts so
obtained in any fiscal year shall be repaid from the income of the next
succeeding year.
                                             
 XXI. Enter into program and service relationships with state
departments, divisions, and other state entities through memoranda of
understanding.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007. 2009, 13:6, eff. April 17,
2009. 2010, 199:2, 4, 7, eff. Aug. 20, 2010. 2011, 35:2, eff. July 8,
2011; 199:3, eff. Aug. 19, 2011. 2016, 319:6, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 188-F:7

 **188-F:7 Employment; Benefits; Retirement System Status. –**
                                             
 I. Any changes to the conditions of employment, compensation, and
benefits of community college system of New Hampshire employees covered
by collective bargaining agreements shall be negotiated through the
collective bargaining process.
                                             
 II. The community college system of New Hampshire shall, as of the
effective date of this section, be considered an employer for the
purposes of RSA 100-A:1, IV. Full-time employees of the community
college system of New Hampshire as of the effective date of this section
shall be considered employees for the purposes of RSA 100-A:1, V.
                                             
 III. Service as an employee of the community college system of New
Hampshire shall be creditable service for purposes of RSA 100-A, RSA
21-I:29, RSA 21-I:30, RSA 21-I:30-a, RSA 21-I:30-b, and RSA 21-I:30-c.
Any community college system of New Hampshire employee who transfers,
without a break in service, to a state classified, unclassified, or
nonclassified service position shall retain and transfer all leave
accruals and seniority and be entitled to all the rights and benefits of
a permanent employee in the classified or unclassified service of the
state based on the years of creditable state service. At the time of
such a transfer, the employee shall immediately begin to accrue annual
and sick leave as granted at the time of the transfer by the receiving
agency according to the employee's continuous years worked. Any state
employee in a classified, unclassified, or nonclassified service
position who transfers, without a break in service, to the community
college system of New Hampshire shall retain and transfer all leave
accruals and seniority and be entitled to all the rights and benefits of
a permanent employee in the classified or unclassified service of the
state based on the years of creditable state service. At the time of
such a transfer, the employee shall immediately begin to accrue annual
and sick leave as granted at the time of the transfer by the receiving
agency according to the employee's continuous years worked.
                                             
 IV. Membership in the retirement system shall be optional for
positions within the community college system of New Hampshire for which
participation was optional as of June 30, 2007, and for such other
positions within the community college system of New Hampshire as may be
designated by the board of trustees.
                                             
 V. The community college system of New Hampshire shall remit to the
state on a monthly basis the cost of retiree health care benefits for
employees who have retired on or after July 1, 2011. The amount due
shall be based on current enrollment for that month and the working rate
for the calendar year. Invoices from the department of administrative
services shall contain retiree enrollment detail in regards to the
amount due. The department shall provide the community college system an
anticipated budget each biennium as part of the retiree health budget
process.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007. 2010, 199:5, eff. Aug. 20,
2010. 2015, 276:24, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 188-F:8

 **188-F:8 Use of Financial Services and Department of Administrative
Services. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2007, 361:35, II, eff. July 1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 188-F:9

 **188-F:9 The State Fund. –**
                                             
 I. For the purpose of providing a fund to be known as the community
college system of New Hampshire fund, the state treasurer shall in each
fiscal year credit to such fund all appropriations made to the community
college system.
                                             
 II. All sums so credited are appropriated to the community college
system of New Hampshire for the support and maintenance thereof,
including payments of salaries and wages to employees, current expenses,
the construction of additional buildings, the purchase of land, library
books, and periodicals, the making of necessary repairs and
replacements, the building of roads and walks, the improvement of the
grounds, the construction, extension, and maintenance of water, sewer,
and heating systems, and in general for the payment of all such expenses
incident to the management of the community college system of New
Hampshire as the trustees thereof may from time to time determine.
                                             
 III. This fund shall constitute a continuing appropriation for the
benefit of the community college system. Any amount remaining to the
credit of the system at the close of any fiscal year shall be carried
over and credited to its account for the succeeding year.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 188-F:10

 **188-F:10 Nonlapsing Account. –** Revenue received in excess of the
legislative estimates in the community college system of New Hampshire
and any net unexpended general fund appropriation balances at the end of
the fiscal year shall be placed in a nonlapsing account. Funds in this
account shall be considered reserves.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 188-F:11

 **188-F:11 Report. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department of education and the
chancellor of the community college system of New Hampshire shall
annually issue a joint report on the proposed use and distribution of
federal vocational funds. Such report shall be completed by October 15
of each year and a copy shall be delivered to the chairpersons of the
house and senate education committees, the speaker of the house of
representatives, the president of the senate, the governor, the house
clerk, the senate clerk, and the state library.
                                             
 II. The chancellor and the chairperson of the board of trustees of
the community college system of New Hampshire shall issue a report
annually which shall include updates on ongoing upgrades to the
information technology systems used by the community college system of
New Hampshire and an assessment of the overall operation of the
community college system of New Hampshire including financial status,
enrollment data, and program administration. Such report shall be
completed by October 15 of each year. A copy of this report shall be
delivered to the chairmen of the house education committee and senate
education committee, the speaker of the house of representatives,
president of the senate, the governor, the senate clerk, the house
clerk, and the state library.
                                             
 III. Each year the chancellor of the community college system of New
Hampshire, as well as one representative from the board of trustees and
the president of each institution shall appear before the house finance
committee and the senate finance committee to review the system's
programs, cost analysis, revenue projections, and any other information
detailed in the written report.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007. 2009, 148:2, eff. June 30,
2009.

### Section 188-F:12

 **188-F:12 Tax Exemption. –** The property of the community college
system of New Hampshire is exempt from taxation as provided in RSA
72:23.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 188-F:13

 **188-F:13 Names of the Colleges. –** The names of the respective
colleges of the community college system of New Hampshire shall be
established, and may be changed, upon approval by the board of trustees
and approval by the governor and council.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 188-F:14

 **188-F:14 Accreditation. –** The community college system of New
Hampshire colleges are authorized to seek accreditation and maintain
membership in the regional accrediting association to satisfy the
requirements necessary to achieve and maintain regional accreditation
and to meet the requirements necessary for federal aid. Each individual
program of study offered shall meet all of the requirements for
professional accreditation or licensing, or both, of the particular
specialty as appropriate.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 188-F:15

 **188-F:15 Tuition Waived. –**
                                             
 I. If a person is domiciled in this state while serving in or with
the armed forces of the United States and is, after February 28, 1961,
reported or listed as missing, or missing in action, or interned in a
neutral country, or beleaguered, besieged, or captured by the enemy
during the Southeast Asian conflict, any child of such person, enrolled
after March 23, 1972, in a community college system of New Hampshire
institution shall, so long as said person is so reported, listed,
interned, beleaguered, besieged, or captured, not be required to pay
tuition for attendance at such school. Any person entitled to free
tuition under this section shall apply to the community college system
of New Hampshire institution he or she wishes to attend which may
require such proof as deemed necessary in order for a person to qualify
for free tuition under this section.
                                             
 II. The board of trustees shall have the authority to allow
full-time employees who have one year of previous service at the
community college system, free tuition, and to the dependents of such
employees a 50 percent discount of tuition, at the community college
system of New Hampshire colleges.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 188-F:16

 **188-F:16 Tuition Waived for Children of Certain Firefighters and
Police Officers. –**
                                             
 I. A person who is a New Hampshire resident, who is under 25 years
of age, and who enrolls in a community college system of New Hampshire
institution shall not be required to pay tuition for attendance at such
school if he or she is the child of a firefighter or police officer who
died while in performance of his or her duties and whose death was found
to be compensable under RSA 281-A.
                                             
 II. Any person entitled to free tuition under this section shall
apply to the community college system of New Hampshire institution he or
she wishes to attend, which may require such proof as deemed necessary
in order for a person to qualify for free tuition under this section.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 188-F:16-a

 **188-F:16-a Waiver of Residency Requirement for In-State Tuition
For Veterans. –** A veteran of the armed forces who establishes a
residence in New Hampshire shall immediately after establishing such
residence be eligible for in-state tuition rates when attending any
institution in the community college system of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 2014, 121:2, eff. June 16, 2014.

### Section 188-F:17

 **188-F:17 Federal Funds. –** The state board of education, acting
as the state board for technical education, shall be the primary
recipient of federal funds provided under the Carl D. Perkins Vocational
Education Act of 1984. The state board shall, each year, provide the
community college system of New Hampshire with funds available under the
Titles I-IV of the act and subsequent amendments to the act. The board
of trustees of the community college system of New Hampshire shall
jointly plan with the department of education for the expenditure of
funds in the New Hampshire state plan for vocational education. The
chancellor of the community college system of New Hampshire and the
commissioner of education shall cooperate in the development of
applications for such funds.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 188-F:18

 **188-F:18 Early Childhood Laboratory School Fund. –** There is
established the early childhood laboratory school fund which shall be
administered by the board of trustees of the community college system.
Moneys received from private donations or from federal or other sources
shall be deposited into the fund. The purpose of the fund is to provide
for payment of the cost of bonds and notes on the early childhood
laboratory school at any community college system of New Hampshire
institution, and to enhance academic programs in parent education. The
fund shall be continually appropriated to the community college system
of New Hampshire and shall be nonlapsing.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 188-F:19

 **188-F:19 Liability Limited. –** Any person who, or any firm or
corporation which donates the use of its premises, personnel or
equipment to the community college system of New Hampshire to assist it
in its training courses shall be immune from civil liability in any
action brought on the basis of any act or omission resulting in damage
or injury arising out of the use by the community college system of New
Hampshire of the equipment, facilities, or services to any person if:
                                             
 I. The person, firm or corporation was acting pursuant to a prior
written request or acceptance by the chancellor of the community college
system of New Hampshire; and
                                             
 II. The damage or injury was not caused by willful, wanton or
grossly negligent misconduct by the person, firm, or corporation.

**Source.** 2007, 361:2, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 188-F:20

 **188-F:20 Motor Vehicle Regulations. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008, 133:4,
eff. June 3, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 188-F:21

 **188-F:21 Advice and Supervision. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2007, 361:35, III,
eff. July 1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 188-F:21-a

 **188-F:21-a Freedom of Association. –** No institution within the
community college system of New Hampshire which accepts state funds
shall prohibit, as a condition of admission or continued enrollment, any
student from becoming a member of any group or organization, nor shall
an institution take disciplinary action against a student based solely
on the student's membership in a group or organization.

**Source.** 2012, 69:2, eff. July 14, 2012.

Police Standards and Training Council
-------------------------------------

### Section 188-F:22

 **188-F:22 Findings and Policy. –** The legislature finds that the
administration of criminal justice is of statewide concern; that police
and corrections work are important to the health, safety, and welfare of
the people of this state; that police and corrections work are of such a
nature as to require education and training of a professional character;
and that it is in the public interest that such education and training
be made available to persons who seek to become police and corrections
officers, persons who are serving as police and corrections officers in
a temporary or probationary capacity, and persons already in regular
service.

**Source.** 1985, 152:1. 1993, 331:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 188-F:23

 **188-F:23 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Police officer'' means any appointed or elected employee of a
police department or any appointed employee of a sheriff's department,
the fish and game department, the department of safety, or any special
agent appointed by the state liquor commission which is administered by
the state or any of its political subdivisions and who is responsible
for the prevention, detection or prosecution of crime or the enforcement
of the penal, traffic, highway, boating, liquor, or bingo and lucky 7
laws of this state or any of its political subdivisions.
                                             
 I-a. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. "Council'' means the police standards and training council.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. "State corrections officer'' means any sworn classified employee
of the New Hampshire department of corrections who is responsible for
the physical custody and security of inmates at a state correctional
institution and is authorized by law to use force to prevent escapes
from such institution.
                                             
 V. "State probation-parole officer'' means any sworn employee of the
New Hampshire department of corrections who is responsible for the
supervision of probationers and parolees, who has an assigned caseload,
and who has the authority to arrest for violations of the rules of
probations or parole.

**Source.** 1985, 152:1; 307:2; 326:1. 1986, 67:16. 1987, 292:9, 13, 14.
1989, 303:1. 1993, 331:2. 1995, 182:29. 1996, 13:1. 2007, 361:35, IV,
eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 188-F:24

 **188-F:24 Police Standards and Training Council. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a police standards and training council. It
shall consist of 14 members as follows:
                                             
 (a) Two members shall be chiefs of police in towns;
                                             
 (b) Two members shall be chiefs of police in cities;
                                             
 (c) Two members shall be county sheriffs;
                                             
 (d) Two members shall be judges of courts with criminal
jurisdiction;
                                             
 (e) The chancellor of the community college system of New
Hampshire, or designee;
                                             
 (f) The director of the division of state police, or designee;
                                             
 (g) The attorney general, or designee;
                                             
 (h) The commissioner of the department of corrections, or
designee; and
                                             
 (i) Two public members, neither of whom shall be a certified
police officer, lawyer, or judge, and neither of whom shall have a
spouse, sibling, or parent, by birth, adoption, or marriage, who is a
certified police officer, lawyer, or judge.
                                             
 II. Except for the chancellor of the community college system of New
Hampshire or designee, the attorney general or designee, the director of
the division of state police or designee, and the commissioner of the
department of corrections or designee, who shall serve during their
continuance in office, members of the council shall be appointed by the
governor for terms of 2 years. No member shall serve beyond the time
that the office or employment which qualified such member for
appointment. Any vacancy on the council shall be filled for the
unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment is held.
Persons filling vacancies shall be appointed to serve out the unexpired
term and shall have the same qualifications for office as the member
whose vacancy they are filling.
                                             
 III. The governor shall designate a member to be the chairperson of
the council, and the council shall elect annually its vice chairperson
from among the members of the council.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding the provisions of any statute, ordinance, local
law, or charter provision to the contrary and except as otherwise
provided in subparagraph I(i) regarding qualification of public members,
membership on the council shall not disqualify any member from holding
any other public office or employment, or cause the forfeiture of any
office or employment.
                                             
 V. Members of the council shall serve without compensation, but
shall be entitled to receive reimbursement for any actual expenses
incurred as a necessary incident to such service.
                                             
 VI. The council shall hold no fewer than 4 regular meetings a year.
The chairperson shall fix the times and places of meetings, either on
the chairperson's own motion or upon written request of any 5 members of
the council.
                                             
 VII. The council shall report annually to the governor and executive
council on its activities, and may make such other reports as it deems
desirable.

**Source.** 1985, 152:1. 1989, 303:1. 1993, 331:3. 1995, 133:5, 6;
182:29. 1998, 272:15. 2007, 361:20, 21, eff. July 17, 2007. 2014, 38:1,
2, eff. July 26, 2014.

### Section 188-F:25

 **188-F:25 Agency Attached. –** The police standards and training
council is an executive branch council and is not a body corporate and
politic. The police standards and training council shall be
administratively attached to the community college system of New
Hampshire subject to the provisions prescribed by RSA 21-G:10. The
police standards and training council and the director and employees
hired by the director performing the functions required by RSA 188-F:22
through RSA 188-F:32-d shall be subject to RSA 7:8, RSA 541-B, and RSA
99-D, and shall be subject to attorney general review of contracts
subject to governor and council review.

**Source.** 1985, 152:1. 1989, 303:1. 1995, 182:29. 1998, 272:16. 2007,
361:22, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 188-F:26

 **188-F:26 Powers. –** In addition to other powers given to the
council by this subdivision, it may:
                                             
 I. Adopt rules for the administration of this subdivision in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 541-A.
                                             
 II. Require submission of reports and information from law
enforcement and corrections agencies within this state that may be
pertinent to the effective functioning of the council.
                                             
 II-a. For the purposes of a disciplinary hearing, subpoena and
examine witnesses under oath, take oaths or affirmations, and reduce to
writing testimony given at any hearing. Any person whose rights or
privileges may be affected at such a disciplinary hearing may appear
with witnesses and be represented by counsel.
                                             
 III. Establish minimum educational and training standards for
employment as a police officer, state corrections officer, or state
probation-parole officer either in permanent positions or in temporary
or probationary status.
                                             
 III-a. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]


                                             [Paragraph IV effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph IV
set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 IV. Certify persons as being qualified under the provisions of this
subdivision to be police officers, state corrections officers, or state
probation-parole officers, and establish rules under RSA 541-A for the
suspension or revocation of the certification of such persons in the
case of egregious misconduct or failure to comply with council
standards.


                                             [Paragraph IV effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph IV set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 IV. Certify persons as being qualified under the provisions of this
subdivision to be police officers, state corrections officers, state
probation-parole officers, or certified border patrol agents for the
purposes of RSA 594:26, and establish rules under RSA 541-A for the
suspension or revocation of the certification of such persons in the
case of egregious misconduct or failure to comply with council
standards.
                                             
 V. Establish entrance, student conduct, and curriculum requirements
for preparatory, in-service, and advanced courses and programs for
schools operated by or for the state or its political subdivisions for
the specific purpose of training police, state corrections, or state
probation-parole recruits or officers or tuition students at such
programs.
                                             
 VI. Consult and cooperate with counties, municipalities, agencies of
this state, other governmental agencies, and with universities,
colleges, junior colleges, and other institutions concerning the
development of police and corrections training schools and programs or
courses of instruction, and the development of standards and methodology
for the voluntary accreditation of police departments in the state.
                                             
 VI-a. Offer the educational material and, as appropriate, training
relative to the human immunodeficiency virus and related issues prepared
and developed pursuant to RSA 141-F:3, II.
                                             
 VII. Establish, maintain, certify, or approve institutions and
facilities for training police officers, state corrections officers, or
state probation-parole officers, and recruits for such positions.
                                             
 VIII. Make or cause to be made studies of any aspect of police or
corrections education and training or recruitment.
                                             
 VIII-a. Prepare and make available, upon request, model policies and
procedures to assist law enforcement agencies in preparation of written
policies.
                                             
 VIII-b. Establish and maintain a voluntary certification program for
police canines and canine handlers.
                                             
 IX. Make recommendations concerning any matter within its purview
pursuant to this subdivision.
                                             
 X. Make such investigations as may be necessary to determine whether
governmental units are complying with the provisions of this
subdivision.
                                             
 XI. Adopt and amend bylaws, consistent with law, for its internal
management and control.
                                             
 XII. Enter into contracts or do such things as may be necessary and
incidental to the administration of its authority pursuant to this
subdivision.
                                             
 XIII. Accept in the name of the state any and all donations or
grants, both real and personal, from any governmental unit or public
agency, or from any institution, person, firm, or corporation. The
council shall receive, utilize, and dispose of all donations and grants
subject to budgetary provisions and according to the rules of the
council and consistent with the purposes or conditions of the donation
or grant. The receipt of a donation or grant shall be noted in the
annual report of the council. The report shall identify the donor, the
nature of the donation or grant, and the condition of the donation or
grant, if any. Any moneys received by the council pursuant to this
paragraph shall be deposited in the state treasury to the account of the
council and shall not lapse.
                                             
 XIV. Nominate and appoint a director of police standards and
training for a term of 4 years who shall report to the police standards
and training council, and who shall be an unclassified employee, and
whose salary shall be established by RSA 94:1-a. All other employees
shall be hired by the director and shall be classified employees. The
director shall have practical and academic knowledge in the field of law
enforcement, including substantial administrative experience and a
degree or degrees in criminology, police administration, or other
similar field or any equivalent combination of education and
experience.
                                             
 XIV-a. The council may delegate to the director of police standards
and training any powers and duties enumerated in this subdivision.
                                             
 XV. The director may grant authority to any certified full-time
police officer employed by the council as assistant director or law
enforcement training specialist, to enforce the provisions of this
subdivision and any rules adopted under this subdivision, and cooperate
and exchange information with any local, state, or federal law
enforcement agency relative to the qualification and moral fitness of
applicants for employment or continued employment as police officers or
corrections officers.
                                             
 XVI. The council may appoint, after consultation with the
commissioner of corrections, a corrections advisory committee from a
list of nominees submitted by the director. The members shall serve
without compensation at the pleasure of the council and shall consist of
one representative of the management of each adult correctional facility
operated by the department of corrections, one representative each from
prison industries, the secure psychiatric unit, and probation-parole,
one medical professional from within the correctional system, one state
corrections officer chosen by the New Hampshire state employees'
association, and one representative of a county correctional institution
chosen by the New Hampshire Association of Counties. The committee shall
meet not less than twice in each fiscal year at the call of the
director, and shall advise the council as requested on issues coming
before it concerning corrections standards and training.
                                             
 XVII. Adopt rules and establish fees to implement the provisions of
the Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act of 2004, 18 U.S.C. section
926C(d)(2)(B) in accordance with RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1985, 152:1. 1988, 262:5. 1993, 331:4, 5. 1994, 172:1. 1995,
133:7; 155:6, 7, 9; 182:27. 1996, 13:2, 3. 1998, 108:1; 272:17. 2003,
59:1. 2006, 248:1. 2007, 361:23, 24, eff. July 17, 2007. 2016, 278:8,
eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 188-F:27

 **188-F:27 Education and Training Required. –**
                                             
 I. At the earliest practical time, the council shall provide by rule
that after one year from the effective date of the rule no person shall
be appointed as a police officer, state corrections officer, or state
probation-parole officer, except on a temporary or probationary basis,
unless such person has satisfactorily completed a preparatory program of
police, corrections, or probation-parole training appropriate to such
person's position at a school approved by the council. No such officer
who lacks the educational and training qualifications required by this
section may have the temporary or probationary employment extended
beyond 2 years.
                                             
 II. Every elected police officer shall be required to satisfactorily
complete a preparatory program of police training at a school approved
by the council. Any elected officer who has not complied with the
educational and training requirements of this paragraph within 6 months
after election shall be removed from office by the governing body of the
governmental unit by which such officer was elected; provided, however,
that the council may, for such reasons as it may specify in its rules,
grant an extension of this time limit not to exceed an additional 6
months. A governing body which has removed an elected police officer
from office under the provisions of this paragraph shall appoint a
police officer to fill the vacant office. The appointed police officer
shall continue to hold office until the elected officer who was removed
has complied with the educational and training requirements of this
paragraph or until an election is held, whichever occurs first. If any
police officer who has failed to comply with the educational and
training requirements of this paragraph is reelected, such officer shall
not take office without permission of the council. If a noncomplying
police officer who has not obtained the permission of the council to
take office is reelected, the governing body of the governmental unit by
which such officer was elected shall appoint a police officer to fill
the vacant office. The appointed police officer shall continue to hold
office until the elected officer has complied with the educational and
training requirements of this paragraph or until an election is held,
whichever occurs first.
                                             
 III. The council, by rules adopted under RSA 541-A, shall establish
the standards for physical and mental fitness under paragraphs
III-a-III-h and shall fix other qualifications for the appointment of
police officers, state corrections officers, and probation-parole
officers, including minimum age, physical and mental standards,
citizenship, good moral character, experience, and other such matters as
relate to the competence and reliability of persons to assume and
discharge the responsibilities of their offices. The council shall
prescribe the means for presenting evidence of the fulfillment of these
requirements.
                                             
 III-a. At the earliest practicable time, the police standards and
training council shall require that all uncertified part-time and
full-time police officers, state corrections officers, and
probation-parole officers, prior to assuming their duties, successfully
pass a medical examination including a drug screening administered under
the direction of a licensed physician according to protocols adopted by
the council. Such examination, when conducted, shall be valid for a
period of one year for purposes of application for employment.
                                             
 III-b. At the earliest practical time, the police standards and
training council shall require that all uncertified part-time and
full-time police officers, state corrections officers, and
probation-parole officers, as a condition of admission to a basic or
reciprocal certification training program successfully pass a physical
fitness performance test administered according to standards adopted by
the council.
                                             
 III-c. No later than January 1, 1999, the police standards and
training council shall require that all uncertified part-time and
full-time police officers, state corrections officers, and
probation-parole officers, prior to assuming their duties, successfully
pass a psychological screening test battery administered under the
direction of a licensed psychologist or psychiatrist according to
protocols adopted by the council and designed to detect behavioral
traits that could adversely affect the person's ability to perform the
essential functions of a law enforcement officer. Such an examination
shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of administration
for purposes of application for such employment.
                                             
 III-d. Beginning January 1, 2001, the police standards and training
council shall require that all certified police officers, state
corrections officers, and probation-parole officers, hired after that
date, as a condition of continued certification and employment furnish
the council every 3 years with a certificate from a licensed physician,
physician's assistant, or registered nurse practitioner who has
conducted a medical examination of the officer according to protocols
adopted by the council, certifying that in the opinion of the examiner
the officer is physically capable of participating in the council's
physical fitness test.
                                             
 III-e. Any officer who is unable to meet the medical requirements of
paragraph III-d may request an additional medical examination by a
physician chosen by the council. If the officer is still unable to meet
the standards, such officer's certification shall be placed in a
probationary status for a period of up to 2 years, during which time the
officer may request re-examination at any time. If following the 2-year
period the officer is still unable to meet the standards, the officer's
certification shall be suspended until such time as such officer obtains
the medical certification required in paragraph III-d.
                                             
 III-f. Beginning January 1, 2001, the police standards and training
council shall require that all certified police officers, state
corrections officers, and probation-parole officers, hired after that
date, as a condition of continued certification and employment every 3
years pass a physical fitness performance test administered by the
hiring authority or the council, according to protocols adopted by the
council.
                                             
 III-g. Any officer who is unable to meet the physical fitness
performance requirements of paragraph III-f may request an additional
physical fitness performance test administered by the council. If the
officer is still unable to meet the standards, such officer's
certification shall be placed in a probationary status for a period of
up to 2 years, during which time the officer may request re-examination
at any time. If, following the 2-year period, the officer is still
unable to meet the standards, the officer's certification shall be
suspended until such time as such officer is able to pass the physical
performance test.
                                             
 III-h. In any case where the council has reasonable grounds to doubt
that the medical examination performed as required in paragraph III-d
was performed in accordance with the appropriate protocols, the council
may require the officer to submit to a separate examination by a
physician selected by the council, at the council's expense.
                                             
 III-i. A licensed physician, psychiatrist, psychologist, or person
acting under the licensee's supervision, whose examination administered
under this chapter results in an employment decision adverse to a
police, corrections, or probation-parole officer shall be immune from
suit resulting from such examination or decision, providing such
examination is conducted in good faith, not in a wanton or reckless
manner.
                                             
 III-j. To the extent required to comply with federal or state law,
the council may grant a waiver, with respect to employment at a specific
agency, to an officer who cannot meet the standards in paragraphs
III-d-III-g.
                                             
 III-k. Nothing in this section shall prevent individual hiring
agencies from adopting physical fitness programs for their officers that
are more stringent or frequent than those required in this section.
                                             
 III-*l.* Except as provided in paragraph III-h and notwithstanding
other provisions of law to the contrary, a hiring authority may assess a
testing fee to cover all or part of the cost of any medical or
psychological examination in cases where the person has been given a
conditional offer of employment. A hiring authority may also make
repayment of a testing fee part of any training or hiring contract that
establishes a minimum term of employment for such an officer.
                                             
 IV. The council shall issue a certificate evidencing satisfaction of
the requirements of paragraphs I, II, and III to any applicant who
presents such evidence as may be required by its rules of satisfactory
completion of a program or course of instruction in another jurisdiction
equivalent in content and quality to that required by the council for
approved police, corrections, or probation-parole, as appropriate,
education and training programs in this state.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VII. Any special agent of the state liquor commission who has the
power to enforce the criminal laws under RSA title XIII and rules of the
state liquor commission and who was serving under a permanent
appointment prior to August 13, 1985, shall not be required to meet the
requirements of paragraphs I and III; however, any special agent
referred to in this paragraph shall complete such limited programs as
may be prescribed by rule adopted under RSA 541-A by the police
standards and training council under this section within one year of the
date the programs are required. Should any special agent exempted from
the requirements of paragraphs I and III of this section by this
paragraph terminate employment with the state liquor commission and be
hired as a police officer by another police department of the state or a
political subdivision thereof, the special agent's certification shall
lapse and may be reinstated upon completion of such necessary additional
training courses as the police standards and training council may
prescribe by rule adopted under RSA 541-A.
                                             
 VIII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1985, 152:1. 1986, 67:17; 140:5. 1987, 292:10, 14, II. 1993,
331:6, 7. 1995, 133:8, 9. 1996, 13:4, 5. 1997, 138:2, 3. 1998, 272:18.
2004, 97:8, eff. July 10, 2004; 257:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2005. 2008, 25:1,
eff. July 11, 2008. 2012, 264:1, III, IV, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 188-F:28

 **188-F:28 Additional Training of Peace Officers. –** The director
of the police standards and training council shall develop appropriate
training programs and methods to instruct peace officers in the proper
techniques for dealing with intoxicated and incapacitated persons and to
encourage the maximum utilization by peace officers of detoxification
facilities, alcohol counselors, and licensed general hospitals for such
purposes.

**Source.** 1985, 152:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 188-F:28-a

 **188-F:28-a Alzheimer's Disease and Other Related Dementia
Training. –** The director of the police standards and training council
shall provide education and training to the law enforcement community on
Alzheimer's disease and other related dementia. The director may use the
educational program developed in conjunction with the department of
health and human services under RSA 126-A:5, XXVII and may include such
additional components as may be appropriate to effectively assist law
enforcement officers in responding to incidents involving persons with
Alzheimer's disease and other related dementia.

**Source.** 2014, 67:3, eff. May 27, 2014.

### Section 188-F:29

 **188-F:29 Reimbursement of Expenses. –** The council may reimburse
political subdivisions or the state for, or may pay for a portion of,
the expenses incurred by the officers in attendance at police training
programs conducted or approved by the council.

**Source.** 1985, 152:1, eff. July 1, 1985.

### Section 188-F:30

 **188-F:30 Police Standards and Training Council Training Fund. –**

                                             [Repealed 2016, 319:5, I, eff. July 1, 2016.
                                             ]

### Section 188-F:31

 **188-F:31 Penalty Assessment; Waiver of Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Every court shall levy a penalty assessment of 
                                             $2 or 24 percent,
whichever is greater, on each fine or penalty imposed by the court for a
criminal offense, including any fine or penalty for a violation of RSA
title XXI or any municipal ordinance, except for a violation of a
municipal ordinance relating to motor vehicles unlawfully left or
parked. Notwithstanding any law or rule to the contrary, the penalty
assessment shall be levied in addition to the amount of the fine or
penalty imposed by the court.
                                             
 II. If multiple offenses are involved, the penalty assessment shall
be imposed on the total fine.
                                             
 III. If a fine is suspended in whole or in part, the penalty
assessment shall be reduced in proportion to the suspension.
                                             
 IV. The clerk of each court shall collect all penalty assessments
and shall transmit the amount collected under paragraphs I-III to the
state treasurer for deposit in the following funds. The state treasurer
shall deposit 66.66 percent of the amount collected in the state general
fund, 16.67 percent of the amount collected in the victims' assistance
fund, and 16.67 percent of the amount collected in the judicial branch
information technology fund.
                                             
 V. If it is determined by a court that the payment of all or any
part of a penalty assessment would work a hardship on the person
convicted or on such person's immediate family, the court may suspend
the payment of all or any part of the assessment.

**Source.** 1985, 152:1. 1988, 196:1, 2. 1989, 408:60, 61, 83, 84. 1990,
3:69, 70. 1992, 220:1, 2, 3, 4. 1995, 133:10. 1999, 261:3. 2005,
177:156. 2006, 259:29. 2007, 263:66, eff. June 29, 2007. 2009, 144:109,
110, eff. July 1, 2009. 2011, 224:201, eff. July 1, 2011. 2015, 276:156,
eff. July 1, 2015. 2016, 319:7, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 188-F:32

 **188-F:32 Attendance by Persons Other Than Police Officers. –**
Persons who are not police officers as defined by RSA 188-F:23 may
attend courses given by the police standards and training council under
such conditions and for such tuition as may be established by the
council. Certain courses may be closed to persons who are not police
officers on recommendation of the director and approval by the council.

**Source.** 1985, 152:1. 1989, 303:1. 1995, 182:29. 1998, 272:19. 2007,
361:25, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 188-F:32-a

 **188-F:32-a Tuition Students. –**
                                             
 I. The council with approval of the board of trustees of the
department may set tuition, selection procedures and fees for acceptance
of tuition students at its programs and for the use of its facilities.
Such fees shall be credited with the approval of the department of
administrative services, to the operating accounts of the council to
offset additional expenditures necessitated by the acceptance of the
additional students.
                                             
 II. Tuition students at police and corrections academy programs
shall be required to comply with background investigation requirements
no less stringent than for persons hired as police or corrections
officers by units of government.
                                             
 III. Certain courses may be closed to persons who are not police or
corrections officers on recommendation by the director and approval by
the council and the board of trustees.

**Source.** 1989, 260:2. 1995, 155:13. 1998, 272:20, 21, eff. Jan. 1,
1999. 2016, 319:8, eff. July 1, 2016.

### Section 188-F:32-b

 **188-F:32-b Transfers of Unappropriated Funds. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2013,
144:68, eff. June 30, 2013.
                                             ]

### Section 188-F:32-c

 **188-F:32-c Volunteers; Liability Limited. –**
                                             
 I. Any volunteer of a nonprofit organization or government entity
assisting the council in its training programs shall be immune from
civil liability in any action brought on the basis of any act or
omission resulting in damage or injury to any person if:
                                             
 (a) The volunteer had prior written approval from the
organization to act on behalf of the organization; and
                                             
 (b) The volunteer was acting in good faith and within the scope
of the volunteer's official functions and duties with the organization;
and
                                             
 (c) The damage or injury was not caused by willful, wanton, or
grossly negligent misconduct by the volunteer.
                                             
 II. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Damage or injury'' includes physical, nonphysical, economic
and noneconomic damage.
                                             
 (b) "Nonprofit organization'' shall include, but not be limited
to, a not for profit organization, corporation, community chest, fund or
foundation, and an organization exempt from taxation under section
501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 organized or incorporated in
this state or having a principal place of business in this state.

**Source.** 1989, 260:2. 1995, 133:11, eff. July 1, 1995.

### Section 188-F:32-d

 **188-F:32-d Firearms Instructors; Liability Limited. –** Members of
the police standards and training council, council employees, or persons
currently certified as firearms instructors by the council pursuant to
Pol 404.05, having certified a person as being proficient with their
weapons and meeting the standards established in Pol 404.03 to qualify
under the provisions of 18 U.S.C. section 926C(d)(2)(B), shall be immune
from liability for any action taken by such person subsequent to their
certification, unless the employee or firearms instructor knew that the
person certified was not qualified under 18 U.S.C. section 926C(d)(2)(B)
to have received such certification.

**Source.** 2006, 248:2, eff. Aug. 4, 2006.

New Hampshire Regional Community-Technical Institute
----------------------------------------------------

### Section 188-F:33

 **188-F:33 Institute Security Force. –** The president of the New
Hampshire regional community-technical institute is authorized to
organize a security force for the purpose of patrolling the institute's
buildings, roads, and grounds and providing for general security at the
institute. The campus security force shall be under the immediate
control of the president of the institute or designee.

**Source.** 1987, 53:1. 1995, 133:12; 182:28, eff. Aug. 4, 1995.

### Section 188-F:34

 **188-F:34 Authority. –** All security officers of the campus
security force shall have the power to detain any person who they have
reasonable grounds to believe has committed any offense under the laws
of the state, on the premises of the New Hampshire regional
community-technical institute as long as necessary to surrender the
person to a peace officer, provided such detention is accomplished in a
reasonable manner.

**Source.** 1987, 53:1. 1995, 182:30, eff. Aug. 4, 1995.

### Section 188-F:35

 **188-F:35 Training. –**
                                             
 I. The president of the New Hampshire regional community-technical
institute shall require that all employees hired as campus security
officers shall complete a program of police training meeting standards
as established by the New Hampshire police standards and training
council pursuant to RSA 188-F:26 and as appropriate to such officers'
exercise of limited police powers. Such program shall be one that is
prescribed for part-time police officers.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1987, 53:1. 1995, 182:30, eff. Aug. 4, 1995. 2012, 264:1, V,
eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 188-F:36

 **188-F:36 Retirement Program. –** All employees hired as security
officers shall be group I members of the New Hampshire retirement
system.

**Source.** 1987, 53:1, eff. July 1, 1987.

Postsecondary Technical Education Study Committee
-------------------------------------------------

### Section 188-F:37-41

 **188-F:37 to 188-F:41 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 10:16, VI,
April 12, 1995.
                                             ]

Equipment Challenge Grant Program
---------------------------------

### Section 188-F:42-48

 **188-F:42 to 188-F:48 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2000, 99:1, eff.
June 26, 2000.
                                             ]

Job Training Program for Economic Growth
----------------------------------------

### Section 188-F:49-56

 **188-F:49 to 188-F:56 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2007, 204:4, eff.
July 1, 2007.
                                             ]

Christa McAuliffe Planetarium Commission
----------------------------------------

### Section 188-F:57-67

 **188-F:57 to 188-F:67 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2001, 136:4, eff.
July 1, 2001.
                                             ]
