---
title: 'CHAPTER 188-G PRIVATE POSTSECONDARY CAREER SCHOOLS'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 188-G
                                             
PRIVATE POSTSECONDARY CAREER SCHOOLS
------------------------------------

### Section 188-G:1

 **188-G:1 Definitions; Exclusions. –**
                                             
 I. In this chapter:
                                             
 (a) "Alternative delivery'' means a mode of instruction which
does not involve face-to-face instruction between instructor and student
in the same geographic location. This mode of instruction shall include
Internet, televised, video, telephonic, and correspondence media.
                                             
 (b) "Conference'' or "seminar'' means a scheduled meeting of 2 or
more persons for discussing matters of common concern and where, if
training or education is offered, it shall be incidental to the purpose
of the conference.
                                             
 (c) "Commission'' means the higher education commission
established in RSA 21-N:8-a, II.
                                             
 (d) "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
education.
                                             
 (e) "Director'' means the director of the division of higher
education in the department of education.
                                             
 (f) "Division'' means the department of education, division of
higher education.
                                             
 (g) "Entity'' means any individual, firm, partnership,
association, company, corporation, organization, trust, school, or other
legal entity or combination of these entities.
                                             
 (h) "Physical presence'' means a physical location for
instructional purposes, maintaining an administrative office, including
a mailing address or phone number, or face-to-face advising, mentoring,
supervision, testing, or instruction taking place in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (i) "Private postsecondary career school'' means any for-profit
or nonprofit postsecondary career entity maintaining a physical presence
in this state providing education or training for tuition or a fee that
enhances a person's occupational skills, or provides continuing
education or certification, or fulfills a training or education
requirement in one's employment, career, trade, profession, or
occupation. Schools that offer resident or nonresident programs,
including programs using modes of alternative delivery, beyond the
secondary school level to an entity shall be included in this definition
regardless of the fact that the school's tuition and fees from education
and training programs constitute only a part of the school's revenue.
                                             
 (j) "Workshop'' means a brief, intensive education or training
program that focuses on developing techniques and skills in a particular
area.
                                             
 II. In this chapter, "private postsecondary career school'' shall
not include:
                                             
 (a) Schools authorized to grant degrees pursuant to RSA 292.
                                             
 (b) Schools specifically licensed as an education or training
school by a state agency other than the commission.
                                             
 (c) Schools operated by a business organization exclusively for
the training of that business' own employees and at no charge to its
employees.
                                             
 (d) Schools offering noncredit courses exclusively for
avocational purposes.
                                             
 (e) Schools established, operated, and governed by the state of
New Hampshire or any of its political subdivisions, or any other state
or its political subdivisions.
                                             
 (f) Noncredit courses or programs sponsored by recognized trade,
business, or professional organizations solely for the instruction of
their members that do not prepare or qualify individuals for employment
in any occupation or trade.
                                             
 (g) Schools that offer programs and courses exclusively on
federal military installations.
                                             
 (h) Entities that offer training at seminars, workshops, or
conferences, if:
                                             
 (1) Any training or education offered is incidental to the
purpose of the seminar, workshop, or conference; and
                                             
 (2) The attendee receiving the training is not awarded any
form of a certificate, diploma, or credit including continuing education
units for having received the training.
                                             
 (i) An entity training students under 14 C.F.R. part 91 or 14
C.F.R. part 141, or receiving flight or ground instruction required by
the Federal Aviation Administration.
                                             
 (j) Entities that license software, the content of which is
focused on training or education, if the entity:
                                             
 (1) Is primarily engaged in the business of licensing
software;
                                             
 (2) Licenses its software primarily to other legal entities,
and not directly to an end user or individual student;
                                             
 (3) Does not confer degrees, diplomas, continuing education
units, or any other form of credit in connection with the software it
licenses;
                                             
 (4) Is not accredited and does not seek accreditation in
connection with the software it licenses or the content it offers; and
                                             
 (5) Does not offer an admissions process, financial aid,
career advice, or job placement in connection with the software it
licenses.
                                             
 (k) Entities offering only training courses at a total cost,
including tuition and all other fees and charges, of not more than 
                                             $800
per course for which no payment, including a deposit, is required or
collected prior to the first day of the course. This subparagraph shall
not apply to entities that use alternative delivery methods.


                                             [Paragraph II(l) effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]


                                             
 (l) Government entities offering training in public safety
related occupations including but not limited to the division of fire
standards and training and emergency medical services, the division of
fire safety, and the police standards and training council.

**Source.** 2011, 224:150, eff. July 1, 2011. 2014, 132:3, eff. June 16,
2014. 2016, 149:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2017.

### Section 188-G:2

 **188-G:2 Licenses and Fees. –**
                                             
 I. Prior to registering or renewing a business or trade name, or
soliciting students for enrollment, an entity maintaining a physical
presence in this state shall be reviewed by the commission to determine
if the entity requires a license. The commission shall establish
procedures to accomplish this review.
                                             
 II. A private postsecondary career school maintaining a physical
presence in this state shall register to obtain a license or license
renewal from the commission. The license shall be issued or renewed
pursuant to rules, adopted under RSA 541-A, by the commission. The rules
shall establish minimum criteria, including but not limited to,
financial stability, educational program, administrative and staff
qualifications, business procedures, facilities, equipment, and ethical
practices to be met by licensees, and criteria for rejecting a licensing
applicant and for suspending or revoking a license.
                                             
 III. A school that is not required to obtain a license may apply for
a license and, upon issuance of the license, shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter. Such school may voluntarily surrender its
license and revert to its original status.
                                             
 IV. The commission shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A to
establish reasonable fees, fines, reimbursement rates for consultants,
and procedures for complaint investigations and enforcement actions,
which are necessary for the administration of this chapter.
                                             
 V. A private postsecondary career school which the commission has
determined requires a license shall, prior to the issuance of a license,
comply with this section and RSA 188-G:3.

**Source.** 2011, 224:150, eff. July 1, 2011. 2013, 187:2, eff. June 30,
2013. 2014, 132:4, eff. June 16, 2014.

### Section 188-G:3

 **188-G:3 Surety Indemnification. –** Before a license is issued or
renewed, a school shall furnish surety indemnification as required in
this section.
                                             
 I. A surety bond shall be provided by the school in an amount
prescribed in this section. The obligation of the bond is that the
school, its officers, agents, and employees shall faithfully perform the
terms and conditions of contracts for tuition and other instructional
fees entered into between the school and entity enrolling as students.
The bond shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the
state of New Hampshire. The bond shall be issued in the name of the
commission, and is to be used only for payment of a refund of tuition
and instructional fees due to a student or potential student, and the
expense of investigating and processing the claims.
                                             
 II. The amount of such bond shall be based on income from tuition at
10 percent of gross tuition, with a 
                                             $10,000 minimum. If a school
licensed under RSA 188-G:2 should fail to provide the services required
in a contract with any entity, as determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the bond shall be forfeited, and the proceeds distributed
by the director in such manner as justice and the circumstances
require.
                                             
 III. The bond company may not be relieved of liability on the bond
unless it gives the school and the commission 90 days written notice of
the company's intent to cancel the bond. If at any time the company that
issued the bond cancels or discontinues the coverage, the school's
license is revoked as a matter of law on the effective date of the
cancellation or discontinuance of bond coverage, unless a replacement
bond is obtained and provided to the commission.
                                             
 IV. For the purposes of this section the forms of indemnification
other than a surety bond which may be furnished to the commission for
licensure are the following:
                                             
 (a) An irrevocable letter of credit, maintained for the licensing
period as a minimum, issued by a financial institution authorized to do
business in New Hampshire in an amount to be determined by the
commission with the commission designated as the beneficiary; or
                                             
 (b) A term deposit account held in the state treasury, payable to
the commission, shall be held in trust for the benefit of students
entitled thereto under this section. Said account shall be maintained
for the licensing period as a minimum, in an amount determined by the
commission. Any interest shall be paid annually to the appropriate
school, unless the term deposit account is activated due to a school
closing. Should the licensee for any reason, while not in default,
discontinue operation, all moneys on deposit, including any interest,
shall be released to the appropriate school subject to the approval of
the commission.

**Source.** 2011, 224:150, eff. July 1, 2011. 2013, 187:3, eff. June 30,
2013.

### Section 188-G:4

 **188-G:4 Student Tuition Guaranty Fund. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2013, 187:1,
I, eff. June 30, 2013.
                                             ]

### Section 188-G:5

 **188-G:5 Inspections. –** The commission may at any time inspect
the premises, curriculum, teaching materials, faculty performance, sales
literature, financial data, or other matters which are relevant to the
educational and business activities of a licensed school in order to
determine compliance with applicable laws and rules.

**Source.** 2011, 224:150, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 188-G:6

 **188-G:6 Revocation; Hearing. –** The commission may, after due
notice and hearing, revoke the license of any school licensed pursuant
to RSA 188-G:2 for violating the provisions of this chapter or rules
adopted hereunder. The provisions of RSA 541 shall apply to actions
taken pursuant to this section.

**Source.** 2011, 224:150, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 188-G:7

 **188-G:7 Waiting Period. –** Every contract that purports to bind
any entity to pay money to a private postsecondary career school in
return for training shall be construed to be a home solicitation sales
contract under RSA 361-B and shall be subject to the provisions of RSA
361-B.

**Source.** 2011, 224:150, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 188-G:8

 **188-G:8 Veterans, Education and Services Approval. –** The
division may approve for veterans' education and services any
institution licensed under this chapter. The department of education may
adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to the procedures for approval of
institutions for veterans' education and benefits.

**Source.** 2011, 224:150, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 188-G:9

 **188-G:9 Use of Fees. –** Notwithstanding any provision of law to
the contrary, all license fees collected under the provisions of this
chapter shall be retained by the commission for use in meeting the
expenses of administering this chapter.

**Source.** 2011, 224:150, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 188-G:10

 **188-G:10 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other
person.
                                             
 II. Whenever the commission determines that a person is violating
any provision of this chapter or the rules adopted hereunder, the
commission shall request the attorney general, or other appropriate
official having jurisdiction, to provide appropriate relief.
                                             
 III. The commission, upon verifying that a school is operating
without a license, shall issue a cease and desist order to such school.
                                             
 IV. The commission shall be notified whenever a cease and desist
order is issued to a school, or if a school fails to provide the
services required under a contract with any entity causing the bond to
be forfeited, or if a school is required to have a license but is
operating without a license.

**Source.** 2011, 224:150, eff. July 1, 2011.
