---
title: |
    CHAPTER 189 SCHOOL BOARDS, SUPERINTENDENTS, TEACHERS, AND TRUANT
    OFFICERS; SCHOOL CENSUS
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 189
                                             
SCHOOL BOARDS, SUPERINTENDENTS, TEACHERS, AND TRUANT OFFICERS; SCHOOL CENSUS
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

School Boards, Transportation and Instruction of Pupils
-------------------------------------------------------

### Section 189:1

 **189:1 Days of School. –** The school board of every district shall
provide standard schools for at least 180 days in each year, or the
equivalent number of hours as required in the rules of the department of
education, at such places in the district as will best serve the
interests of education and give to all the pupils within the district as
nearly equal advantages as are practicable.

**Source.** 1883, 43:6. PS 92:1. 1919, 106:20. 1921, 85, II:1. PL 117:1.
RL 135:1. RSA 189:1. 1959, 133:1. 2007, 71:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2007. 2011,
42:1, eff. July 8, 2011.

### Section 189:1-a

 **189:1-a Duty to Provide Education. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be the duty of the school board to provide, at district
expense, elementary and secondary education to all pupils who reside in
the district until such time as the pupil has acquired a high school
diploma or has reached age 21, whichever occurs first; provided, that
the board may exclude specific pupils for gross misconduct or for
neglect or refusal to conform to the reasonable rules of the school, and
further provided that this section shall not apply to pupils who have
been exempted from school attendance in accordance with RSA 193:5.
                                             
 II. Elected school boards shall be responsible for establishing the
structure, accountability, advocacy, and delivery of instruction in each
school operated and governed in its district. To accomplish this end,
and to support flexibility in implementing diverse educational
approaches, school boards shall establish, in each school operated and
governed in its district, instructional policies that establish
instructional goals based upon available information about the knowledge
and skills pupils will need in the future.
                                             
 III. School boards shall adopt a teacher performance evaluation
system, with the involvement of teachers and principals, for use in the
school district. A school board may consider any resources it deems
reasonable and appropriate, including any resources that may be provided
by the state department of education. In this paragraph, "teacher''
shall have the same meaning as in RSA 189:14-a, V.

**Source.** 1969, 356:10. 1973, 72:28. 1975, 22:1. 1983, 84:1, eff. July
23, 1983. 2011, 108:1, eff. July 30, 2011. 2013, 243:1, eff. Sept. 22,
2013.

### Section 189:1-b

 **189:1-b Freedom of Assembly; Freedom of Religion. –**
                                             
 I. On each school day, before classes of instruction officially
convene in the public schools of this sovereign state, a period of not
more than 5 minutes shall be available to those who may wish to exercise
their right to freedom of assembly and participate voluntarily in the
free exercise of religion.
                                             
 II. There shall be no teacher supervision of this free exercise of
religion, nor shall there be any prescribed or proscribed form or
content of prayer.

**Source.** 1977, 182:1, eff. Aug. 13, 1977.

### Section 189:1-c

 **189:1-c Student Member. –** In addition to the school board
members authorized in RSA 671:4, the members of the school board may
choose by a simple majority to add one or more nonvoting student members
from a high school within its district to the board. The powers and
duties of a student member shall be as described in RSA 194:23-f. In
districts having more than one public high school, the school board may
rotate the student member representation as determined by the board.

**Source.** 1983, 111:2, eff. July 24, 1983. 2009, 5:1, eff. June 16,
2009.

### Section 189:1-d

 **189:1-d Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Attendance'' means full-time participation in a program of
instruction under the direction of a teacher employed by the school
district. Educationally disabled home educated pupils educated at school
district expense under the direction of a teacher employed by the school
district shall be included.
                                             
 II. "Membership'' means pupils of whom attendance is expected,
whether a pupil is present or absent on any given day.
                                             
 III. "Average daily membership in attendance'' means the aggregate
half-day membership of pupils attending schools operated by a school
district divided by the number of half-days of instruction offered. The
average daily membership in attendance for preschool and kindergarten
pupils shall be divided by the number of instructional days offered to
higher-level elementary grades.
                                             
 IV. "Average daily membership in residence'' means the average daily
membership in attendance of pupils who are legal residents of the school
district pursuant to RSA 193:12 or RSA 193:27, IV and attend a
state-approved public or nonpublic school as assigned by the school
district in which the pupil resides, or by the state, or attend an
approved chartered public school.

**Source.** 1993, 322:5. 2003, 241:9, eff. July 1, 2003. 2008, 354:1,
eff. Sept. 5, 2008. 2009, 297:1, eff. Sept. 29, 2009.

### Section 189:1-e

 **189:1-e Directory Information. –** A local education agency which
maintains education records may provide information designated as
directory information consistent with the Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act (FERPA). Each year schools shall give parents public notice
of the types of information designated as directory information. By a
specified time after parents are notified of their review rights,
parents shall request in writing to remove all or part of the
information on their child that they do not wish to be available to the
public. Such approval shall be renewed on an annual basis. Items of
directory information, which is information not generally considered
harmful or an invasion of privacy if disclosed, may include:
                                             
 I. Name and address of a student.
                                             
 II. Field of study.
                                             
 III. Weight and height of athletes.
                                             
 IV. Most recent previous school attended.
                                             
 V. Date and place of birth.
                                             
 VI. Participation in officially recognized activities and sports.
                                             
 VII. Date of attendance, degrees, and awards.

**Source.** 1997, 255:1, eff. Aug. 18, 1997.

### Section 189:2

 **189:2 Reduction of Time. –** If the school board of any district
shall decide that, by reason of special conditions or circumstances, the
maintenance of standard schools for 180 days, or the equivalent number
of hours if approved by the commissioner of the department of education,
in said district is undesirable, said school board may so represent in
writing to the state board. If, upon hearing, the state board, or the
commissioner when authorized by the state board, shall be of the opinion
that the representation is true, it may reduce the time of maintaining
such schools in said district to such limits as it may deem wise.
Provided, however, that the state board, or the commissioner if
authorized, shall not reduce the days during which schools shall be in
session, as provided in RSA 189:1, on account of workshops, conventions
or teachers' institutes.

**Source.** 1919, 106:20. 1921, 85, II:1. PL 117:2. RL 135:2. RSA 189:2.
1959, 133:2. 1981, 318:5. 2007, 71:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 189:3

 **189:3 Other Modifications. –** If any other provisions in the laws
which relate to education shall be found by the state board to impose
upon any district obligations which, by reason of unusual circumstances
or of exceptional conditions in that district, result in an unnecessary
expenditure of school money, or in a procedure which is inimical to the
best interests of education therein, the state board, upon like
proceedings, may suspend or modify such obligations as in its judgment
may be reasonable.

**Source.** 1919, 106:20. 1921, 85, II:1. PL 117:3. RL 135:3.

### Section 189:4

 **189:4 Decisions of State Board. –** All such decisions of the
state board shall be made in writing, recorded by it and a copy sent for
record to the clerk of the district affected thereby.

**Source.** 1919, 106:20. 1921, 85, II:1. PL 117:4. RL 135:4.

### Section 189:5

 **189:5 Surplus Funds. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1969, 104:1, eff. June 24,
1969.
                                             ]

### Section 189:6

 **189:6 Transportation of Pupils. –** The local school district
shall furnish transportation to all pupils in grade 1 through grade 8
who live more than 2 miles from the school to which they are assigned.
The local school board may furnish transportation to kindergarten
pupils, pupils in grades above the eighth or to any pupils residing less
than 2 miles from the school to which they are assigned, when it finds
that this is appropriate, and shall furnish it when so directed by the
commissioner of education.

**Source.** 1885, 43:6. PS 92:1. 1919, 106:20. 1921, 125:6. PL 117:6. RL
135:6. RSA 189:6. 1992, 159:1, eff. July 5, 1992.

### Section 189:6-a

 **189:6-a School Bus Safety. –** The district shall instruct all
pupils, who are transported by the district as provided in RSA 189:6, in
the following:
                                             
 I. School bus safety.
                                             
 II. The evacuation procedure for buses in emergency situations.
                                             
 III. Any other matters regarding the safety of pupils being
transported to school.

**Source.** 1996, 19:1, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 189:6-b

 **189:6-b Transportation Between Schools and Before-and-After-School
Programs. –** To achieve maximum utilization of available
before-and-after-school programs for school-age children, school
districts shall be permitted to transport pupils between schools and
legally-operating before-and-after-school programs upon the approval of
the school district in the same manner as the school budget is adopted
by that district. Such approval shall continue until revoked in the same
manner.

**Source.** 1997, 308:2, eff. Aug. 19, 1997.

### Section 189:6-c

 **189:6-c Pupils Transported in a Mixed Use School Bus. –**
                                             
 I. Pupils may be transported to or from school activities in a mixed
use school bus, as defined by RSA 259:96-a, which bears a valid state
inspection sticker and is operated by a driver who holds a valid
driver's license to operate that vehicle. An operator of a mixed use
school bus that qualifies as a commercial motor vehicle as defined in
RSA 259:12-e shall hold a valid commercial driver license pursuant to
RSA 263:86 appropriate for the type and class of mixed use school bus
being driven.
                                             
 II. Pupils with disabilities may be transported to or from school
activities in a mixed use school bus unless the pupil's individualized
education program as defined in RSA 186-C:2, III, or the pupil's
accommodation plan pursuant to section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973, 29 U.S.C. section 794, states that such a vehicle shall not be
used.
                                             
 III. In this section, "school activities'' shall include, but is not
limited to, sporting events, intramural events, events associated with
student clubs or organizations, job training programs, field trips, and
special education transition services. "School activities'' shall not
include transportation between home and school.

**Source.** 2011, 44:1, eff. July 8, 2011. 2015, 100:1, eff. Aug. 4,
2015. 2016, 138:1, eff. July 26, 2016.

### Section 189:7

 **189:7 Pupils Under 14 Years of Age. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1992, 159:3,
eff. July 5, 1992.
                                             ]

### Section 189:8

 **189:8 Limitations and Additions. –** Pupils entitled to
transportation in accordance with RSA 189:6 may be required to walk a
distance not to exceed one mile to a school bus stop established by the
local school board. Pupils residing in areas which are inaccessible by a
local school district's established mode of transportation may be
required to walk a distance not to exceed 1- 1/2 miles to a school bus
stop, provided that the vehicle, route and schedule have been approved
by the commissioner of education. School districts shall assure that
pupils shall not be subject to unsafe conditions while walking the
required distance to a school bus stop and that the school bus stop is
established in a safe location.

**Source.** 1919, 106:20. 1921, 125:6. PL 117:7. 1933, 76:1. RL 135:8.
RSA 189:8. 1992, 159:2, eff. July 5, 1992.

### Section 189:9

 **189:9 Pupils in Private Schools. –** Pupils attending approved
private schools, up to and including the twelfth grade, shall be
entitled to the same transportation privileges within any town or
district as are provided for pupils in public schools.

**Source.** 1937, 199:1. RL 135:9. RSA 189:9. 1973, 501:3, eff. June 30,
1973.

### Section 189:9-a

 **189:9-a Pupils Prohibited for Disciplinary Reasons. –**
Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 189:6-8, the superintendent, or a
representative as designated in writing, is authorized to suspend the
right of pupils from riding in a school bus when said pupils fail to
conform to the reasonable rules and regulations as may be promulgated by
the school board. Any suspension to continue beyond 20 school days must
be approved by the school board. Said suspension shall not begin until
the next school day following the day notification of suspension is sent
to the pupil's parent or legal guardian.
                                             
 I. If a pupil has been denied the right to ride a school bus for
disciplinary reasons, the parent or guardian of that pupil has a right
of appeal within 10 days of suspension to the authority that suspended
this pupil's right.
                                             
 II. Until the appeal is heard, or if the suspension of pupil's right
to ride the school bus is upheld, it shall be the parents' or guardians'
responsibility to provide transportation to and from school for that
pupil for the period of the suspension.

**Source.** 1973, 462:1. 1995, 174:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 189:10

 **189:10 Studies. –** The school board shall ensure that health
education and physical education are taught to pupils as part of the
basic curriculum. The school board shall ensure that all studies
prescribed by the state board of education are thoroughly taught,
especially physiology, hygiene, and health and physical education as
they relate to the effects of alcohol and other drugs, child abuse as
established in the definition of "abused child'' under RSA 169-C:3, II,
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS), and sexually transmitted diseases on the human system.

**Source.** 1858, 208:2. GS 81:5. GL 89:5. 1883, 37:2. 1887, 52:1. PS
92:6. 1895, 40:1; 50:2. 1899, 12:1. 1903, 31:1. 1909, 49:1. 1911, 136:1.
1921, 85, II:2. PL 117:8. RL 135:10. RSA 189:10. 1959, 130:1. 1973,
242:2; 529:37. 1975, 183:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1975. 2008, 251:3, eff. Aug.
23, 2008. 2016, 56:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 189:11

 **189:11 Instruction in National and State History and Government.
–**
                                             
 I. In all public and private schools in the state there shall be
given regular courses of instruction in the history, government and
constitutions of the United States and New Hampshire, including the
organization and operation of New Hampshire municipal, county and state
government and of the federal government. Such instruction shall begin
not later than the opening of the eighth grade and shall continue in
high school as an identifiable component of a year's course in the
history and government of the United States and New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. As a component of instruction under paragraph I, a locally
developed competency assessment of United States government and civics
that includes, but is not limited to, the nature, purpose, structure,
function, and history of the United States government, the rights and
responsibilities of citizens, and noteworthy government and civic
leaders, shall be administered to students as part of the high school
course in history and government of the United States and New Hampshire.
Students who attain a passing grade on the competency assessment shall
be eligible for a certificate issued by the school district. The United
States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) test may be used to
satisfy the requirement of this paragraph.

**Source.** 1923, 47:2. PL 117:9. RL 135:11. RSA 189:11. 1975, 183:2,
eff. Sept. 1, 1975. 2016, 7:1, eff. Mar. 16, 2016.

### Section 189:11-a

 **189:11-a Food and Nutrition Programs. –**
                                             
 I. Each school board shall make a meal available during school hours
to every pupil under its jurisdiction. Such meals shall be served
without cost or at a reduced cost to any needy child who is unable to
pay the full cost of said meals. The state board of education shall
insure compliance with this section and shall establish minimum
nutritional standards for such meals and shall further establish income
guidelines setting forth the minimum family size annual income levels to
be used in determining eligibility for free and reduced price meals.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the operation of both a breakfast
and lunch program in the same school. Further any requirement of this
section which conflicts with any federal statute or regulation may be
waived by the state board of education.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph I, the requirements
thereof may be waived as hereinafter provided:
                                             
 (a) The school board of any school may make application for a
waiver to the state board.
                                             
 (b) Requests for such waiver may be granted by the commissioner
of education upon the receipt of such application and shall remain in
force until the state board determines otherwise as hereinafter
provided.
                                             
 (c) The state board is authorized and directed to study the
schools which have been granted a waiver and to formulate a plan to
implement the requirements of this section in such schools.
                                             
 (d) The state board shall, after formulating such a plan, notify
the school board granted such a waiver of the date when said waiver will
terminate.
                                             
 (e) After the termination of a waiver, a school board shall
comply with the requirements of RSA 189:11-a, I.
                                             
 (f) The state board may also grant a waiver to any school which
is being phased out of use; however, such waiver may not exceed the
period of one school year.
                                             
 III. The state board shall prepare and distribute a curriculum for
nutrition education and such curriculum shall be integrated into the
regular courses of instruction for kindergarten and grades one through
12 during the school year.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 V. The school board of each school district shall develop and adopt
a policy recommending that all pupils participate in developmentally
appropriate daily physical activity, exercise, or physical education as
a way to minimize the health risks created by chronic inactivity,
childhood obesity, and other related health problems.
                                             
 VI. The state board of education shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA
541-A, relative to a model physical activity policy and distribute such
policy to each public school in the state.
                                             
 VII. (a) Each school district which participates in the National
School Breakfast Program shall maintain annual statistics on the number
of breakfast meals served to pupils.
                                             
 (b) Such school which demonstrates to the department of education
that an approved school wellness policy, as required under the Child
Nutrition and WIC Reauthorization Act of 2004, is in effect, and that
such school is providing breakfast meals to pupils that meet or exceed
the United States Department of Agriculture's child nutrition criteria
may apply for and receive a 3 cent reimbursement for each breakfast meal
served to a pupil. The department of education shall request biennial
appropriations in an amount sufficient to meet projected school
breakfast reimbursements. The department of education shall prescribe
forms as necessary under this paragraph.
                                             
 VIII. A school lunch meal payment policy which is implemented by a
school board either before or after the effective date of this section
shall ensure that all students have access to a healthy school lunch,
that the school district will make every reasonable effort to inform
parents of the policy, and that no student will be subject to different
treatment from the standard school lunch meal or school cafeteria
procedures. The department of education or the state board of education,
upon request of the local school board, may provide communication
assistance to school districts and parents of school children regarding
the school lunch meal payment policy.

**Source.** 1973, 170:1. 1977, 183:1. 1979, 82:1. 1981, 318:6. 2001,
83:2, I. 2004, 33:2. 2006, 127:2, eff. July 18, 2006. 2016, 48:1, eff.
July 2, 2016.

### Section 189:11-b

 **189:11-b Learning Disability Teacher. –** The school board of each
school district may provide the services of a learning disability
teacher under such conditions and with such exceptions, as the state
board of education may prescribe.

**Source.** 1973, 209:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1974.

### Section 189:11-c

 **189:11-c Cursive Handwriting and Memorization of Multiplication
Tables. –** The school board of each school district is encouraged to
provide instruction in cursive handwriting and memorization of
multiplication tables.

**Source.** 2015, 41:1, eff. July 8, 2015.

### Section 189:11-d

 **189:11-d Drug and Alcohol Education. –**
                                             
 I. Each public school in the state, as part of the school
board-approved kindergarten through grade 12 health education program,
shall provide age and developmentally appropriate drug and alcohol
education to pupils based upon the needs of the pupils and the
community. The school board may authorize the use of an evidence-based
prevention program.
                                             
 II. School boards shall develop policies authorizing school district
personnel to provide pupils, parents, and legal guardians with
information and resources relative to existing drug and alcohol
counseling and treatment for pupils. Nothing in this section shall
require a school district to add additional programs or services, but
only to provide information about available programs and services.

**Source.** 2016, 301:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 189:12

 **189:12 Fuel; Repairs. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1998, 389:10, eff. Oct. 1,
1998.
                                             ]

### Section 189:13

 **189:13 Dismissal of Teacher. –** The school board may dismiss any
teacher found by them to be immoral, or who has not satisfactorily
maintained the competency standards established by the school district,
or one who does not conform to regulations prescribed; provided, that no
teacher shall be so dismissed before the expiration of the period for
which said teacher was engaged without having previously been notified
of the cause of such dismissal, nor without having previously been
granted a full and fair hearing.

**Source.** GS 81:8. GL 89:8. PS 92:3. 1895, 51:1. 1905, 59:1. 1921, 85,
II:5. PL 117:11. RL 135:13. 2005, 178:1, eff. Aug. 29, 2005.

### Section 189:13-a

 **189:13-a School Employee and Designated School Volunteer Criminal
History Records Check. –**
                                             
 I. (a) The employing school administrative unit, school district, or
chartered public school shall complete a criminal history records check
on every selected applicant for employment in any position in the school
administrative unit, school district, or chartered public school prior
to a final offer of employment. A public academy approved by the New
Hampshire state board of education shall submit a criminal history
records check on applicants for employment pursuant to this section. The
superintendent of the school administrative unit or the chief executive
officer of the chartered public school or public academy may extend a
conditional offer of employment to a selected applicant, with a final
offer of employment subject to a successfully completed criminal history
records check. No selected applicant may be extended a final offer of
employment unless the school administrative unit, school district,
chartered public school, or public academy has completed a criminal
history records check. The school administrative unit, school district,
chartered public school, or public academy shall not be held liable in
any lawsuit alleging that the extension of a conditional or final offer
of employment to an applicant, or the acceptance of volunteer services
from a designated volunteer, with a criminal history was in any way
negligent or deficient, if the school administrative unit, school
district, chartered public school, or public academy fulfilled the
requirements of this section.
                                             
 (b) A nonpublic school may elect to require a criminal history
records check on selected applicants for employment or selected
volunteers. A nonpublic school that elects to conduct a criminal history
records check shall comply with the procedures and requirements set
forth in this section.
                                             
 II. The selected applicant for employment or designated volunteer
with a school administrative unit, school district, chartered public
school, or public academy shall submit to the employer a notarized
criminal history records release form, as provided by the division of
state police, which authorizes the release of information regarding the
presence or absence of any record of convictions of the applicant of
felonies or misdemeanors, or of charges pending disposition for or
convictions of the applicant of the crimes listed in paragraph V. The
applicant shall submit with the release form a complete set of
fingerprints taken by a qualified law enforcement agency or an
authorized employee of the school administrative unit, school district,
chartered public school, or public academy. In the event that the first
set of fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern and a second
set of fingerprints is necessary in order to complete the criminal
history records check, the conditional offer of employment shall remain
in effect. If, after 2 attempts, a set of fingerprints is invalid due to
insufficient pattern, the school administrative unit, school district,
chartered public school, or public academy may, in lieu of the criminal
history records check, accept police clearances from every city, town,
or county where an applicant has lived during the past 5 years.
                                             
 III. The school administrative unit, school district, chartered
public school, or public academy shall submit the criminal history
records release form to the New Hampshire state police which shall
conduct a criminal history records check through its records and through
the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The state police shall examine the
list of crimes constituting grounds for nonapproval of employment, or
nonacceptance of volunteer services in that school administrative unit,
school district, chartered public school, or public academy, and shall
report the presence or absence of any such crime to the superintendent
of the school administrative unit or the chief executive officer of the
chartered public school or public academy. The superintendent of the
school administrative unit or the chief executive officer of the
chartered public school or public academy shall maintain the
confidentiality of all criminal history records information received
pursuant to this paragraph. If the criminal history records information
indicates no criminal record, the superintendent of the school
administrative unit or the chief executive officer of the chartered
public school or public academy shall destroy the information received
immediately following review of the information. If the criminal history
records information indicates that the applicant has been convicted of
any crime or has been charged pending disposition for or convicted of a
crime listed in paragraph V, the superintendent of the school
administrative unit or the chief executive officer of the chartered
public school or public academy shall review the information for a
hiring decision, and the division of state police shall notify the
department of education of any such charges pending disposition or
convictions. The superintendent of the school administrative unit or the
chief executive officer of the chartered public school or public academy
shall destroy any criminal history record information that indicates a
criminal record within 30 days of receiving such information.
                                             
 IV. The school administrative unit, school district, chartered
public school, or public academy may require the selected applicant for
employment or designated volunteer to pay the actual costs of the
criminal history records check.
                                             
 V. Any person who has been charged pending disposition for or
convicted of any violation or attempted violation of RSA 630:1; 630:1-a;
630:1-b; 630:2; 632-A:2; 632-A:3; 632-A:4; 633:1; 639:2; 639:3; 645:1,
II or III; 645:2; 649-A:3; 649-A:3-a; 649-A:3-b; 649-B:3; or 649-B:4; or
any violation or any attempted violation of RSA 650:2 where the act
involves a child in material deemed obscene; in this state, or under any
statute prohibiting the same conduct in another state, territory, or
possession of the United States, shall not be hired by a school
administrative unit, school district, chartered public school, or public
academy. The superintendent of the school administrative unit or the
chief executive officer of the chartered public school or public academy
may deny a selected applicant a final offer of employment if such person
has been convicted of any crime in addition to those listed above. The
governing body of a school district, chartered public school, or public
academy may adopt a policy stating that any person who has been
convicted of any felony, or any of a list of felonies, shall not be
hired.
                                             
 VI. This section shall apply to any employee, selected applicant for
employment, designated volunteer, or volunteer organization which
contracts with a school administrative unit, school district, chartered
public school, or public academy to provide services, including but not
limited to cafeteria workers, school bus drivers, custodial personnel,
or any other service where the contractor or employees of the contractor
provide services directly to students of the district, chartered public
school, or public academy. The cost for criminal history records checks
for employees or selected applicants for employment with such
contractors shall be borne by the contractor.
                                             
 VII. The school administrative unit, school district, chartered
public school, or public academy shall not be required to complete a
criminal history records check on volunteers, provided that the
governing body of a school administrative unit, school district,
chartered public school, or public academy shall adopt a policy
designating certain categories of volunteers as "designated volunteers''
who may be required to undergo a criminal history records check.
                                             
 VIII. A school administrative unit, school district, chartered
public school, public academy, or school official acting pursuant to a
policy establishing procedures for certain volunteers shall be immune
from civil or criminal liability, provided the school administrative
unit, school district, chartered public school, public academy, or
school official has in good faith acted in accordance with said policy.
Nothing in this paragraph shall be deemed to grant immunity to any
person for that person's reckless or wanton conduct.
                                             
 IX. (a) Substitute teachers, student teachers, student interns, and
other educational staff shall apply for a criminal history records check
at the employing school administrative unit, school district, chartered
public school, or public academy. The division of state police shall
complete the criminal history records check and, upon completion, shall
issue a letter to the applicant. The letter shall be valid for 30 days
from the date of issue and shall constitute satisfactory proof of
compliance with this section.
                                             
 (b) Student teachers and student interns shall submit a criminal
history records check upon enrollment in a teacher preparation program,
but shall not be required to submit additional criminal history records
checks if the student teacher or student intern maintains continuous
enrollment in the teacher preparation program.
                                             
 X. Violations of this section shall be jointly investigated by the
state police and the department of education. Information obtained
through such investigations shall remain confidential and shall not be
subject to RSA 91-A.
                                             
 XI. In this section, "public academy'' shall have the same meaning
as in RSA 194:23, II.

**Source.** 1993, 324:1. 1995, 260:5. 1997, 77:2. 1998, 256:6; 314:6.
2000, 214:1, 2. 2007, 319:1, 4, eff. Sept. 14, 2007. 2008, 323:8, 12,
eff. Jan. 1, 2009; 354:1, eff. Sept. 5, 2008. 2010, 138:1, eff. Aug. 13,
2010; 318:1, eff. Sept. 18, 2010. 2013, 250:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2014. 2014,
55:1, eff. May 27, 2014. 2016, 117:1, eff. July 19, 2016.

### Section 189:14

 **189:14 Liability of District. –** The district shall be liable in
the action of assumpsit to any teacher dismissed in violation of the
provisions of RSA 189:13, to the extent of the full salary for the
period for which such teacher was engaged.

**Source.** 1845, 225. CS 77:3. GS 81:9. GL 89:8. PS 92:4. 1905, 59:1.
1921, 85, II:6. PL 117:12. RL 135:14.

### Section 189:14-a

 **189:14-a Failure to be Renominated or Reelected. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Any teacher who has a professional standards certificate from
the state board of education and who has taught for one or more years in
the same school district shall be notified in writing on or before April
15 or within 15 days of the adoption of the district budget by the
legislative body, whichever is later, if that teacher is not to be
renominated or reelected, provided that no notification shall occur
later than the Friday following the second Tuesday in May.
                                             
 (b) School boards shall have a teacher performance evaluation
policy.
                                             
 (c) Any such teacher who has taught for 5 consecutive years or
more in the teacher's current school district, or who taught for 3
consecutive years or more in the teacher's current school district
before July 1, 2011, and who has been so notified may request in writing
within 10 days of receipt of said notice a hearing before the school
board and may in said request ask for reasons for failure to be
renominated or reelected. For purposes of this section only, a leave of
absence shall not interrupt the consecutive nature of a teacher's
service, but neither shall such a leave be included in the computation
of a teacher's service. Computation of a teacher's service for any other
purposes shall not be affected by this section. The notice shall advise
the teacher of all of the teacher's rights under this section. The
school board, upon receipt of said request, shall provide for a hearing
on the request to be held within 15 days. The school board shall issue
its decision in writing within 15 days of the close of the hearing.
                                             
 II. Any teacher who has a professional standards certificate from
the state board of education shall be entitled to all of the rights for
notification and hearing in paragraphs I(b), III, and IV of this section
if:
                                             
 (a) The teacher has taught for 5 consecutive years or more in any
school district in the state and has taught for 3 consecutive years or
more in the teacher's current school district; or
                                             
 (b) Before July 1, 2011, the teacher taught for 3 consecutive
years or more in any school district in the state and taught for 2
consecutive years or more in the teacher's current school district.
                                             
 III. In cases of nonrenomination or nonreelection because of
reduction in force, the reduction in force shall not be based solely on
seniority.
                                             
 IV. In all proceedings before the school board under this section,
the burden of proof for nonrenewal of a teacher shall be on the
superintendent of the local school district by a preponderance of the
evidence. Except as provided in paragraph III, the grounds for
nonrenomination and nonreelection shall be determined at the sole
discretion of the school board.
                                             
 V. "Teacher'' means any professional employee of any school district
whose position requires certification as a professional engaged in
teaching. The term "teacher'' shall also include principals, assistant
principals, librarians, and guidance counselors.

**Source.** 1957, 285:1. 1981, 250:1. 1986, 39:1. 1995, 174:2. 2000,
16:8. 2003, 204:2, 3, eff. Aug. 29, 2003. 2011, 267:1, eff. July 1,
2011.

### Section 189:14-b

 **189:14-b Review by State Board. –**
                                             
 I. A teacher aggrieved by such decision may either petition the
state board of education for review thereof or request arbitration under
the terms of a collective bargaining agreement pursuant to RSA 273-A:4,
if applicable, but may not do both. Such petition must be in writing and
filed with the state board within 10 days after the issuance of the
decision to be reviewed. Upon receipt of such petition, the state board
shall notify the school board of the petition for review, and shall
forthwith proceed to a consideration of the matter. Such consideration
shall include a hearing if either party shall request it. The state
board shall issue its decision within 15 days after the petition for
review is filed, and the decision of the state board shall be final and
binding upon both parties. A petition for review under this section
shall constitute the exclusive remedy available to a teacher on the
issue of the nonrenewal of such teacher.
                                             
 II. The state board of education shall uphold a decision of a local
school board to nonrenew a teacher's contract unless the local school
board's decision is clearly erroneous.

**Source.** 1957, 285:1. 2003, 204:4, eff. Aug. 29, 2003. 2008, 246:1,
eff. Aug. 23, 2008. 2011, 267:2, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 189:14-c

 **189:14-c Revocation of Certification. –** Any teacher certified in
this state who has been convicted of any felony involving child
pornography or of a felonious physical assault on a minor or of any
sexual assault, shall have such teacher certification revoked by the New
Hampshire state board of education.

**Source.** 1988, 257:3. 1995, 174:11, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 189:14-d

 **189:14-d Termination of Employment. –** Employees of a school
administrative unit or school district in this state who have been
convicted of homicide, child pornography, aggravated felonious sexual
assault, felonious sexual assault, or kidnapping, in this state or under
any statute prohibiting the same conduct in another state, territory or
possession of the United States, shall have their employment terminated
by the school administrative unit or school district after it receives
notice of the conviction.

**Source.** 1993, 324:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1994.

### Section 189:14-e

 **189:14-e Speech-Language Specialists. –**
                                             
 I. (a) The department of education shall certify speech-language
specialists pursuant to RSA 21-N:9, II(s). Certified speech-language
specialists shall provide speech-language pathology services for schools
only.
                                             
 (b) The department of education shall establish the criteria for
certification as a speech-language specialist which shall include a
minimum of a masters degree in speech-language pathology, or its
equivalent as determined by the state board of education.
                                             
 II. Speech-language pathologists licensed pursuant to RSA 326-F and
328-F shall automatically meet certification requirements under this
section.

**Source.** 1996, 271:4. 1997, 287:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 189:14-f

 **189:14-f Master Teacher. –**
                                             
 I. The state board of education shall establish the educational
credential of master teacher and grant it to those persons who have
fulfilled at least the following requirements:
                                             
 (a) Academic preparation which shall include a master's-level
degree and graduate coursework in curriculum development, supervision,
and evaluation;
                                             
 (b) Teaching experience, including at least 7 years during which
a teaching certificate was held; and
                                             
 (c) Demonstrated quality teaching to be satisfied by meeting
professional criteria developed by the professional standards board and
approved by the state board of education, which criteria shall include:
                                             
 (1) Quantitative evaluations of teaching quality from
students, parents, peers, and administrators;
                                             
 (2) At least 3 classroom observations of the candidate by an
independent observer from outside the candidate's school district; and
                                             
 (3) At least 4 significant and rigorous written tasks and
exercises.
                                             
 II. The purposes of the credential are to allow experienced teachers
an opportunity for professional growth and development, and to identify
highly qualified, experienced teachers to serve as resources in their
areas of expertise in curriculum development, mentoring, supervising,
evaluating teachers, and in other areas as may be determined by their
schools and school districts.
                                             
 III. Master teachers shall have no authority to effectively
recommend any personnel action. However, their activities may form the
basis for an independent administrative performance review.

**Source.** 1998, 314:4, eff. Aug. 25, 1998.

### Section 189:14-g

 **189:14-g Teacher Signature Certification. –**
                                             
 I. A teacher applying for certification through the bureau of
credentialing, department of education, shall complete and submit either
a written application or an electronic application, both of which shall
include a declaration and verification statement to read substantially
as follows:
                                             
 "I hereby certify that I am the individual listed in this
application, and that all information provided herein, including all
accompanying documentation, is true, accurate, and complete to the best
of my knowledge.''
                                             
 II. Any willful misrepresentation or omission of facts shall
constitute just cause for denial of certification or revocation of
existing certifications, and possible criminal prosecution.

**Source.** 2001, 87:1. 2003, 39:2, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 189:14-h

 **189:14-h Notice to Education Support Personnel and Non-Certified
School District Employees Required. –** No later than the last day of
school each year, the superintendent shall notify, in writing, all
education support personnel and non-certified school district employees
who have completed their probationary employment period of the intent to
continue or not to continue that employment into the next school year.
The notification may contain special circumstances as may be defined by
the employer. Nothing in this section shall be construed to amend,
replace, or otherwise modify a school district's policy on dismissal,
collective bargaining agreements, or any employee benefits package. The
receipt of notification under this section shall not constitute a
private right of action against a school district.

**Source.** 2010, 279:1, eff. Sept. 6, 2010.

### Section 189:15

 **189:15 Regulations. –** The school board may, unless otherwise
provided by statute or state board regulations, prescribe regulations
for the attendance upon, and for the management, classification and
discipline of, the schools; and such regulations, when recorded in the
official records of the school board, shall be binding upon pupils and
teachers.

**Source.** RS 73:2. GS 81:10. 1868, 9:1. GL 89:10. 1883, 37:3. 1887,
52:1. PS 92:5. 1898, 208:1. 1905, 59:1. 1921, 85, II:7. PL 117:13. RL
135:15. RSA 189:15. 1965, 110:1. 1969, 104:2, eff. June 24, 1969.

### Section 189:15-a

 **189:15-a Purchase of School Insurance. –** The school board may
purchase, at the expense of the district, accident or injury insurance
covering all students while participating in any school activity or may
make such insurance available at the option and expense of the parent or
guardian of each student.

**Source.** 1969, 104:3, eff. June 24, 1969.

### Section 189:16

 **189:16 Textbooks; Supplies. –** The school board shall purchase,
at the expense of the city or town in which the district is situated,
textbooks and other supplies required for use in the public schools; and
shall loan the same to the pupils of such schools free of charge,
subject to such regulations for their care and custody as the board may
prescribe; and shall sell such books at cost to pupils of the school
wishing to purchase them for their own use.

**Source.** RS 73:11. CS 77:12. 1863, 27:21. GS 81:17. GL 89:11. 1883,
37:2. 1889, 13:1. PS 92:7. 1895, 90:3. 1921, 85, II:8. PL 117:14. RL
135:16.

### Section 189:17

 **189:17 Flags; Penalty. –** The school board shall supply a United
States and a New Hampshire state flag; the flags shall be made not less
than 5 feet in length, with a flagstaff and appliances for displaying
the same, for every schoolhouse in the district in which a public school
is taught, at the expense of the district. They shall prescribe rules
and regulations for the proper custody, care and display of these flags;
the regulations shall require that wherever possible, the United States
flag and the New Hampshire state flag shall be displayed on separate
staffs of equal height. When the flags are displayed on the same staff,
the United States flag shall be displayed above the New Hampshire flag.
The regulations shall further require that such flags shall be displayed
prominently outside of the schoolhouse. When they are otherwise
displayed, the flags shall be placed conspicuously in the principal room
of assembly of the schoolhouse. The governing board of every private
school shall supply a United States flag, such flag to be made not less
than 5 feet in length, with a flagstaff and appliances for displaying
same. They shall make provisions similar to those required in the public
schools for the display of said flag. Any members of a school board or
the governing board who shall refuse or neglect to comply with the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1903, 39:1. 1921, 85, II:9. 1925, 128:1. PL 117:15. RL
135:17. RSA 189:17. 1969, 104:4. 1971, 291:1. 1973, 531:45. 1977, 51:1,
eff. June 13, 1977.

### Section 189:17-a

 **189:17-a Flags Provided by Other Than School District. –**
                                             
 I. State agencies, private groups, or individual citizens may
provide and have placed in a public school classroom an American flag or
a New Hampshire state flag, or both, and appliances for displaying such
flag or flags, where none is already displayed.
                                             
 II. Upon receipt of an American flag or a New Hampshire state flag,
or both, and appliances donated pursuant to paragraph I of this section,
a school shall display such flag or flags in a classroom where none is
already displayed.
                                             
 III. The local school board shall have the authority to accept the
donation of flags and appliances, and to determine the location of the
flags in the classrooms.

**Source.** 1988, 30:1, eff. March 24, 1988.

### Section 189:18

 **189:18 Patriotic Exercises. –** In all public schools of the state
one session, or a portion thereof, during the weeks in which Memorial
Day and Veterans Day fall, shall be devoted to exercises of a patriotic
nature, which shall include a discussion of the words, meaning, and
history of the Pledge of Allegiance and the Star Spangled Banner.

**Source.** 1897, 14:1. 1921, 85, II:23. PL 117:16. 1933, 3:1. RL
135:18. 2016, 67:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 189:18-a

 **189:18-a Memorial or Memorial Plaque on School Property. –** The
placement of a memorial or memorial plaque on school property in memory
of an alumnus of a junior high school or high school in the district who
died honorably during active duty shall require approval from the school
board or approval of a warrant article acted upon at the annual school
district meeting. The cost for design, manufacture, installation, or
maintenance of the memorial shall not be a charge to the state, any
municipality, or the school district. This section shall not apply to
the addition of names to already existing memorials or to plans for
memorials initiated by the municipality or school district.

**Source.** 2016, 77:1, eff. July 18, 2016.

### Section 189:19

 **189:19 English Required. –** In the instruction of children in all
schools, including private schools, in reading, writing, spelling,
arithmetic, grammar, geography, physiology, history, civil government,
music, and drawing, the English language shall be used exclusively, both
for the purposes of instruction therein and for purposes of general
administration. Educational programs in the field of bilingual education
shall be permitted under the provisions of this section with the
approval of the state board of education and the local school district.

**Source.** 1919, 106:13. 1921, 85, II:10. PL 117:17. RL 135:19. RSA
189:19. 1969, 139:1. 1977, 110:1, eff. July 30, 1977.

### Section 189:20

 **189:20 Foreign Languages. –** A foreign language may be taught in
elementary schools; provided, that the course of study (or its
equivalent) outlined by the state board in the branches named in RSA
189:19 be not abridged but be taught in compliance with the law of the
state.

**Source.** 1919, 106:13. 1921, 85, II:10. PL 117:18. RL 135:20.

### Section 189:21

 **189:21 Language of Devotional Exercises in Private Schools. –**
The exclusive use of English for purposes of instruction and
administration shall not prohibit the conduct of devotional exercises in
private schools in a language other than English.

**Source.** 1919, 106:13. 1921, 85, II:10. PL 117:19. RL 135:21.

### Section 189:22

 **189:22 Copies of State Constitution and Election Laws to be
Furnished. –** The secretary of state is hereby directed to furnish to
the state board of education such number of copies of the state
constitution and the election laws as may be necessary.

**Source.** 1937, 31:1. RL 135:22.

### Section 189:23

 **189:23 Distribution. –** The state board of education is hereby
directed to distribute copies of the state constitution and election
laws to all teachers of history and civics in the upper grades of
elementary schools and to teachers of United States history in junior
and senior high schools to be used by them in instructing their pupils
relative to the laws governing election and voting.

**Source.** 1937, 31:1. RL 135:23.

### Section 189:24

 **189:24 Standard School. –** A standard school is one approved by
the state board of education, and maintained for at least 180 days in
each year, or the equivalent number of hours as required in the rules of
the department of education, in a suitable and sanitary building,
equipped with approved furniture, books, maps and other necessary
appliances, taught by teachers, directed and supervised by a principal
and a superintendent, each of whom shall hold valid educational
credentials issued by the state board of education, with suitable
provision for the care of the health and physical welfare of all pupils.
A standard school shall provide instruction in all subjects prescribed
by statute or by the state board of education for the grade level of
pupils in attendance.

**Source.** 1919, 106:24. 1921, 85, II:11. PL 117:20. RL 135:24. RSA
189:24. 1959, 133:3. 1971, 371:1. 2007, 71:2, eff. Aug. 10, 2007. 2011,
42:2, eff. July 8, 2011.

### Section 189:25

 **189:25 Elementary School. –** An elementary school is any school
approved by the state board of education in which the subjects taught
are those prescribed by the state board for the grades kindergarten
through 8 of the public schools. However, a separate organization
consisting of grades 7 through 9, or any grouping of these grades, may
be recognized as a junior high school and so approved by the board. Also
a separate organization consisting of grades 4 through 8 or any grouping
of these grades may be recognized as a middle school and so approved by
the state board. Any elementary school may include a kindergarten
program which, if it is provided, shall precede the other elementary
grades.

**Source.** 1919, 106:25. 1921, 85, II:12. PL 117:21. RL 135:25. RSA
189:25. 1963, 288:1. 1971, 178:1. 2007, 71:2, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 189:25-a

 **189:25-a Universal Service Fund; Definition of "School.'' –** For
the purpose of obtaining discounts pursuant to the universal service
fund, otherwise known as "E-rate'' discounts, as established by section
254 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, "school'' means any public or
private elementary or secondary school, and any regional career and
technical educational center designated under RSA 188-E, including
educational programs offered at such career and technical educational
centers for pre-kindergarten, adult education programs, and juvenile
justice programs.

**Source.** 2001, 84:1, eff. Aug. 18, 2001. 2015, 252:12, eff. July 1,
2015.

### Section 189:26

 **189:26 Books Excluded. –** No book shall be introduced into the
public schools calculated to favor any particular religious sect or
political party.

**Source.** RS 73:11, 12. CS 77:12, 13. GS 81:12. GL 89:12. PS 92:9.
1895, 50:5. 1921, 85, II:13. PL 117:22. RL 135:26.

### Section 189:27

 **189:27 Register. –** The school board shall furnish to the
responsible person a supply of blank registers provided by the state
board.

**Source.** RS 73:2. CS 72:2. 1861, 25:68. GS 81:14, 16. GL 89:15, 17.
PS 92:10. 1921, 85, II:14. PL 117:23. RL 135:27. RSA 189:27. 1967,
448:2. 1971, 149:2, eff. July 25, 1971.

### Section 189:27-a

 **189:27-a Computerization of Pupil Registers. –** School boards, or
the governing persons or governing bodies of public academies or
non-public schools, may choose to maintain pupil registration and
enrollment information through the use of a computer, instead of using a
register provided by the state board of education. The software program
for any such computer application shall be capable of providing in
printed form at least the information required by RSA 186:11, VI.

**Source.** 1988, 103:1, eff. July 1, 1988.

### Section 189:27-b

 **189:27-b Retention of Pupil Registers. –** Pupil registers,
whether kept manually or by means of a computer, shall be retained as a
permanent record of the school district, public academy or non-public
school. When a computer is used, the permanent record shall consist, at
a minimum, of a paper printout.

**Source.** 1988, 103:1, eff. July 1, 1988.

Reports
-------

### Section 189:28

 **189:28 Statistical Reports; Failure to File Report. –**
                                             
 I. The governing body of every public education agency, shall, on or
before August 1 in each year, submit to the department of education
those statistical reports necessary to compute the average daily
membership of pupils attending each school district, and the average
daily membership of pupils resident in each school district. Information
relating to the fall enrollment, drop-outs, staffing census, and average
teacher salary, as of October 1 of each school year, shall be submitted
to the department of education on or before October 15. Private schools
shall submit average daily membership in attendance, fall enrollment,
and teacher staff census.
                                             
 II. (a) The information needed to determine compliance with
performance or accountability measures of public education agency under
RSA 193-E:3 or federal law, shall be submitted to the department of
education in a timely manner as determined by the department of
education. The state board of education shall ensure the accuracy and
completeness of such data and shall take enforcement or other actions
when necessary, including verification checks, for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions of this section.
                                             
 (b) If the department of education requests verification of
information relevant to reports submitted, the public education agency
shall provide corrected information or verification within 10 business
days of such request. The governing body of every public education
agency shall maintain files of all records, data, and other information
submitted pursuant to this section for not less than 5 years from the
date of submission. The state board of education shall have access to
such records, data, and information for the purpose of ensuring the
accuracy of reported information.
                                             
 III. Each statistical report submitted under this section by a
public education agency shall include a certification, signed by the
chief executive official that states: "I certify, under the pains and
penalties of perjury, that all of the information contained in this
document is true, accurate, and complete, and that the school board
chairperson has received a copy of this document.''
                                             
 IV. The commissioner of the department of education may grant a
school district, city, or public academy up to a 30-day extension of the
reporting deadline set forth in paragraph I. The commissioner of the
department of education shall notify the governing body of the public
education agency that all state aid to education and all federal aid, if
the report is required by federal law, shall be withheld until such time
as complete and accurate information is submitted.
                                             
 V. The department of education shall determine the average daily
membership in attendance of every public education agency, and private
institution that operates an elementary or secondary school, and the
average daily membership in residence of each school district,
municipality within a cooperative school district, and unincorporated
place.
                                             
 VI. In this section, "public education agency'' means a school
district, city, joint maintenance agreement, chartered public school, or
approved public academy.

**Source.** 1874, 43:3. GL 92:3. 1887, 50:9, 10. PS 92:13. 1895, 50:7.
1903, 5:1. 1917, 122:1. 1921, 85, II:15. PL 117:24. RL 135:28. RSA
189:28. 1991, 169:1. 1998, 389:2. 2003, 314:2. 2005, 189:1. 2006, 60:1,
eff. April 24, 2006. 2008, 354:1, eff. Sept. 5, 2008. 2016, 8:8, eff.
Mar. 16, 2016.

### Section 189:28-a

 **189:28-a Report to the Public. –**
                                             
 I. School boards shall publish in the next annual report, or post at
the annual meeting, the general fund balance sheet from the most
recently completed audited financial statements or from the most
recently completed financial report filed pursuant to RSA 21-J:34, V.
                                             
 II. In the case of an accumulated general fund deficit, the school
board shall insert an article in the warrant recommending such action as
they deem appropriate, which may include, but is not limited to, raising
a sum of money for the purpose of reducing that deficit.

**Source.** 1994, 147:5, eff. July 22, 1994.

### Section 189:29

 **189:29 Penalty for Failure to Report. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1998, 389:11,
eff. Oct. 1, 1998.
                                             ]

### Section 189:29-a

 **189:29-a Records Retention and Disposition. –** Members of the
school board shall establish a records retention and disposition
schedule for all official records of the school district. If records are
microfilmed, 2 films shall be made, properly labeled and stored in 2
different locations. At least one copy shall be stored in a fireproof
container. Records which have been microfilmed may be retained or
destroyed in accordance with the schedule determined by the members of
the board. A complete record of all records destroyed or discarded shall
be maintained along with notations of the methods and dates of disposal.

**Source.** 1983, 94:1, eff. July 23, 1983.

Superintendents
---------------

### Section 189:30

 **189:30 Payment of State Share of Salaries. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986,
41:29, V, eff. April 3, 1988.
                                             ]

### Section 189:31

 **189:31 Removal of Teacher. –** Superintendents shall direct and
supervise the work of teachers, and for cause may remove a teacher or
other employee of the district. The person so removed shall continue as
an employee of the district unless discharged by the local school board
but may not return to the classroom or undertake to perform the duties
of such person's position unless reinstated by the superintendent.

**Source.** RS 70:10. CS 74:12. GS 79:14. GL 87:14. PS 92:2. 1919,
106:12. 1921, 85, II:4. PL 117:27. RL 135:31. RSA 189:31. 1969, 196:4.
1995, 174:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 189:32

 **189:32 Appeal. –** Any person so removed, unless dismissed by the
school board, may appeal to the state board. The board shall prescribe
the manner in which appeals shall be made, and when one is made shall
investigate the matter in any way it sees fit, and make such orders as
justice requires.

**Source.** 1919, 106:12. 1921, 85, II:4. PL 117:28. RL 135:32. RSA
189:32. 1969, 196:5. 1986, 41:19, eff. April 3, 1988.

### Section 189:33

 **189:33 Conferences; Reports. –** It shall be the duty of
superintendents to attend all conferences called by the state board.
Each superintendent shall report to the proper officers any violation of
the provisions of the laws of this state in reference to the public
schools, school buildings, the employment of persons under 18 years of
age who cannot read and speak the English language understandingly, the
protection of children and violations of the rules and regulations
prescribed by the state board for the efficient administration of the
public schools.

**Source.** 1919, 106:12. 1921, 85, I:4. 1925, 138:2. PL 117:29. RL
135:33. RSA 189:33. 1973, 72:13, eff. June 3, 1973.

Truant Officers
---------------

### Section 189:34

 **189:34 Appointment. –**
                                             
 I. School boards shall appoint truant officers for their districts.
                                             
 II. School board policies on truancy shall include but not be
limited to:
                                             
 (a) A definition of "excused absence'' and a process for
considering exceptions to absences not otherwise excused.
                                             
 (b) A process for intervention designed to address individual
cases of truancy as quickly as possible and to reduce the number of
habitual truants in the school district. The process shall consider
whether school record keeping practices and notification provided to
parents or guardians of the child's absences have an effect on the
child's attendance. The board shall provide for the participation of
parents in the development of the policy. The policy shall include early
parental involvement in the intervention process. The policy shall also
designate an employee in each school as the person responsible for
truancy issues.

**Source.** 1852, 1278. CS 78:2. GS 83:7. GL 91:7. 1881, 42:1. PS 92:15.
1899, 70:1. 1921, 85, II:17. PL 117:30. RL 135:34. 2010, 9:1, eff. July
6, 2010. 2013, 249:14, eff. Sept. 1, 2013.

### Section 189:35

 **189:35 Term; Removal. –** Truant officers shall hold office for
one year and until their successors are appointed, but they may be
removed by the school board at any time for cause.

**Source.** 1881, 42:2. PS 92:16. 1921, 85, II:18. PL 117:31. RL 135:35.

### Section 189:35-a

 **189:35-a Truancy Defined. –**
                                             
 I. For the purposes of this subdivision, "truancy'' means an
unexcused absence from school or class and "unexcused absence'' is an
absence which has not been excused in accordance with RSA 189:34,
II(a).
                                             
 II. Ten half days of unexcused absence during a school year shall
constitute habitual truancy.
                                             
 III. A school district shall define the term "half day of
absence.''
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section shall affect or limit a school
district's power to adopt bylaws concerning truancy pursuant to RSA
193:16.
                                             
 V. Nothing in this section shall affect or limit the duties of a
parent pursuant to RSA 193:1.
                                             
 VI. School district attendance records shall be presumed to be true
and accurate unless evidence to the contrary is presented.

**Source.** 2005, 7:1, eff. July 1, 2005. 2010, 9:2, eff. July 6, 2010.

### Section 189:36

 **189:36 Duties. –**
                                             
 I. Truant officers shall, when directed by the school board, enforce
the laws and regulations relating to truants and children between the
ages of 6 and 18 years not attending school or who are not participating
in an alternative learning plan under RSA 193:1, I(h); and the laws
relating to the attendance at school of children between the ages of 6
and 18 years; and shall have authority without a warrant to take and
place in school any children found employed contrary to the laws
relating to the employment of children, or violating the laws relating
to the compulsory attendance at school of children under the age of 18
years, and the laws relating to child labor. No home school pupil nor
any person between the ages of 6 and 18 who meets any of the
requirements of RSA 193:1, I(c)-(h) shall be deemed a truant.
                                             
 II. A truant officer or school official shall not file a petition
alleging that the child is in need of services pursuant to RSA 169-D:2,
II until all steps in the school district's intervention process under
RSA 189:34, II have been followed.

**Source.** 1852, 1278. CS 78:2. GS 83:7. GL 91:7. 1881, 42:3. PS 92:17.
1899, 70:2. 1911, 162:16. 1921, 85, II:19. PL 117:32. RL 135:36. RSA
189:36. 1973, 72:29. 2007, 350:4, eff. July 1, 2009. 2010, 9:3, eff.
July 6, 2010. 2011, 224:281, eff. Sept. 30, 2011.

### Section 189:37

 **189:37 Additional Officers. –** The state board may require school
boards to appoint additional truant officers if in its judgment such
additional officers are necessary; and may require the school board of
any school district to remove any truant officer found by it to be
incompetent, and to appoint a competent successor; and upon the failure
or neglect of the school board to do so, it may appoint such truant
officer and fix compensation, which shall be paid by the district.

**Source.** 1911, 162:18. 1921, 85, III:33. PL 117:34. 1927, 29:1. RL
135:38. 1995, 174:4, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

School Census
-------------

### Section 189:38

 **189:38 Enumeration of Children. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1992, 29:1, eff.
June 2, 1992.
                                             ]

Teachers
--------

### Section 189:39

 **189:39 How Chosen. –** Superintendents shall nominate and school
boards elect all teachers employed in the schools in their school
administrative unit, providing such teachers hold a valid educational
credential issued by the state board of education.

**Source.** RS 70:10. CS 74:12. GS 79:14. GL 87:14. PS 92:2. 1919,
106:12. 1921, 85, II:4. PL 117:35. RL 135:39. RSA 189:39. 1971, 371:2,
eff. Aug. 27, 1971.

### Section 189:39-a

 **189:39-a Critical Staffing Shortages. –** Notwithstanding a
determination of critical staffing shortage made by the department of
education, a superintendent, with the approval of the local school
board, may determine that a critical staffing shortage exists in one or
more specific teaching areas within the school district. The department
of education shall be notified of any critical staffing shortages which
have been determined in a school district within 30 days of such
determination.

**Source.** 2002, 117:1, eff. July 2, 2002.

### Section 189:39-b

 **189:39-b One-Year Certificate of Eligibility. –**
                                             
 I. The local school board, in consultation with the superintendent,
may offer a one-time, one year certificate of eligibility to any person
interested in teaching on a full-time or part-time basis, without
requiring a person to possess a teaching credential, teaching license,
or other teaching certification provided that such person:
                                             
 (a) Possesses at least a bachelor's degree from an accredited
postsecondary institution.
                                             
 (b) Is subject to a criminal history records check pursuant to
RSA 189:13-a.
                                             
 (c) Is qualified for the position by relevant experience and
education.
                                             
 II. The school board, with input from the superintendent, shall
formulate the terms of the certificate of eligibility which shall
contain no tenure provisions.
                                             
 III. The department of education shall be notified of the issuance
of all certificates of eligibility within 30 days of the date of
issuance.
                                             
 IV. Any person who has had a teaching credential, teaching license,
or other teaching certification revoked under RSA 189:14-c or RSA
189:14-d, or who has been rendered ineligible to be employed as a
teacher under another provision of law, shall not be eligible to teach
under this section.
                                             
 V. No person shall be offered more than one certificate of
eligibility under this section.

**Source.** 2002, 117:1, eff. July 2, 2002. 2010, 318:2, eff. Sept. 18,
2010.

### Section 189:40

 **189:40 School Sessions. –** In the absence of express contract, a
session of 3 hours in the forenoon and 3 hours in the afternoon shall
constitute a school day, 5 such days a school week, and 4 such weeks a
school month, in the public schools.

**Source.** 1883, 33:1. PS 92:20. 1921, 85, II:21. PL 117:36. RL 135:40.

### Section 189:41

 **189:41 Institutes. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1969, 104:5, eff. June 24,
1969.
                                             ]

### Section 189:42

 **189:42 Registers. –** The person responsible shall make the
entries in the register required by the state board of education, and at
the close of the term return the register to the school board.

**Source.** 1861, 250:81. GS 81:14, 15. GL 89:15, 16. PS 92:11. 1921,
85, II:24. PL 117:38. RL 135:42. RSA 189:42. 1967, 448:3. 2003, 41:1,
eff. July 5, 2003.

School Administrative Units
---------------------------

### Section 189:43-47-a

 **189:43 to 189:47-a Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1996, 298:5, II, eff.
Aug. 9, 1996.
                                             ]

### Section 189:48

 **189:48 Reports. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 41:29, V, eff. April 3,
1988.
                                             ]

Child Benefit Services
----------------------

### Section 189:49

 **189:49 Optional Services. –** The school board of any school
district may provide the following child benefit services for pupils in
each public and nonpublic school in the district or in another school
district in this state:
                                             
 I. School physician services under the provisions of RSA 200:26-41.
                                             
 II. School nurse services.
                                             
 III. School health services.
                                             
 IV. School guidance and psychologist services.
                                             
 V. Educational testing services.
                                             
 VI. Transportation under the provisions of RSA 189:9.
                                             
 VII. Textbooks and instructional materials.
                                             
 VIII. Health and welfare services equivalent to those provided by
public schools including speech correction and remedial and diagnostic
services.
                                             
 IX. Driver education.
                                             
 X. Educational television services.
                                             
 XI. Programs for the deaf, blind, emotionally disturbed, children
with disabilities; audio-visual aids; and programs for the improvement
of the educational studies of pupils with disabilities.
                                             
 XII. Physical education.
                                             
 XIII. Hot lunch program.
                                             
 In the event that a court rules invalid one or more of the above
services the other services shall not be deemed void but shall continue
in effect.

**Source.** 1970, 51:1. 1971, 499:4; 566:1. 1973, 501:1. 1990, 140:4,
eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 189:49-a

 **189:49-a Fingerprinting Program. –**
                                             
 I. The state board of education in conjunction with the department
of safety shall adopt a model fingerprinting program which shall be made
available to the board of education of each school district in the
state. The state board of education shall encourage each school district
to adopt this program in the interest of uniformity throughout the
state.
                                             
 II. If the school district adopts the fingerprinting program it
shall be for the sole purpose of providing a means by which a missing
child might be located or identified and shall be operated on the
following basis:
                                             
 (a) No student shall be required to participate in the program.
                                             
 (b) In order for a student to participate in the program, the
parents, custodial parent, guardian, legal custodian, or other person
responsible for the student shall authorize the student's participation
by signing a form that shall be developed by the board of education or
by the principal or chief administrative officer of the nonpublic school
for the program.
                                             
 (c) All fingerprint cards shall be given to the parents,
custodial parent, guardian, legal custodian, or other person responsible
for a student after the fingerprinting of the student. A copy of a
fingerprint card may be retained by a school or school district, if
written permission is given by the student's parent, guardian, or legal
custodian. The student, upon reaching the age of 18, or the parent at
any time, shall have the right to have the card returned and no copy
shall be retained by the school or school district.
                                             
 (d) The name, sex, hair and eye color, height, weight, and date
and place of birth of the student and other information may be indicated
on the fingerprint sheet or card.
                                             
 III. Fingerprints obtained pursuant to this section, or any medical,
psychological, guidance, counseling, or other information that is
derived from the use of the fingerprints, shall not be admissible as
evidence against the minor who is the subject of the fingerprints in any
proceeding in any court, and shall not be used against the minor after
the minor reaches the age of majority.
                                             
 IV. A principal or chief administrative officer of a public school,
or any employee of a public school who is authorized to handle school
records, shall provide access to the relevant records of a student to a
law enforcement officer who indicates that an investigation is being
conducted by such officer and that the student is or may be a missing
child. Copies of information in the relevant records of a student shall
be provided, upon request, to the law enforcement officer, if prior
approval is given by the student's parent, guardian, or legal custodian.
Information obtained by the officer shall be used solely in the
investigation of the case. The information may be used by law
enforcement agency personnel in any manner that is appropriate to
solving the case, including, but not limited to, providing the
information to other law enforcement officers and agencies and to the
office of the attorney general, division of public protection, bureau of
criminal justice, for purposes of computer integration pursuant to RSA
7:10-a.

**Source.** 1985, 318:5. 1995, 174:9, 10, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 189:50

 **189:50 Appropriations. –** A town may raise and appropriate money
to carry the provisions of this subdivision into effect.

**Source.** 1970, 51:1, eff. May 4, 1970.

### Section 189:51

 **189:51 Limitation. –** Nothing in this subdivision shall be
construed to allow either a deletion or diminution of a program or
purchase adopted through normal budgetary procedure.

**Source.** 1971, 566:2, eff. Sept. 29, 1971.

Literacy Instruction and Dropout Prevention
-------------------------------------------

### Section 189:52

 **189:52 Screening of Students. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 288:3, I, eff.
July 1, 1995.
                                             ]

### Section 189:53

 **189:53 Literacy Skill Development in Elementary Grades. –** All
school districts which provide elementary education shall have
instruction in literacy for all students through grade 3, including
instruction in reading, writing, speaking, listening, reasoning, and
mathematics. All instruction shall be designed to assist students to
achieve literacy and to provide the opportunity for each child to learn
according to such child's needs and abilities as set forth by the state
board of education in the minimum standards for New Hampshire public
elementary schools.

**Source.** 1988, 274:3. 1995, 174:12, eff. Jan. 1, 1996.

### Section 189:54

 **189:54 Literacy Instruction. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1997, 13:1, eff. June
21, 1997.
                                             ]

### Section 189:55

 **189:55 Dropout Prevention. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2003, 288:2, eff. Sept.
16, 2003.
                                             ]

### Section 189:56

 **189:56 Advisory Council on Literacy and Dropout Prevention. –**

                                             [Repealed 1995, 288:3, II, eff. July 1, 1995.
                                             ]

### Section 189:57

 **189:57 Coordination With Special Population Programs. –**
Educational and youth employment programs serving special population
students shall be coordinated with the requirements of this subdivision.
All such coordinating efforts shall not exempt participating school
districts or public or private employers from meeting all requirements
of state or federal laws.

**Source.** 1988, 274:3, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 189:58

 **189:58 Rulemaking. –** The state board of education shall adopt
rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the procedures and guidelines
necessary to effect the purposes of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1988, 274:3, eff. June 29, 1988.

Dropout Prevention and Dropout Recovery Program
-----------------------------------------------

### Section 189:59

 **189:59 Dropout Prevention and Dropout Recovery Program
Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a dropout prevention and dropout
recovery program in the department of education. The department is
authorized to provide the services described in this subdivision to the
state and to public, quasi-public, and private entities to assist pupils
in successfully completing high school. The program shall:
                                             
 (a) Provide and coordinate services designed to assist pupils in
the successful completion of high school.
                                             
 (b) Encourage individual, corporate, and state support and
involvement to promote employment opportunities for New Hampshire's
students.
                                             
 (c) Render assistance in ensuring student placement in quality
jobs with ample career opportunities.
                                             
 (d) Encourage students to pursue postsecondary education by
assisting in securing appropriate part-time work to accompany that
education.
                                             
 (e) Encourage lifelong learning by introducing students to the
importance of skills training and demonstrating how learning is relevant
to skills necessary in the workplace.
                                             
 (f) Provide tutoring, study skills training, and instruction
leading to successful completion of secondary school, including dropout
prevention strategies through a school-site mentor.
                                             
 (g) Provide alternative secondary school services with high
academic standards.
                                             
 (h) Deliver pre-employment and work maturity skill training, paid
and unpaid work, work-based learning experiences that teach all aspects
of industry-specific and general workplace competencies, including
internships, job shadowing, and school sponsored workplace mentoring.
                                             
 (i) Provide opportunities which may include community service and
peer- centered activities encouraging responsibility and other positive
social behaviors during non-school hours, including linking youth and
adult mentoring, as appropriate.
                                             
 (j) Provide support services and transitional links that assist
students in the elimination of barriers.
                                             
 (k) Establish an 85 percent graduation rate, and a 90 percent
return to school rate as performance goals for program participants most
likely to drop out. "Graduation rate'' means the number of seniors who
receive a diploma from a high school divided by the number enrolled in
this program at such high school. "Return to school rate'' means the
percentage of students in grades 9-11 enrolled in the program who return
to school for the next school year.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of the department of education shall adopt
rules pursuant to RSA 541-A, relevant to the implementation of this
subdivision. Such rules shall include:
                                             
 (a) Procedures for securing funds for participating entities.
                                             
 (b) Methods for tracking compliance with program goals and
reporting performance outcomes.

**Source.** 2003, 288:1, eff. Sept. 16, 2003.

### Section 189:60

 **189:60 Dropout Prevention and Dropout Recovery Oversight Council.
–**
                                             
 I. There is established a dropout prevention and dropout recovery
oversight council consisting of the following members:
                                             
 (a) One member from the house of representatives, appointed by
the speaker of the house.
                                             
 (b) One member from the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of the department of education, or
designee.
                                             
 (d) The chancellor of the community college system of New
Hampshire, or designee.
                                             
 (e) Three members of the public, qualified by education or
experience, in dropout prevention and dropout reduction, appointed by
the governor and council.
                                             
 II. The council shall:
                                             
 (a) Maintain programmatic and fiscal oversight of the program
requirements as set forth in this subdivision.
                                             
 (b) Develop and establish funding opportunities at the federal,
state, and local levels for each entity participating in this program.
                                             
 (c) Review each participating entity's performance outcomes and
suggest strategies for improvement where appropriate.
                                             
 (d) Apply for, receive, and expend any funds from federal, state,
or non-state sources, including grants and matching funds which may be
available, and accept private donations and gifts from any source.
                                             
 III. (a) The term of office for council members in subparagraphs
I(a)-(d) shall be coterminous with the term of office which qualifies
that member to serve on the council. Two members in subparagraph I(e)
shall serve a 2-year term of office and one member in subparagraph I(e)
shall serve a 3-year term of office. Members of the council shall serve
without compensation, except that legislative members shall receive
mileage at the legislative rate while attending to the duties of the
council.
                                             
 (b) The council shall elect a member to serve as chairperson of
the council. The chairperson shall serve a 2-year term. The council
shall meet at least quarterly and may meet more frequently at the call
of the chairperson.
                                             
 (c) Members shall serve until a successor is appointed and
confirmed. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment and shall only be for the unexpired term.

**Source.** 2003, 288:1. 2007, 361:26, eff. July 17, 2007.

### Section 189:61

 **189:61 Local Matching Funds Required. –** A school district may
receive dropout prevention and dropout recovery services by a favorable
vote of its legislative body authorizing the expenditure of not less
than 10 percent of estimated program costs for such school district.

**Source.** 2003, 288:1, eff. Sept. 16, 2003.

### Section 189:62

 **189:62 Eligible Program Participants. –**
                                             
 I. All programs shall be eligible to apply for dropout prevention
and dropout recovery programs and funds under this subdivision, provided
that such programs and funds shall be targeted, to the extent available,
to those high schools with the highest dropout rate, as determined by
the department of education.
                                             
 II. Program participants shall be certified by the department of
education according to the following criteria:
                                             
 (a) Programs which focus on youth development strategies.
                                             
 (b) A minimum of 3 years and preferably 10 or more years of
experience at the state and national levels in providing dropout
prevention and dropout recovery programming to at-risk youth.
                                             
 (c) Experience in program delivery in both rural and city high
schools in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (d) Programs shall be existing operations with boards of
directors.
                                             
 (e) Documentable accountability and performance measures with
supporting data.
                                             
 (f) State or national recognition for dropout prevention or
dropout recovery.
                                             
 (g) Ability to provide multiple sources of funds for the purposes
of expansion and efficiency of service delivery.
                                             
 (h) Programs which are members of the National Career
Association.
                                             
 (i) Provide nationally normed outcomes in the following areas:
                                             
 (1) Basic academic competencies.
                                             
 (2) Career development.
                                             
 (3) Job attainment.
                                             
 (4) Leadership and self development.
                                             
 (5) Personal skills.
                                             
 (6) Job survival competencies.
                                             
 (j) Connection with an established tracking and reporting system.

**Source.** 2003, 288:1, eff. Sept. 16, 2003.

### Section 189:63

 **189:63 Report. –** The dropout prevention and dropout recovery
oversight council shall annually submit a report to the speaker of the
house of representatives, the president of the senate, the commissioner
of the department of education, and the governor on the status of the
dropout prevention and dropout recovery program. The report shall
include details regarding an overall assessment of the effectiveness of
the program, the utilization of available funds in the program, dropout
rates of participating high schools or other participating entities,
graduation rates of participating high schools, the percent of
participating students pursuing postsecondary education, and the percent
of participating students securing employment in the year following
graduation.

**Source.** 2003, 288:1, eff. Sept. 16, 2003.

Emergency Response Plans
------------------------

### Section 189:64

 **189:64 Emergency Response Plans. –**
                                             
 I. Within 2 years of the effective date of this section, every
public and nonpublic school shall develop a site-specific school
emergency response plan which is based on and conforms to the Incident
Command System and the National Incident Management System. The plan
should be documented at the time of school approval review. The plan
shall provide that at least 2 of the currently required number of fire
evacuation drills shall be emergency response drills. The plan shall
address hazards including but not limited to acts of violence, threats,
earthquakes, floods, tornadoes, structural fire, wildfire, internal and
external hazardous materials releases, medical emergencies, and any
other hazard deemed necessary by school officials and local emergency
authorities. The first emergency response drill shall be conducted
within one year of the completion of the plan. If the school has a
building schematic floor plan diagram, the school may, with the approval
of the local school board, submit the diagram to the division of
homeland security and emergency management, department of safety, in a
commonly used digital format. Submission of the diagram will enable the
state to better prepare, respond, and mitigate potentially dangerous
conditions should the need arise.
                                             
 II. The plan shall be coordinated with local emergency authorities
and with the emergency operations plan in the municipality in which the
school is located. A school shall review its plan at least annually, and
shall update the plan, as necessary. The director of homeland security
and emergency management, department of safety shall assist school
districts in conducting training for and providing support to school
districts in the development, implementation, and review of an emergency
response plan, as may be needed.

**Source.** 2007, 92:1, eff. July 1, 2007. 2014, 87:1, eff. Aug. 10,
2014.

Student and Teacher Information Protection and Privacy
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 189:65

 **189:65 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Biometric'' means a record of one or more measurable biological
or behavioral characteristics that can be used for automated recognition
of an individual. Examples include fingerprints, retina and iris
patterns, voiceprints, DNA sequence, facial characteristics, and
handwriting.
                                             
 II. "Board'' means the state board of education.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of education.
                                             
 IV. "District'', "school'', or "school district'' means a school
district, including the school administrative unit to which it may
belong, and the high school educational program at the state prison or
county jail in which an inmate under the age of 21 is participating.
                                             
 V. "Disclosure'' means permitting access to, revealing, releasing,
transferring, or otherwise communicating, personally identifiable
information contained in education records to any party, by any means,
including oral, written, or electronic.
                                             
 VI. "Statewide longitudinal data system'' (SLDS) means the
department's statewide longitudinal data system containing student
information collected pursuant to RSA 193-E:5 and the state longitudinal
database created to house data pursuant to RSA 193-E:5.
                                             
 VII. "Student personally-identifiable data'' means:
                                             
 (a) The student's name.
                                             
 (b) The name of the student's parents or other family members.
                                             
 (c) The address of the student or student's family.
                                             
 (d) Indirect identifiers, including the student's date of birth,
place of birth, social security number, email, social media address, or
other electronic address, telephone number, credit card account number,
insurance account number, and financial services account number.
                                             
 (e) Other information that, alone or in combination, is linked or
linkable to a specific student that would allow a reasonable person in
the school community, who does not have personal knowledge of the
relevant circumstances, to identify the student with reasonable
certainty.
                                             
 VII-a. "Teacher personally-identifiable data'' or "teacher data,''
which shall apply to teachers, paraprofessionals, principals, school
employees, contractors, and other administrators, means:
                                             
 (a) Social security number.
                                             
 (b) Date of birth.
                                             
 (c) Personal street address.
                                             
 (d) Personal email address.
                                             
 (e) Personal telephone number.
                                             
 (f) Performance evaluations.
                                             
 (g) Other information that, alone or in combination, is linked or
linkable to a specific teacher, paraprofessional, principal, or
administrator that would allow a reasonable person in the school
community, who does not have personal knowledge of the relevant
circumstances, to identify any with reasonable certainty.
                                             
 (h) Information requested by a person who the department
reasonably believes or knows the identity of the teacher,
paraprofessional, principal, or administrator to whom the education
record relates.
                                             
 VIII. "Testing entity'' means a third party, within or outside of
New Hampshire, contracted to administer the state assessment as defined
in RSA 193-C:6.
                                             
 IX. "Workforce information'' means information related to
unemployment insurance, wage records, unemployment benefit claims, or
employment and earnings data from workforce data sources, such as state
wage records, wage record interchange system (WRIS) data or the federal
employment data exchange system (FEDES).

**Source.** 2014, 68:1, eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 71:2, eff. Aug. 1,
2015.

### Section 189:66

 **189:66 Data Inventory and Policies Publication. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall create, maintain, and make publicly
available an annually-updated index of data elements containing
definitions of individual student personally-identifiable data fields or
fields identified in RSA 189:68 currently in the SLDS or any other
database maintained by the department, or added or proposed to be added
thereto, including:
                                             
 (a) Any individual student personally-identifiable data required
to be reported by state or federal law.
                                             
 (b) Any individual student personally-identifiable data which has
been proposed for inclusion in the SLDS with a statement explaining the
purpose or reason for the proposed collection.
                                             
 (c) Any individual student personally-identifiable data that the
department collects or maintains.
                                             
 (d) Any data identified in RSA 189:68.
                                             
 II. The department shall develop a detailed data security plan to
present to the state board, the legislative oversight committee
established in RSA 193-C:7, and the commissioner of the department of
information technology. The plan shall include:
                                             
 (a) Privacy compliance standards.
                                             
 (b) Privacy and security audits.
                                             
 (c) Breach planning, notification, and procedures.
                                             
 (d) Data retention and disposition policies.
                                             
 III. The security plan shall:
                                             
 (a) Require notification as soon as practicable to:
                                             
 (1) Any teacher or student whose personally identifiable
information could reasonably be assumed to have been part of any data
security breach, consistent with the legitimate needs of law enforcement
or any measures necessary to determine the scope of the breach and
restore the integrity of the data system; and
                                             
 (2) The governor, state board, senate president, speaker of
the house of representatives, chairperson of the senate committee with
primary jurisdiction over education, chairperson of the house committee
with primary jurisdiction over education, legislative oversight
committee established in RSA 193-C:7, and commissioner of the department
of information technology.
                                             
 (b) Require the department to issue an annual data security
breach report to the governor, state board, senate president, speaker of
the house of representatives, chairperson of the senate committee with
primary jurisdiction over education, chairperson of the house committee
with primary jurisdiction over education, legislative oversight
committee established in RSA 193-C:7, and commissioner of the department
of information technology. The breach report shall also be posted to the
department's public Internet website and shall not include any
information that itself would pose a security threat to a database or
data system. The report shall include:
                                             
 (1) The name of the organization reporting the breach.
                                             
 (2) Any types of personal information that were or are
reasonably believed to have been the subject of a breach.
                                             
 (3) The date, estimated date, or date range of the breach.
                                             
 (4) A general description of the breach incident.
                                             
 (5) The estimated number of students and teachers affected by
the breach, if any.
                                             
 (6) Information about what the reporting organization has done
to protect individuals whose information has been breached.
                                             
 IV. The department shall make publicly available students' and
parents' rights under the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA), 20 U.S.C. section 1232g, et seq., and applicable state law
including:
                                             
 (a) The right to inspect and review the student's education
records within 14 days after the day the school receives a request for
access.
                                             
 (b) The right to request amendment of a student's education
records that the parent or eligible student believes are inaccurate,
misleading, or otherwise in violation of the student's privacy rights
under FERPA.
                                             
 (c) The right to provide written consent before the school
discloses student personally identifiable data from the student's
education records, provided in applicable state and federal law.
                                             
 (d) The right to file a complaint with the Family Policy
Compliance Office in the United States Department of Education
concerning alleged failures to comply with the requirements of FERPA.

**Source.** 2014, 68:1, eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 136:1, eff. Aug. 11,
2015.

### Section 189:67

 **189:67 Limits on Disclosure of Information. –**
                                             
 I. A school shall, on request, disclose student
personally-identifiable data about a student to the parent, foster
parent, or legal guardian of the student under the age of 18 or to the
eligible student.
                                             
 II. A school or the department may disclose to a testing entity the
student's name or unique pupil identifier, but not both, and birth date
for the sole purpose of identifying the test taker. Except when
collected in conjunction with the SAT or ACT, when such tests are used
for the purpose of the state assessment as defined in RSA 193-C:6, the
data shall be destroyed by the testing entity as soon as the testing
entity has completed the verification of test takers, shall not be
disclosed by the testing entity to any other person, organization,
entity or government or any component thereof, other than the district,
school or school district, and shall not be used by the testing entity
for any other purpose whatsoever, including but not limited to test-data
analysis.
                                             
 II-a. Students taking the SAT or ACT, when such tests are used for
the purpose of the state assessment as defined in RSA 193-C:6, may opt
to have all personal information destroyed by the testing entity,
following the completion and verification of the test.
                                             
 III. Except when collected in conjunction with the SAT or ACT, when
such tests are used for the purpose of the state assessment as defined
in RSA 193-C:6, neither a school nor the department shall disclose or
permit the disclosure of student or teacher personally-identifiable
data, the unique pupil identifier, or any other data listed in RSA
189:68, I to any testing entity performing test-data analysis. The
testing entity may perform the test analysis but shall not connect such
data to other student data.
                                             
 IV. Except as provided in RSA 193-E:5, or pursuant to a court order
signed by a judge, the department shall not disclose student
personally-identifiable data in the SLDS or teacher
personally-identifiable data in other department data systems to any
individual, person, organization, entity, government or component
thereof, but may disclose such data to the school district in which the
student resides or the teacher is employed.
                                             
 V. Student personally-identifiable data shall be considered
confidential and privileged and shall not be disclosed, directly or
indirectly, as a result of administrative or judicial proceedings.
                                             
 VI. The department shall report quarterly on its website the number
of times it disclosed student personally-identifiable data to any
person, organization entity or government or a component thereof, other
than the student, his or her parents, foster parents or legal guardian
and the school district, early childhood program or post-secondary
institution in which the student was enrolled at the time of disclosure;
the name of the recipient or entity of the disclosure; and the legal
basis for the disclosure.

**Source.** 2014, 68:1, eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 71:3, eff. Aug. 1,
2015. 2016, 69:1, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 189:68

 **189:68 Student Privacy. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall not collect or maintain the following data
in the SLDS:
                                             
 (a) Name of the student's parents or other family members.
                                             
 (b) Address of the student or student's family.
                                             
 (c) Student email or other electronic address.
                                             
 (d) Student or family telephone number.
                                             
 (e) Student or parent credit card account number, insurance
account number, or financial services account number.
                                             
 (f) Juvenile delinquency records.
                                             
 (g) Criminal records.
                                             
 (h) Medical and dental insurance information.
                                             
 (i) Student birth information, other than birth date and town of
birth.
                                             
 (j) Student social security number.
                                             
 (k) Student biometric information.
                                             
 (l) Student postsecondary workforce information including the
employer's name, and the name of a college attended outside of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 (m) Height and weight.
                                             
 (n) Body mass index (BMI).
                                             
 (o) Political affiliations or beliefs of student or parents.
                                             
 (p) Family income, excluding free and reduced lunch program
eligibility as determined by Food Nutrition Services of the United
States Department of Agriculture.
                                             
 (q) Mother's maiden name.
                                             
 (r) Parent's social security number.
                                             
 (s) Mental and psychological problems of the student or the
student's family.
                                             
 (t) Sex behavior or attitudes.
                                             
 (u) Indication of a student pregnancy.
                                             
 (v) Religious or ethical practices, affiliations, or beliefs of
the student or the student's parents.
                                             
 II. No school shall require a student to use an identification
device that uses radio frequency identification, or similar technology,
to identify the student, transmit information regarding the student, or
monitor or track the student without approval of the school board, after
a public hearing, and without the written consent of a parent of legal
guardian of an affected student which may be withheld without
consequence.
                                             
 III. No school shall install remote surveillance software on a
school supplied computing device provided to a student without the
approval of the school board, after a public hearing and without the
written consent of a parent, foster parent, or legal guardian of the
affected student which may be withheld without consequence. In this
paragraph, "surveillance'' means observing, capturing images, listening,
or recording and shall not include locating equipment when there is
reason to believe the equipment is about to be or has been stolen or
damaged.
                                             
 IV. No school shall record in any way a school classroom for the
purpose of teacher evaluations without school board approval after a
public hearing, and without written consent of the teacher and the
parent or legal guardian of each affected student.
                                             
 V. (a) Nothing in this section shall preclude the use of audio or
video recordings for use with or by a child with a disability, or by
such child's teacher or service provider when the child's individualized
education program or accommodation plan includes audio or video
recording as part of the child's special education, related services,
assistive technology service, or methodology, so long as such audio or
video recordings are made, used, and maintained in accordance with the
Family Education Rights and Privacy Act, 20 U.S.C. section 1232g, and
applicable state law.
                                             
 (b) Nothing in this section shall preclude the use of audio or
video recordings for student instructional purposes.
                                             
 (c) Nothing in this section shall preclude the use of audio or
video recordings for use in the instruction of teacher interns or
student teachers after written notification to the parent or legal
guardian of each affected student as to the purpose of, and privacy
policy for, the recordings.

**Source.** 2014, 68:1, eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 71:4, eff. Aug. 1,
2015. 2016, 87:1, eff. May 19, 2016.

### Section 189:68-a

 **189:68-a Student Online Personal Information. –**
                                             
 I. For the purposes of this section:
                                             
 (a) "Operator'' means the operator of an Internet website, online
service, online application, or mobile application with actual knowledge
that the site, service, or application is used primarily for K-12 school
purposes and was designed and marketed for K-12 school purposes.
                                             
 (b) "Covered information'' means personally identifiable
information or materials, in any media or format that meets any of the
following:
                                             
 (1) Is created or provided by a student, or the student's
parent or legal guardian, to an operator in the course of the student's,
parent's, or legal guardian's use of the operator's site, service, or
application for K-12 school purposes.
                                             
 (2) Is created or provided by an employee or agent of the K-12
school, school district, local education agency, or county office of
education, to an operator.
                                             
 (3) Is gathered by an operator through the operation of a
site, service, or application described in subparagraph (a) and is
descriptive of a student or otherwise identifies a student, including,
but not limited to, information in the student's educational record or
email, first and last name, home address, date of birth, telephone
number, unique pupil identifier, social security number, financial or
insurance account numbers, email address, other information that allows
physical or online contact, discipline records, test results, special
education data, juvenile dependency records, grades, evaluations,
criminal records, medical records, health records, biometric
information, disabilities, socioeconomic information, food purchases,
political affiliations, religious information, text messages, documents,
other student identifiers, search activity, photos, voice recordings, or
geo-location information.
                                             
 (c) "K-12 school purposes'' means purposes that customarily take
place at the direction of the K-12 school, teacher, or school district
or aid in the administration of school activities, including, but not
limited to, instruction in the classroom or at home, administrative
activities, and collaboration between students, school personnel, or
parents, or are for the use and benefit of the school.
                                             
 (d) "Online service'' includes cloud computing services, which
shall comply with this section if they otherwise meet the definition of
an operator.
                                             
 II. (a) No operator shall knowingly engage in any of the following
activities with respect to their site, service, or application:
                                             
 (1) Targeted advertising on the operator's site, service, or
application, or targeted advertising on any other site, service, or
application when the targeting of the advertising is based upon any
information, including covered information and persistent unique
identifiers, that the operator has acquired because of the use of that
operator's site, service, or application.
                                             
 (2) Use of information, including persistent unique
identifiers, created or gathered by the operator's site, service, or
application, to amass a profile about a K-12 student.
                                             
 (3) Sale, lease, rent, trade, or otherwise make available a
student's information, including covered information. This prohibition
does not apply to the purchase, merger, or other type of acquisition of
an operator by another entity, provided that the operator or successor
entity continues to be subject to the provisions of this section with
respect to previously acquired student information.
                                             
 (4) Disclosing protected information unless the disclosure is
made to respond to or participate in judicial process.
                                             
 (b) An operator shall:
                                             
 (1) Implement and maintain reasonable security procedures and
practices appropriate to the nature of the covered information, and
protect that information from unauthorized access, destruction, use,
modification, or disclosure.
                                             
 (2) Delete a student's covered information if the school or
district requests deletion of data under the control of the school or
district.
                                             
 (c) Nothing in this section shall prohibit an operator from using
de-identified student covered information as follows:
                                             
 (1) Within the operator's site, service, or application or
other sites, services, or applications owned by the operator to improve
educational products.
                                             
 (2) To demonstrate the effectiveness of the operator's
products or services, including in its marketing.
                                             
 (d) Nothing in this section shall prohibit an operator from
sharing aggregated de-identified student covered information for the
development and improvement of educational sites, services, or
applications.
                                             
 III. This section shall not apply to general audience Internet
websites, general audience online services, general audience online
applications, or general audience mobile applications, even if login
credentials created for an operator's site, service, or application may
be used to access those general audience sites, services, or
applications.
                                             
 IV. This section shall not limit Internet service providers from
providing Internet connectivity to schools or students and their
families.
                                             
 V. This section shall not be construed to prohibit an operator of an
Internet website, online service, online application, or mobile
application from marketing educational products directly to parents so
long as the marketing did not result from the use of covered information
obtained by the operator through the provision of services covered under
this section.
                                             
 VI. This section shall not be construed to impose a duty upon a
provider of an electronic store, gateway, marketplace, or other means of
purchasing or downloading software or applications to review or enforce
compliance with this section on those applications or software.
                                             
 VII. This section shall not be construed to impose a duty upon a
provider of an interactive computer service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
section 230, to review or enforce compliance with this section by
third-party content providers.
                                             
 VIII. This section shall not impede the ability of students to
download, export, or otherwise save or maintain their own student
created data or documents.
                                             
 IX. The provisions of this section are severable. If any provision
of this section or its application is held invalid, that invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications that can be given
effect without the invalid provision or application.

**Source.** 2015, 128:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

Commission to Study Sexual Abuse Prevention Education in Elementary and Secondary Schools
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 189:69

 **189:69 Commission Established. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2014, 143:2, eff.
July 1, 2015.
                                             ]

Educational Institution Policies on Social Media
------------------------------------------------

### Section 189:70

 **189:70 Educational Institution Policies on Social Media. –**
                                             
 I. An educational institution shall not:
                                             
 (a) Require or request a student or prospective student to
disclose or to provide access to a personal social media account through
the student's or prospective student's user name, password, or other
means of authentication that provides access.
                                             
 (b) Require or request a student or prospective student to access
a personal social media account in the presence of any employee of the
educational institution in a manner that enables the employee to observe
the contents of the personal social media account.
                                             
 (c) Compel a student or prospective student to add anyone to his
or her list of contacts associated with a personal social media account
or require, request, suggest, or cause a student or prospective student
to change the privacy settings associated with a personal social media
account.
                                             
 (d) Take or threaten to take any action against a student or
prospective student to discipline or prohibit such student or
prospective student from participation in curricular or co-curricular
activities for refusal to disclose information or to take actions
specified in subparagraphs (a)-(c).
                                             
 (e) Fail or refuse to admit a prospective student as a result of
the refusal by the prospective student to disclose information or to
take actions specified in subparagraphs (a)-(c).
                                             
 II. Nothing in this subdivision shall prohibit an educational
institution from adopting a policy which permits:
                                             
 (a) Conducting an investigation, without requiring or requesting
access to a personal social media account through username, password, or
other means of authentication, for the purpose of ensuring compliance
with applicable law or educational institution's policies against
student misconduct based on the receipt of specific information about
activity associated with a student's social media account. In the case
of a minor, the educational institution may request the student's parent
or guardian to provide specific data from the student's social media
account.
                                             
 (b) Revoking a student's access, in whole or in part, to
equipment or computer networks owned or operated by the educational
institution.
                                             
 (c) Monitoring the usage of the educational institution's
computer network.
                                             
 (d) Requesting a student voluntarily share a printed copy of a
specific communication from the student's social media account that is
relevant to an ongoing investigation.
                                             
 III. This subdivision shall not apply to personal social media
accounts that are created or provided by the educational institution if
the student has been provided advance notice that the account may be
monitored at any time by employees of the educational institution.
                                             
 IV. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Educational institution'' means a public or private school,
college, university, or other institution that offers students,
participants, or trainees an organized course of study or training that
is academic, technical, vocational, trade-oriented, or designed to
prepare a person for employment. "Educational institution'' shall not
include a military school.
                                             
 (b) "Social media account'' means an account, service, or profile
on a social networking website that is used by a current or prospective
student primarily for personal communications. This definition shall not
apply to an account opened or provided by an educational institution and
intended to be used solely on behalf of the educational institution.

**Source.** 2015, 270:1, eff. Sept. 19, 2015.

Military Uniforms
-----------------

### Section 189:71

 **189:71 Military Uniform. –** A student shall have the right to
wear a dress uniform issued to the student by a branch of the United
States armed forces while participating in the graduation ceremony for
the student's high school if that student meets the following
requirements:
                                             
 I. The student has fulfilled all of the requirements for receiving a
high school diploma in the state of New Hampshire and the school
district and is otherwise eligible to participate in the graduation
ceremony.
                                             
 II. The student has completed basic training for and is an active
member of a branch of the United States armed forces.

**Source.** 2016, 32:2, eff. July 1, 2016.
