---
title: CHAPTER 190 COUNCIL FOR TEACHER EDUCATION
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 190
                                             
COUNCIL FOR TEACHER EDUCATION
-----------------------------

### Section 190:1

 **190:1 Establishment. –** An advisory and coordinating council for
teacher education, hereinafter called the council for teacher education,
is hereby established.

**Source.** 1951, 143:1, eff. June 6, 1951.

### Section 190:2

 **190:2 Members. –** The council for teacher education shall consist
of: the commissioner of education and the chairman of the department of
education of the university of New Hampshire; 3 members appointed by
them for terms not exceeding 3 years, one from a private educational
institution, one from the professional personnel of the public schools
and one layman; and the presidents of Keene state college and Plymouth
state university, or staff members designated by them; provided that
additional members may be appointed by these 7 for such terms as they
may determine. Members of the council shall be entitled to reimbursement
by the state board of education for mileage and expenses incurred in the
performance of their required duties. The state board of education shall
furnish the council with suitable meeting facilities, administrative
assistance, and necessary supplies.

**Source.** 1951, 143:2. 2003, 159:2. 2007, 21:1, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 190:3

 **190:3 Duties. –** The council for teacher education shall
coordinate teacher education in the state in an advisory capacity
through a continuing study and discussion of its problems and shall
issue advisory reports to agencies and institutions, public and private,
concerned with teacher education or its financing in this state.

**Source.** 1951, 143:3, eff. June 6, 1951.

### Section 190:4

 **190:4 Meetings. –** The council shall meet at least twice each
year.

**Source.** 1951, 143:4, eff. June 6, 1951.

### Section 190:5

 **190:5 Officers. –** The council members shall elect a chairman and
secretary annually to serve for the ensuing year.

**Source.** 1951, 143:5, eff. June 6, 1951.

### Section 190:6

 **190:6 Meeting Room; Clerical Assistance. –** The state board of
education shall provide a meeting room, filing space and clerical
assistance to the council.

**Source.** 1951, 143:6, eff. June 6, 1951.

### Section 190:7

 **190:7 Employment of Consultant. –** The council is empowered to
employ consultant services subject to the approval of the state board of
education. The said board shall pay the expenses of such employment.

**Source.** 1951, 143:7, eff. June 6, 1951.
