---
title: 'CHAPTER 193-D SAFE SCHOOL ZONES'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 193-D
                                             
SAFE SCHOOL ZONES
-----------------

### Section 193-D:1

 **193-D:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Act of theft, destruction, or violence'' means an act set forth
in the following statutes regardless of the age of the perpetrator:
                                             
 (a) Homicide under RSA 630.
                                             
 (b)(1) Any first or second degree assault under RSA 631.
                                             
 (2) Any simple assault under RSA 631:2-a.
                                             
 (c) Any felonious or aggravated felonious sexual assault under
RSA 632-A.
                                             
 (d) Criminal mischief under RSA 634:2.
                                             
 (e) Unlawful possession or sale of a firearm or other dangerous
weapon under RSA 159.
                                             
 (f) Arson under RSA 634:1.
                                             
 (g) Burglary under RSA 635.
                                             
 (h) Robbery under RSA 636.
                                             
 (i) Theft under RSA 637.
                                             
 (j) Illegal sale or possession of a controlled drug under RSA
318-B.
                                             
 (k) Criminal threatening under RSA 631:4.
                                             
 II. "Safe school zone'' means an area inclusive of any school
property or school buses.
                                             
 III. "School'' means any public or private elementary, secondary, or
secondary vocational-technical school in New Hampshire. It shall not
include home schools under RSA 193-A.
                                             
 IV. "School employee'' means any school administrator, teacher, or
other employee of any public or private school, school district, school
department, or school administrative unit, or any person providing or
performing continuing contract services for any public or private
school, school district, school department, or school administrative
unit.
                                             
 V. "School property'' means all real property, physical plant and
equipment used for school purposes, including but not limited to school
playgrounds and buses, whether public or private.
                                             
 VI. "School purposes'' means school-sponsored programs, including
but not limited to educational or extra-curricular activities.

**Source.** 1994, 355:3. 1995, 231:2. 2007, 139:1, eff. Aug. 17, 2007.

### Section 193-D:2

 **193-D:2 State Board Rulemaking Authority; Public School District
Policies. –**
                                             
 I. The state board of education shall adopt rules relative to safe
school zones, under RSA 541-A, for public school pupils and public
school employees regarding:
                                             
 (a) Disciplinary proceedings, including procedures assuring due
process.
                                             
 (b)(1) Standards and procedures for suspension and expulsion of
pupils, including procedures assuring due process.
                                             
 (2) Standards and procedures which shall require expulsion of
a pupil for knowingly possessing a firearm in a safe school zone without
written authorization from the superintendent or designee.
                                             
 (c) Procedures pertaining to discipline of pupils with special
needs, including procedures assuring due process.
                                             
 (d) Procedures for reporting acts of theft, destruction, or
violence under RSA 193-D:4.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit local school boards from
adopting and implementing policies relative to pupil conduct and
disciplinary procedures.

**Source.** 1994, 355:3, eff. June 8, 1994.

### Section 193-D:3

 **193-D:3 Criminal Penalties. –** Any person convicted of an act of
theft, destruction, or violence as defined in RSA 193-D:1 committed in a
safe school zone at any time of year may be subject to an extended term
of imprisonment as provided in RSA 651:6.

**Source.** 1994, 355:3, eff. Sept. 1, 1994.

### Section 193-D:4

 **193-D:4 Written Report Required. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Any public or private school employee who has witnessed or
who has information from the victim of an act of theft, destruction, or
violence in a safe school zone shall report such act in writing
immediately to a supervisor. A supervisor receiving such report shall
immediately forward such information to the school principal who shall
file it with the local law enforcement authority. Such report shall be
made by the principal to the local law enforcement authority
immediately, by telephone or otherwise, and shall be followed within 48
hours by a report in writing. If the alleged victim is a student, the
principal shall also immediately notify the person responsible for the
victim's welfare, as defined in RSA 169-C:3, XXII, that a report was
made to the local law enforcement authority.
                                             
 (b) The provisions of subparagraph (a) shall not apply to any
simple assault involving pupils in kindergarten through grade 12 if the
local school board has adopted a discipline policy which sets forth
circumstances under which parents shall be notified of simple assaults.
                                             
 (c) Each school district, in conjunction with the local law
enforcement authority, shall establish a memorandum of understanding for
administering the provisions of RSA 193-D:4, I(a)-(c).
                                             
 II. The report required under paragraph I shall include:
                                             
 (a) The name and home address, if known, of any person suspected
of committing an act of theft, destruction, or violence in a safe school
zone.
                                             
 (b) The name and home address, if known, of any witness to the
act of theft, destruction, or violence in a safe school zone.
                                             
 (c) Identification of the act of theft, destruction, or violence
as defined in RSA 193-D:1 that was allegedly committed.

**Source.** 1994, 355:3. 1995, 231:3. 2000, 194:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 193-D:5

 **193-D:5 Waiver of Written Report Requirement. –** The written
report required under RSA 193-D:4 shall be waived by law enforcement
officials when there is a law enforcement response at the time of the
incident which results in a written police report.

**Source.** 1994, 355:3, eff. Sept. 1, 1994.

### Section 193-D:6

 **193-D:6 Penalties for Failure to Report. –** Any person who
knowingly fails to comply with the reporting requirements under RSA
193-D:4 for acts of theft, destruction, or violence, unless such report
is waived under RSA 193-D:5, shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1994, 355:3, eff. Sept. 1, 1994.

### Section 193-D:7

 **193-D:7 Confidentiality. –** Notwithstanding any other provision
of law, it shall be permissible for any law enforcement officer and any
school administrator to exchange information relating only to acts of
theft, destruction, or violence in a safe school zone regarding the
identity of any juvenile, police records relating to a juvenile, or
other relevant information when such information reasonably relates to
delinquency or criminal conduct, suspected delinquency or suspected
criminal conduct, or any conduct which would classify a pupil as a child
in need of services under RSA 169-D or a child in need of protection
under RSA 169-C.

**Source.** 1994, 355:3, eff. Sept. 1, 1994.

### Section 193-D:8

 **193-D:8 Transfer Records; Notice. –** All elementary and secondary
educational institutions, including academies, private schools, and
public schools, shall upon request of the parent, pupil, or former
pupil, furnish a complete school record for the pupil transferring into
a new school system. Such record shall include, but not be limited to,
records relating to any incidents involving suspension or expulsion, or
delinquent or criminal acts, or any incident reports in which the pupil
was charged with any act of theft, destruction, or violence in a safe
school zone.

**Source.** 1994, 355:3, eff. Sept. 1, 1994.

### Section 193-D:9

 **193-D:9 Liability for Reporting. –** Any public or private school
employee or employee of a company under contract to a school or school
district who in good faith has made a report under RSA 193-D shall not
be subject to liability for making the report.

**Source.** 2010, 155:5, eff. July 1, 2010.
