---
title: 'CHAPTER 193-F PUPIL SAFETY AND VIOLENCE PREVENTION'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 193-F
                                             
PUPIL SAFETY AND VIOLENCE PREVENTION
------------------------------------

### Section 193-F:1

 **193-F:1 Title. –** This chapter shall be known, and may be cited
as the "Pupil Safety and Violence Prevention Act of 2000.''

**Source.** 2000, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 193-F:2

 **193-F:2 Purpose and Intent. –**
                                             
 I. All pupils have the right to attend public schools, including
chartered public schools, that are safe, secure, and peaceful
environments. One of the legislature's highest priorities is to protect
our children from physical, emotional, and psychological violence by
addressing the harm caused by bullying and cyberbullying in our public
schools.
                                             
 II. Bullying in schools has historically included actions shown to
be motivated by a pupil's actual or perceived race, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry or ethnicity, sexual orientation,
socioeconomic status, age, physical, mental, emotional, or learning
disability, gender, gender identity and expression, obesity, or other
distinguishing personal characteristics, or based on association with
any person identified in any of the above categories.
                                             
 III. It is the intent of the legislature to protect our children
from physical, emotional, and psychological violence by addressing
bullying and cyberbullying of any kind in our public schools, for all of
the historical reasons set forth in this section, and to prevent the
creation of a hostile educational environment.
                                             
 IV. The sole purpose of this chapter is to protect all children from
bullying and cyberbullying, and no other legislative purpose is
intended, nor should any other intent be construed from the enactment of
this chapter.

**Source.** 2000, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001. 2010, 155:1, eff. July 1,
2010.

### Section 193-F:3

 **193-F:3 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. (a) "Bullying'' means a single significant incident or a pattern
of incidents involving a written, verbal, or electronic communication,
or a physical act or gesture, or any combination thereof, directed at
another pupil which:
                                             
 (1) Physically harms a pupil or damages the pupil's property;
                                             
 (2) Causes emotional distress to a pupil;
                                             
 (3) Interferes with a pupil's educational opportunities;
                                             
 (4) Creates a hostile educational environment; or
                                             
 (5) Substantially disrupts the orderly operation of the
school.
                                             
 (b) "Bullying'' shall include actions motivated by an imbalance
of power based on a pupil's actual or perceived personal
characteristics, behaviors, or beliefs, or motivated by the pupil's
association with another person and based on the other person's
characteristics, behaviors, or beliefs.
                                             
 II. "Cyberbullying'' means conduct defined in paragraph I of this
section undertaken through the use of electronic devices.
                                             
 III. "Electronic devices'' include, but are not limited to,
telephones, cellular phones, computers, pagers, electronic mail, instant
messaging, text messaging, and websites.
                                             
 IV. "Perpetrator'' means a pupil who engages in bullying or
cyberbullying.
                                             
 V. "School property'' means all real property and all physical plant
and equipment used for school purposes, including public or private
school buses or vans.
                                             
 VI. "Victim'' means a pupil against whom bullying or cyberbullying
has been perpetrated.

**Source.** 2000, 190:1. 2004, 205:1, eff. June 11, 2004. 2010, 155:2,
eff. July 1, 2010.

### Section 193-F:4

 **193-F:4 Pupil Safety and Violence Prevention. –**
                                             
 I. Bullying or cyberbullying shall occur when an action or
communication as defined in RSA 193-F:3:
                                             
 (a) Occurs on, or is delivered to, school property or a
school-sponsored activity or event on or off school property; or
                                             
 (b) Occurs off of school property or outside of a
school-sponsored activity or event, if the conduct interferes with a
pupil's educational opportunities or substantially disrupts the orderly
operations of the school or school-sponsored activity or event.
                                             
 II. The school board of each school district and the board of
trustees of a chartered public school shall, no later than 6 months
after the effective date of this section, adopt a written policy
prohibiting bullying and cyberbullying. Such policy shall include the
definitions set forth in RSA 193-F:3. The policy shall contain, at a
minimum, the following components:
                                             
 (a) A statement prohibiting bullying or cyberbullying of a
pupil.
                                             
 (b) A statement prohibiting retaliation or false accusations
against a victim, witness, or anyone else who in good faith provides
information about an act of bullying or cyberbullying and, at the time a
report is made, a process for developing, as needed, a plan to protect
pupils from retaliation.
                                             
 (c) A requirement that all pupils are protected regardless of
their status under the law.
                                             
 (d) A statement that there shall be disciplinary consequences or
interventions, or both, for a pupil who commits an act of bullying or
cyberbullying, or falsely accuses another of the same as a means of
retaliation or reprisal.
                                             
 (e) A statement indicating how the policy shall be made known to
school employees, regular school volunteers, pupils, parents, legal
guardians, or employees of a company under contract to a school, school
district, or chartered public school. Recommended methods of
communication include, but are not limited to, handbooks, websites,
newsletters, and workshops.
                                             
 (f) A procedure for reporting bullying or cyberbullying that
identifies all persons to whom a pupil or another person may report
bullying or cyberbullying.
                                             
 (g) A procedure outlining the internal reporting requirements
within the school or school district or chartered public school.
                                             
 (h) A procedure for notification, within 48 hours of the incident
report, to the parent or parents or guardian of a victim of bullying or
cyberbullying and the parent or parents or guardian of the perpetrator
of the bullying or cyberbullying. The content of the notification shall
comply with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act, 20 U.S.C.
1232g.
                                             
 (i) A provision that the superintendent or designee may, within
the 48-hour period, grant the school principal or designee a waiver from
the notification requirement if the superintendent or designee deems
such waiver to be in the best interest of the victim or perpetrator. Any
such waiver granted shall be in writing. Granting of a waiver shall not
negate the school's responsibility to adhere to the remainder of its
approved written policy.
                                             
 (j) A written procedure for investigation of reports, to be
initiated within 5 school days of the reported incident, identifying
either the principal or the principal's designee as the person
responsible for the investigation and the manner and time period in
which the results of the investigation shall be documented. The
superintendent or designee may grant in writing an extension of the time
period for the investigation and documentation of reports for up to an
additional 7 school days, if necessary. The superintendent or
superintendent's designee shall notify in writing all parties involved
of the granting of an extension.
                                             
 (k) A requirement that the principal or designee develop a
response to remediate any substantiated incident of bullying or
cyberbullying, including imposing discipline if appropriate, to reduce
the risk of future incidents and, where deemed appropriate, to offer
assistance to the victim or perpetrator. When indicated, the principal
or designee shall recommend a strategy for protecting all pupils from
retaliation of any kind.
                                             
 (l) A requirement that the principal or designee report all
substantiated incidents of bullying or cyberbullying to the
superintendent or designee.
                                             
 (m) A written procedure for communication with the parent or
parents or guardian of victims and perpetrators regarding the school's
remedies and assistance, within the boundaries of applicable state and
federal law. This communication shall occur within 10 school days of
completion of the investigation.
                                             
 (n) Identification, by job title, of school officials responsible
for ensuring that the policy is implemented.
                                             
 III. The department of education may develop a model policy in
accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter which may be
used by schools, school districts, and chartered public schools as a
basis for adopting a local policy.
                                             
 IV. A school board or board of trustees of a chartered public school
shall, to the greatest extent practicable, involve pupils, parents,
administrators, school staff, school volunteers, community
representatives, and local law enforcement agencies in the process of
developing the policy. The policy shall be adopted by all public schools
within the school district and, to the extent possible, the policy
should be integrated with the school's curriculum, discipline policies,
behavior programs, and other violence prevention efforts.

**Source.** 2000, 190:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001. 2010, 155:2, eff. July 1,
2010.

### Section 193-F:5

 **193-F:5 Training and Assessment. –**
                                             
 I. Each school district and chartered public school shall provide:
                                             
 (a) Training on policies adopted pursuant to this chapter, within
9 months of the effective date of this section and annually thereafter,
for school employees, regular school volunteers, or employees of a
company under contract to a school, school district, or chartered public
school who have significant contact with pupils for the purpose of
preventing, identifying, responding to, and reporting incidents of
bullying or cyberbullying; and
                                             
 (b) Educational programs for pupils and parents in preventing,
identifying, responding to, and reporting incidents of bullying or
cyberbullying. Any such program for pupils shall be written and
presented in age appropriate language.
                                             
 II. The department of education shall provide evidence-based
educational programs to support training as required under paragraph I.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this chapter shall require the inclusion of any
specific curriculum, textbook, or other material designed to prevent
bullying or cyberbullying in any program or activity conducted by an
educational institution. The omission of such subject matter from any
curriculum, textbook, or other material in any program or activity
conducted by an educational institution shall not constitute a violation
of this chapter.

**Source.** 2002, 149:2, eff. July 14, 2002. 2010, 155:2, eff. July 1,
2010.

### Section 193-F:6

 **193-F:6 Reporting. –**
                                             
 I. Each school district and chartered public school shall annually
report substantiated incidents of bullying or cyberbullying to the
department of education. Pursuant to the Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act, 20 U.S.C. 1232g, such reports shall not contain any
personally identifiable information pertaining to any pupil. The
department shall develop a form to facilitate the reporting by school
districts and chartered public schools. The department shall maintain
records of such reports.
                                             
 II. The department of education shall prepare an annual report of
substantiated incidents of bullying or cyberbullying in the schools. The
report shall include the number and types of such incidents in the
schools and shall be submitted to the president of the senate, the
speaker of the house of representatives, and the chairpersons of the
house and senate education committees. The department of education shall
assist school districts with recommendations for appropriate actions to
address identified problems with pupil safety and violence prevention.

**Source.** 2010, 155:3, eff. July 1, 2010.

### Section 193-F:7

 **193-F:7 Immunity. –** A school administrative unit employee,
school employee, chartered public school employee, regular school
volunteer, pupil, parent, legal guardian, or employee of a company under
contract to a school, school district, school administrative unit, or
chartered public school, shall be immune from civil liability for good
faith conduct arising from or pertaining to the reporting,
investigation, findings, recommended response, or implementation of a
recommended response under this chapter. The department of education
shall be immune from civil liability for its good faith conduct in
making recommendations under this chapter.

**Source.** 2010, 155:3, eff. July 1, 2010.

### Section 193-F:8

 **193-F:8 School District Discrimination or Harassment Policies. –**
A school district or chartered public school may establish separate
discrimination or harassment policies that include categories of pupils,
and nothing in this chapter shall prevent a school district or chartered
public school from remediating any discrimination or harassment based on
a person's membership in a legally protected category under local,
state, or federal law.

**Source.** 2010, 155:3, eff. July 1, 2010.

### Section 193-F:9

 **193-F:9 Private Right of Action Not Permitted. –** Nothing in this
chapter shall supersede or replace existing rights or remedies under any
other general or special law, including criminal law, nor shall this
chapter create a private right of action for enforcement of this chapter
against any school district or chartered public school, or the state.

**Source.** 2010, 155:3, eff. July 1, 2010.

### Section 193-F:10

 **193-F:10 Public Academies. –** The provisions of this chapter
shall apply to public academies as defined in RSA 194:23.

**Source.** 2010, 155:3, eff. July 1, 2010.
