---
title: 'CHAPTER 193-A HOME EDUCATION'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 193-A
                                             
HOME EDUCATION
--------------

### Section 193-A:1

 **193-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Child'' means a child or children at least 6 years of age and
under 18 years of age who is a resident of New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. "Nonpublic school'' means a nonpublic school approved pursuant
to rules adopted by the state board of education and administered by the
department of education and which has agreed to administer the relevant
provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 III. "Parent'' means a parent, guardian, or person having legal
custody of a child.
                                             
 IV. "Resident district'' means the school district in which the
child resides.

**Source.** 1990, 279:3. 2007, 242:4, eff. July 1, 2009.

### Section 193-A:2

 **193-A:2 Program Established. –** There is established the home
education program to be administered by the department of education.

**Source.** 1990, 279:3, eff. July 1, 1991.

### Section 193-A:3

 **193-A:3 Rulemaking. –** The state board of education shall adopt
rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to administering the home
education program. The state board of education shall, in addition to
the provisions of RSA 541-A, submit any notice of proposed rulemaking
under RSA 541-A:6 and any final proposed rule under RSA 541-A:12 to the
home education advisory council established in RSA 193-A:10 for review
and comment.

**Source.** 1990, 279:3, eff. July 1, 1991. 2012, 203:1, eff. Aug. 12,
2012.

### Section 193-A:4

 **193-A:4 Home Education; Defined. –**
                                             
 I. Instruction shall be deemed home education if it consists of
instruction in science, mathematics, language, government, history,
health, reading, writing, spelling, the history of the constitutions of
New Hampshire and the United States, and an exposure to and appreciation
of art and music. Home education shall be provided by a parent for his
own child, unless the provider is as otherwise agreed upon by the
appropriate parties named in paragraph II.
                                             
 II. The department of education, resident district superintendent,
or a nonpublic school shall work with parents upon request in meeting
the requirements of this section.

**Source.** 1990, 279:3. 2006, 13:1, eff. May 12, 2006.

### Section 193-A:5

 **193-A:5 Notification and Other Procedural Requirements. –** A
parent may provide home education to a child or children at home,
subject to the following requirements:
                                             
 I. Any parent commencing a home education program for a child, for a
child who withdraws from a public school, or for a child who moves into
a school district shall notify the commissioner of the department of
education, resident district superintendent, or principal of a nonpublic
school of such within 5 business days of commencing the program.
                                             
 II. Notification made by the parent pursuant to paragraph I shall
include a list of the names, addresses, and birth dates of all children
who are participating in the home education program.
                                             
 III. Written notice of termination of a home education program shall
be filed by the parent with the commissioner of education, and, in
addition, the resident district superintendent or nonpublic school
principal within 15 days of said termination.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner of education, resident district superintendent,
or nonpublic school principal shall acknowledge receipt of notification
within 14 days of such receipt.

**Source.** 1990, 279:3. 1996, 222:1. 2006, 13:2, 3, eff. May 12, 2006.
2008, 344:1, eff. July 7, 2008. 2012, 203:2, eff. Aug. 12, 2012; 227:1,
eff. June 16, 2012.

### Section 193-A:6

 **193-A:6 Records; Evaluation. –**
                                             
 I. The parent shall maintain a portfolio of records and materials
relative to the home education program. The portfolio shall consist of a
log which designates by title the reading materials used, and also
samples of writings, worksheets, workbooks, or creative materials used
or developed by the child. Such portfolio shall be preserved by the
parent for 2 years from the date of the ending of the instruction.
                                             
 II. The parent shall provide for an annual educational evaluation in
which is documented the child's demonstration of educational progress at
a level commensurate with the child's age and ability. The child shall
be deemed to have successfully completed his annual evaluation upon
meeting the requirements of any one of the following:
                                             
 (a) A certified teacher or a teacher currently teaching in a
nonpublic school who is selected by the parent shall evaluate the
child's educational progress upon review of the portfolio and discussion
with the parent or child;
                                             
 (b) The child shall take any national student achievement test,
administered by a person who meets the qualifications established by the
provider or publisher of the test. Composite results at or above the
fortieth percentile on such tests shall be deemed reasonable academic
proficiency;
                                             
 (c) The child shall take a state student assessment test used by
the resident district. Composite results at or above the fortieth
percentile on such state test shall be deemed reasonable academic
proficiency; or
                                             
 (d) The child shall be evaluated using any other valid
measurement tool mutually agreed upon by the parent and the commissioner
of education, resident district superintendent, or nonpublic school
principal.
                                             
 III. The parent shall maintain a copy of the evaluation. The results
of the evaluation:
                                             
 (a) May be used to demonstrate the child's academic proficiency
in order to participate in public school programs, and co-curricular
activities which are defined as school district-sponsored and directed
athletics, fine arts, and academic activities. Home educated students
shall be subject to the same participation policy and eligibility
conditions as apply to public school students.
                                             
 (b) Shall not be used as a basis for termination of a home
education program.
                                             
 (c) Provides a basis for a constructive relationship between the
parent and the evaluator, both working together in the best interest of
the child.

**Source.** 1990, 279:3. 2006, 13:4, eff. May 12, 2006. 2012, 227:2,
eff. June 16, 2012.

### Section 193-A:7

 **193-A:7 Hearing, Notice, and Procedure. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012,
227:4, I, eff. June 16, 2012.
                                             ]

### Section 193-A:8

 **193-A:8 Order; Appeals. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 227:4, II, eff. June
16, 2012.
                                             ]

### Section 193-A:9

 **193-A:9 Liability Limited. –** The resident school district, the
board of such district, and any employees of the resident school
district associated with a child who is or has been receiving home
education are not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death or loss to person or property allegedly sustained by that child,
the child's parent, or any other person as a result of the child's
receipt of home education, including but not limited to, any liability
allegedly based on the failure of the child to receive a free
appropriate or adequate public education.

**Source.** 1990, 279:3, eff. July 1, 1991. 2012, 227:3, eff. June 16,
2012.

### Section 193-A:10

 **193-A:10 Home Education Advisory Council. –**
                                             
 I. There is established the home education advisory council which
shall consist of the following members:
                                             
 (a) Two members of the house of representatives from the house
education committee, appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives, who shall be nonvoting members.
                                             
 (b) One member of the senate from the senate education committee,
appointed by the president of the senate, who shall be a nonvoting
member.
                                             
 (c) The following individuals who shall be appointed by the
commissioner of the department of education from persons named as
follows:
                                             
 (1) Six members nominated by home educator associations
organized within New Hampshire.
                                             
 (2) Two members nominated by the commissioner of the
department of education, or designee.
                                             
 (3) One member nominated by the New Hampshire School
Administrators Association.
                                             
 (4) One member nominated by the New Hampshire School Boards
Association.
                                             
 (5) One member nominated by the New Hampshire Association of
School Principals.
                                             
 (6) One member nominated by the nonpublic school advisory
council established by the state board of education pursuant to RSA
21-N:9, II(f).
                                             
 II. The duties of the council and the terms of office of the members
appointed under subparagraph I(c) shall be prescribed in accordance with
rules proposed by the commissioner of education and adopted by the state
board of education pursuant to RSA 541-A. Legislative members of the
council shall serve a term which is coterminous with their elected
office.
                                             
 III. The chair of the council shall be elected by the council
members from the home educator membership on the council appointed under
subparagraph I(c). All vacancies on the council shall be filled in the
same manner as that of the original appointment.
                                             
 IV. Legislative members of the council shall receive mileage at the
legislative rate when attending to the duties of the council.

**Source.** 1990, 279:3, eff. July 1, 1990. 2008, 344:2, eff. July 7,
2008. 2012, 203:3, eff. Aug. 12, 2012.

### Section 193-A:11

 **193-A:11 Authority of School District Officials. –** No
superintendent, school board, school principal, or other school district
official shall propose, adopt, or enforce any policy or procedure
governing home educated pupils that is inconsistent with or more
restrictive than the provisions of this chapter and any rules adopted
pursuant to RSA 193-A:3.

**Source.** 2012, 203:4, eff. Aug. 12, 2012.
