---
title: 'CHAPTER 193-E ADEQUATE PUBLIC EDUCATION'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 193-E
                                             
ADEQUATE PUBLIC EDUCATION
-------------------------

### Section 193-E:1

 **193-E:1 Policy and Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. It is the policy of the state of New Hampshire that public
elementary and secondary education shall provide all students with the
opportunity to acquire the knowledge and skills necessary to prepare
them for successful participation in the social, economic, scientific,
technological, and political systems of a free government, now and in
the years to come; an education that is consistent with the minimum
standards for public school approval, the state-established academic
standards, and school district or school curriculum.
                                             
 II. Respecting New Hampshire's long tradition of community
involvement, it is the purpose of this chapter to ensure that
appropriate means are established to provide an adequate education
through an integrated system of shared responsibility between state and
local government. In this system, the state establishes minimum
standards for public school approval and academic standards for
inclusion and delivery of educational services at the local level.
School districts then have responsibility and flexibility in
implementing diverse educational approaches to instruction and
curriculum tailored to meet student needs.

**Source.** 1998, 389:1. 2005, 257:15. 2007, 270:3, eff. June 29, 2007.
2016, 84:6, eff. July 18, 2016.

### Section 193-E:2

 **193-E:2 Criteria for an Adequate Education. –** An adequate
education shall provide all students with the opportunity to acquire:
                                             
 I. Skill in reading, writing, and speaking English to enable them to
communicate effectively and think creatively and critically.
                                             
 II. Skill in mathematics and familiarity with methods of science to
enable them to analyze information, solve problems, and make rational
decisions.
                                             
 III. Knowledge of the biological, physical, and earth sciences to
enable them to understand and appreciate the world around them.
                                             
 IV. Knowledge of civics and government, economics, geography, and
history to enable them to participate in the democratic process and to
make informed choices as responsible citizens.
                                             
 V. Grounding in the arts, languages, and literature to enable them
to appreciate our cultural heritage and develop lifelong interests and
involvement in these areas.
                                             
 VI. Sound wellness and environmental practices to enable them to
enhance their own well-being, as well as that of others.
                                             
 VII. Skills for lifelong learning, including interpersonal and
technological skills, to enable them to learn, work, and participate
effectively in a changing society.

**Source.** 1998, 389:1. 2005, 257:15. 2007, 270:3, eff. June 29, 2007.

### Section 193-E:2-a

 **193-E:2-a Substantive Educational Content of an Adequate
Education. –**
                                             
 I. Beginning in the school year 2008-2009, the specific criteria and
substantive educational program that deliver the opportunity for an
adequate education shall be defined and identified as the school
approval standards in the following areas:
                                             
 (a) English/language arts and reading.
                                             
 (b) Mathematics.
                                             
 (c) Science.
                                             
 (d) Social studies.
                                             
 (e) Arts education.
                                             
 (f) World languages.
                                             
 (g) Health education.
                                             
 (h) Physical education.
                                             
 (i) Technology education, and information and communication
technologies.
                                             
 II. The standards shall cover kindergarten through twelfth grade and
shall clearly set forth the opportunities to acquire the communication,
analytical and research skills and competencies, as well as the
substantive knowledge expected to be possessed by students at the
various grade levels, including the credit requirement necessary to earn
a high school diploma.
                                             
 III. Public schools and public academies shall adhere to the
standards identified in paragraph I.
                                             
 IV. The minimum standards for public school approval for the areas
identified in paragraph I shall constitute the opportunity for the
delivery of an adequate education. The general court shall periodically,
but not less frequently than every 10 years, review, revise, and update,
as necessary, the minimum standards identified in paragraph I and shall
ensure that the high quality of the minimum standards for public school
approval in each area of education identified in paragraph I is
maintained. Changes made by the board of education to the school
approval standards through rulemaking after the effective date of this
section shall not be included within the standards that constitute the
opportunity for the delivery of an adequate education without prior
adoption by the general court. The board of education shall provide
written notice to the speaker of the house of representatives, the
president of the senate, and the chairs of the house and senate
education committees of any changes to the school approval standards
adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 V. The general court requires the state board of education and the
department of education to institute procedures for maintaining,
updating, improving, and refining the minimum standards for public
school approval for each area of education identified in paragraph I.
Each school district shall be responsible for maintaining, updating,
improving, and refining curriculum. The curriculum shall present
educational goals, broad pedagogical approaches and strategies for
assisting students in the development of the skills, competencies, and
knowledge called for by the minimum standards for public school approval
for each area of education identified in paragraph I. It is the
responsibility of local teachers, administrators, and school boards to
identify and implement approaches best suited for the students in their
communities to acquire the skills and knowledge included in the
curriculum, to determine the scope, organization, and sequence of course
offerings, and to choose the methods of instruction, the activities, and
the materials to be used.
                                             
 VI. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Minimum standards for public school approval'' mean the
applicable criteria that public schools and public academies shall meet
in order to be an approved school, as adopted by the state board of
education through administrative rules.
                                             
 (b) "Academic standards'' mean what a student should know and be
able to do at each grade level.
                                             
 (c) "Curriculum'' means the lessons and academic content taught
in school or in a specific course or program.

**Source.** 2007, 270:2, eff. June 29, 2007. 2016, 84:7, eff. July 18,
2016.

### Section 193-E:2-b

 **193-E:2-b Cost of an Adequate Education. –**
                                             
 I. The general court shall use the definition of the opportunity for
an adequate education in RSA 193-E:2-a to determine the resources
necessary to provide essential programs, considering educational needs.
The general court shall make an initial determination of the necessary
specific resource elements to be included in the opportunity for an
adequate education.
                                             
 II. The general court shall create a process for the periodic
determination of the specific resource elements essential to providing
the substantive educational content of an adequate education. This
review should occur no less frequently than every 10 years.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 2007, 270:2, eff. June 29, 2007. 2012, 264:1, VII, eff. Aug.
17, 2012.

### Section 193-E:2-c

 **193-E:2-c Resource Elements. –** The general court recognizes that
schools with greater educational challenges will benefit from varying
resources. Schools with varying educational challenges often exist
within a single school district. The general court is committed to
addressing the varying educational challenges that exist among the
schools of the state.

**Source.** 2007, 270:2, eff. June 29, 2007.

### Section 193-E:2-d

 **193-E:2-d Duties of the Legislative Oversight Committee. –**

                                             [Repealed 2009, 198:4, eff. July 14, 2009.
                                             ]

### Section 193-E:3

 **193-E:3 Delivery of an Adequate Education. –**
                                             
 I. Annually, beginning with the 2002-2003 school year, each school
district shall report data to the department of education at the school
and district levels on the indicators set forth in this paragraph. The
report shall not contain personally identifiable information including
but not limited to name, gender, or social security number. The
department of education shall develop a reasonable schedule to phase-in
the reporting of new data required by federal law. The requirements for
data keeping and the form of the report shall be established in
accordance with rules adopted by the state board of education.
Indicators shall include the following areas:
                                             
 (a) Attendance rates.
                                             
 (b) Annual and cumulative drop-out rates of high school pupils
and annual drop-out rates for pupils in grades 7 and 8.
                                             
 (c) School environment indicators, such as safe-schools data.
                                             
 (d) Number and percentage of graduating pupils going on to
post-secondary education, military service, and advanced placement
participation.
                                             
 (e) Performance on state tests administered pursuant to RSA 193-C
and other standardized tests administered at local option.
                                             
 (f) Expulsion and suspension rates, including in-school and
out-of-school suspensions, which shall be reported for each school
year.
                                             
 (g) Number and percentage of classes taught by highly qualified
teachers.
                                             
 (h) Teacher and administrative turnover rates at the school and
district levels.
                                             
 (i) Pupil course information.
                                             
 II. (a) The department of education, with the approval of the
legislative oversight committee established in RSA 193-C:7, may
implement and report data on any additional indicators deemed relevant
to the purposes of this section.
                                             
 (b) The department of education shall enter into an agreement
with the board of trustees of the university system of New Hampshire or
the community college system of New Hampshire, or both, if necessary, to
determine additional indicators applicable to postsecondary institutions
within their respective jurisdictions which are not required under
paragraph VI.
                                             
 III. (a) Not later than December 1, 2003, and annually thereafter,
the department of education shall issue a public report on the condition
of education statewide and on a district-by-district and
school-by-school basis. This report shall be entitled "New Hampshire
School District Profiles'' and shall be made available at every school
administrative unit for public review. It shall include demographic and
pupil performance data reported in paragraph I and other relevant
statistics as determined by the department of education. Comparisons
with state averages shall be provided for all data reported. Comparisons
of each district and school to itself based on its own statewide
improvement and assessment performance for the prior school year and its
most recent 3-year rolling averages shall be provided. Statewide
rankings of each district and school shall be provided, including a
statewide ranking of each school and school district based on the
percentage increase of improvement as compared with the same school
district's performance in the previous year. The report shall be
organized and presented in a manner that is easily understood by the
public and that assists each school district with the identification of
trends, strengths, and weaknesses and the development of its local
school education improvement plan.
                                             
 (b) Beginning with the annual report issued in 2013, the
department of education shall include data provided by early childhood
programs, districts, and postsecondary institutions.
                                             
 IV. Data reported in paragraph I shall be disaggregated as required
by federal law and shall include numbers and percentages of pupils with
disabilities, limited English proficient pupils, pupils in advanced
placement programs, economically disadvantaged pupils, and pupils of
major ethnic, racial, and multi-racial groups.
                                             
 V. In order to reduce school districts' administrative time and
costs, the department of education shall develop and utilize
user-friendly, computer forms and programs to collect the data set forth
in paragraphs I, VI, and VII.
                                             
 VI. (a) Annually, beginning with the 2011-2012 school year, each
postsecondary institution as defined in RSA 193-E:4 shall submit a
report, which shall not include any personally identifiable information
such as, but not limited to, name, gender, or social security number, to
the department of education containing information on indicators in the
following areas:
                                             
 (1) Remedial education courses.
                                             
 (2) Entry, withdrawal, and transfers.
                                             
 (3) Degrees and certificates granted.
                                             
 (b) The department of education shall integrate all data
collected into the data warehouse. The department of education shall
have access to data solely to conduct studies, track and report annual
and longitudinal pupil outcomes, and improve postsecondary readiness,
retention, and articulation between educational institutions.
                                             
 (c) The state board of education, in consultation with the
university system of New Hampshire board of trustees and the community
college system of New Hampshire board of trustees shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, for developing a form to be used for the report
and to establish requirements for data maintenance.
                                             
 VII. (a) Annually, beginning with the 2011-2012 school year, each
early childhood program as defined in RSA 193-E:4 shall submit a report,
which shall not include any personally identifiable information such as,
but not limited to, name, gender, or social security number, to the
department of education containing information on indicators in the
following areas:
                                             
 (1) Program participation.
                                             
 (2) Entry, exit, and type of program.
                                             
 (3) Participant demographics as identified in RSA 193-E:3,
IV.
                                             
 (b) The department of education shall integrate all data
collected into the data warehouse. The department of education shall
have access to data solely to conduct studies, track and report annual
and longitudinal pupil outcomes, and improve education programs.
                                             
 (c) The state board of education, in consultation with the
department of health and human services, shall adopt rules, pursuant to
RSA 541-A, for developing a form to be used for the report and to
establish requirements for data maintenance.

**Source.** 1998, 389:1. 2003, 314:1. 2004, 147:2. 2005, 257:15. 2007,
270:3, eff. June 29, 2007. 2010, 356:1, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 193-E:3-a

 **193-E:3-a Definitions. –** In this section:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
education.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of education.
                                             
 III. "Input-based school accountability system'' means the certified
narrative explanation describing how a school has demonstrated
compliance with the school approval standards included in the
opportunity for an adequate education required under RSA 193-E:3-b.
                                             
 IV. "Performance-based school accountability system'' means the
scoring system required under RSA 193-E:3-b and implemented by the
department in rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 V. "State board'' means the state board of education.

**Source.** 2009, 198:1, eff. July 14, 2009.

### Section 193-E:3-b

 **193-E:3-b Accountability for the Opportunity for an Adequate
Education. –** Beginning with the 2009-2010 school year, a school shall
demonstrate by the end of the school year that it provides the
opportunity for an adequate education under RSA 193-E:2-a by meeting the
requirements of subparagraphs I(a) and (b) of this section. Beginning
with the 2011-2012 school year, a school shall demonstrate, by the end
of the school year, that it provides the opportunity for an adequate
education by meeting the requirements of either paragraph I or II of
this section. Following the adoption of the performance-based
accountability system as provided in RSA 193-E:3-c and RSA 193-E:3-d,
the department shall evaluate all schools using both the input-based
school accountability system under subparagraphs I(a) and (b) of this
section and the performance-based accountability system under RSA
193-E:3-c and RSA 193-E:3-d. A school that satisfies the requirements of
either paragraph I or II shall be providing the opportunity for an
adequate education.
                                             
 I. (a) A school may demonstrate that it provides the opportunity for
an adequate education as set forth in RSA 193-E:2-a by establishing that
it meets the following input-based school accountability standards in
effect as of the effective date of this section:
                                             
 (1) English/language arts and reading as set forth in Ed
306.37.
                                             
 (2) Mathematics as set forth in Ed 306.43.
                                             
 (3) Science as set forth in Ed 306.45.
                                             
 (4) Social studies as set forth in Ed 306.46.
                                             
 (5) Arts education as set forth in Ed 306.31.
                                             
 (6) World languages as set forth in Ed 306.48.
                                             
 (7) Health education as set forth in Ed 306.40.
                                             
 (8) Physical education as set forth in Ed 306.41.
                                             
 (9) Technology education, and information and communication
technologies as set forth in Ed 306.42 and Ed 306.47.
                                             
 (10) School year as set forth in Ed 306.18.
                                             
 (11) Minimum credits required for a high school diploma as set
forth in Ed 306.27(f) and (m).
                                             
 (b)(1) The commissioner shall require school officials to submit
a narrative explanation detailing how the school has complied with each
of the standards included in the opportunity for an adequate education
contained in subparagraph (a). The school principal and school district
superintendent shall certify in writing that the responses submitted are
accurate. The commissioner shall develop a form which conforms to the
provisions of this paragraph.
                                             
 (2) The commissioner shall review the responses to each
school's self-assessment required under this section and shall verify
that the responses comply with the standards included in the opportunity
for an adequate education specified under subparagraph (a).
                                             
 (3) Schools that successfully demonstrate that they provide
the opportunity for an adequate education through the input-based school
accountability system for any year beginning with the 2009-2010 school
year shall be required by the commissioner to resubmit the narrative
explanations at least once every 2 years.
                                             
 (4) Schools that are unable to demonstrate that they provide
the opportunity for an adequate education through the input-based school
accountability system for the 2009-2010 school year, or for any year
thereafter, shall be required by the commissioner to resubmit the
narrative explanations annually until such demonstration has been made.
                                             
 (5) The commissioner shall integrate, to the maximum extent
practicable, the input-based school accountability system to demonstrate
the opportunity for an adequate education with the school approval
process pursuant to RSA 21-N:6, V.
                                             
 (6) Beginning September 1, 2012, the department shall annually
conduct site visits at 10 percent of schools statewide to assess the
validity of the input-based school accountability system and to
determine whether those schools demonstrate the opportunity for an
adequate education by meeting the school standards identified in this
paragraph. To the extent feasible, the commissioner shall conduct these
site visits together with other site visits conducted by the department
for other purposes and programs. The commissioner may require more
frequent site visits at schools which have been unable to demonstrate
that they provide the opportunity for an adequate education. To the
extent that the department conducts school site visits for other state
and/or federal programs after the commencement of the 2009-2010 school
year, but prior to September 1, 2012, the department shall, to the
maximum extent practicable, endeavor to audit the input-based school
accountability self-reporting completed by the visited school.
                                             
 (c) A school that furnishes the commissioner with evidence that
it has received full accreditation from the New England Association of
Schools and Colleges (NEASC) shall be deemed to be in compliance with
the provisions of subparagraphs (a) and (b). The school shall submit to
the commissioner copies of documentation necessary during the school's
accreditation process including, but not limited to, the accreditation
self-study report, peer review reports, reports of any follow-up
activities taken by the school in response to NEASC's recommendations
for accreditation, and the annual school update report as required by
NEASC each fall. In the fifth year of the 10-year accreditation, the
school shall submit a progress report to the commissioner. A school
accredited by NEASC shall meet or exceed NEASC's standards and shall use
those standards to measure improvement.
                                             
 II. Beginning with the 2011-2012 school year, a school may
demonstrate by the end of the school year that it provides the
opportunity for an adequate education through the performance-based
school accountability system to be developed and implemented by the
department, pursuant to RSA 193-E:3-c and RSA 193-E:3-d and designed to
measure educational outcomes.

**Source.** 2009, 198:1, eff. July 14, 2009. 2011, 255:1, eff. Sept. 11,
2011.

### Section 193-E:3-c

 **193-E:3-c Development of the Performance-Based Accountability
System. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a task force to develop a
performance-based school accountability system that, beginning with the
2011-2012 school year, will serve as one method a school may use to
demonstrate by the end of the school year that it is providing the
opportunity for an adequate education. The commissioner shall be the
chairman of the task force and shall appoint no fewer than 9 and no more
than 13 members to the task force which shall consist of department
personnel, one or more representatives of a school district including at
least one school board member, educational experts, parents or guardians
of a current public school pupil, members of a public interest group
concerned with education, members of the business community, and other
individuals with information or expertise of benefit to the task force's
duties. The task force shall include one member of the house of
representatives, appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives, and one member of the senate, appointed by the
president of the senate.
                                             
 II. The task force shall have the following duties:
                                             
 (a) Define the performance-based accountability system to be used
by schools that will ensure that the opportunity for an adequate
education is maintained.
                                             
 (b) Identify performance criteria and measurements.
                                             
 (c) Establish performance goals and the relative weights assigned
to those goals.
                                             
 (d) Establish the basis, taking into account the totality of the
performance measurements, for determining whether the opportunity for an
adequate education exists, which may include the assignment of a value
for performance on each measurement.
                                             
 (e) Ensure the integrity, accuracy, and validity of the
performance methodology as a means of establishing that a school
provided the opportunity for an adequate education as defined in RSA
193-E:2-a.
                                             
 III. The task force shall develop a performance-based scoring system
using only the best available data and indicators which are already
provided to the department and/or performance measures that schools are
already required to provide the department under other state or federal
law. In establishing the performance-based system, the task force may
consider one or more of the following data and indicators:
                                             
 (a) Performance on state assessments administered pursuant to RSA
193-C and, upon the prior approval of the department, other assessments
administered at local option that are consistent with the state's
academic standards.
                                             
 (b) Number and percentage of pupils participating in an advanced
placement course.
                                             
 (c) Number and percentage of graduating pupils going on to
post-secondary education and military service.
                                             
 (d) Attendance rates.
                                             
 (e) Annual cumulative drop-out rates of high school pupils.
                                             
 (f) School environment indicators, such as safe schools data.
                                             
 (g) Expulsion and suspension rates, including in-school and
out-of-school suspensions, which shall be reported for each school
year.
                                             
 (h) Number and percentage of classes taught by highly qualified
teachers.
                                             
 (i) Teacher and administrative turnover rates at the school and
district levels.
                                             
 IV. No later than April 1, 2010, the task force shall submit an
interim report of its findings and recommendations for future
legislation for the performance-based accountability system to the
chairpersons of the house and senate education committees, the speaker
of the house of representatives, and the senate president. After the
interim report is reviewed by the house and senate education committees,
the department shall verify the integrity, accuracy, and validity of the
performance-based accountability system utilizing actual school data as
provided in RSA 193-E:3-d and shall submit a final report no later than
November 1, 2010, including recommendations for future legislation and
legislative adoption of the performance-based accountability system, to
the chairpersons of the house and senate education committees, the
speaker of the house of representatives, the senate president, the
governor, the house clerk, and the senate clerk.
                                             
 V. During the department's verification process, the task force may
further evaluate and review whether there are any new or emerging
performance measures, or modifications to the performance-based
accountability system based upon the verification process that should be
considered by the department for implementation beginning with the
2012-2013 school year. No later than November 1, 2011, the task force
shall present any further recommendations for legislation regarding the
performance-based school accountability system to the same individuals
receiving the final report under paragraph IV.
                                             
 VI. The department shall annually prepare a detailed report
documenting the results of each school on the performance-based school
accountability system to be developed pursuant to RSA 193-E:3-c, and
identifying all schools that can demonstrate the opportunity for an
adequate education through the performance-based methodology. The report
shall be submitted no later than January 15 annually to the same
individuals receiving the final report under paragraph IV.

**Source.** 2009, 198:1, eff. July 14, 2009. 2016, 84:8, 9, eff. July
18, 2016.

### Section 193-E:3-d

 **193-E:3-d Performance-Based School Accountability System;
Verification Process. –** Prior to the submission of the final report
pursuant to RSA 193-E:3-c, IV the department shall undertake a process
to verify and test the integrity, accuracy, and validity of the
performance-based accountability system utilizing the best available
data from one school from each of the counties in the state. The
commissioner shall ensure, to the greatest extent possible, that the
verification process utilizes the best available data from a balance of
elementary and secondary schools representing diverse socioeconomic
conditions throughout the state. The commissioner shall work with school
officials and faculty from the selected schools to implement the
performance-based school accountability program and to develop a data
collection system which will allow schools to easily report results to
the department for analysis and reporting.

**Source.** 2009, 198:1, eff. July 14, 2009.

### Section 193-E:3-e

 **193-E:3-e Corrective and Technical Assistance. –** The department
shall implement corrective and technical assistance to schools that do
not demonstrate that they provide the opportunity for an adequate
education under RSA 193-E:3-b, I or II as follows:
                                             
 I. In the first year of a school being unable to demonstrate that it
provides the opportunity for an adequate education under either RSA
193-E:3-b, I or II, school officials shall submit an action plan to the
commissioner. The plan shall detail the specific actions the school will
take and the timeline to be followed to demonstrate that the school
provides the opportunity for an adequate education. The plan shall:
                                             
 (a) Identify areas where the school failed to meet the
requirements under paragraph RSA 193-E:3-b, I or II.
                                             
 (b) Identify and explain the strategy the school intends to
implement to achieve compliance and improve performance.
                                             
 (c) Detail how the school budget reflects the goals of the action
plan.
                                             
 II. After the second consecutive year of a school being unable to
demonstrate that it provides the opportunity for an adequate education
under either RSA 193-E:3-b, I or II, school officials shall submit an
action plan to the commissioner. The plan shall:
                                             
 (a) Describe procedures for providing mentoring or coaching to
school personnel.
                                             
 (b) Include ongoing technical assistance and a liaison from the
department.
                                             
 (c) Provide an accounting of how education funds are being
expended to provide opportunities for an adequate education as defined
in RSA 193-E:2-a.
                                             
 (d) Establish and explain a strategy designed to promote family
and community involvement.
                                             
 III. After the third consecutive year of a school being unable to
demonstrate that it provides the opportunity for an adequate education
under either RSA 193-E:3-b, I or II, the commissioner shall:
                                             
 (a) Assess how the school is expending its education funds and
may order that adequacy funds be redirected to address those areas that
are contributing to the failure of the school to provide the opportunity
for an adequate education.
                                             
 (b) Assign a coach or mentor to the school until the school
demonstrates sufficient progress toward providing the opportunity for an
adequate education.
                                             
 (c) Require the school to provide an accounting of how education
funds are being used to provide the opportunity for an adequate
education under RSA 193-E:2-a.
                                             
 (d) Require or provide, to the extent necessary, one or more of
the following:
                                             
 (1) Professional development that is aligned with school
improvement goals.
                                             
 (2) External support and resources based on their
effectiveness and alignment with school improvement goals.
                                             
 (3) Instructional models that incorporate research-based
practices that have been proven to be effective in improving pupil
achievement.
                                             
 (4) Formal and informal opportunities to assess and monitor
each pupil's progress.
                                             
 (5) Evidence of decisions supported by data.
                                             
 (6) Improvements to the school's curriculum, including
curricular priorities and instructional materials.
                                             
 (7) External support and resources based on their
effectiveness and alignment with the school improvement plan.
                                             
 (8) Extended learning opportunities for pupils.
                                             
 (9) Structural reform strategies that may include changes in
scheduling, organization, support mechanisms, and resources.
                                             
 (10) Structural changes to school leadership to support school
improvement.
                                             
 (e) Meet quarterly with school officials in the affected school
to assess the school's progress.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner shall provide progress reports annually to the
state board and the legislative oversight committee established in RSA
193-C:7 on the status and effectiveness of the corrective and technical
assistance provided by the department in achieving the demonstration of
adequacy by all schools.

**Source.** 2009, 198:1, eff. July 14, 2009.

Unique Pupil Identification
---------------------------

### Section 193-E:4

 **193-E:4 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
education.
                                             
 II. "Data warehouse'' means the electronic system operated by the
department of education that maintains the information about pupils as
set forth in RSA 193-E:3, I, VI, and VII. The data warehouse shall not
contain the name, address, telephone number, e-mail address, social
security number, or any other personally identifiable information about
any pupil.
                                             
 III. "District'' means a New Hampshire public school district or a
district outside of New Hampshire educating publicly funded New
Hampshire pupils.
                                             
 IV. "District of origin'' means the district in which the pupil
resides at the point at which the pupil first enters the New Hampshire
educational system, whether in an early childhood program, district, or
postsecondary education level.
                                             
 V. "Early childhood program'' means a preschool or childcare program
receiving Head Start or child care scholarship funds, whether licensed
or exempt from licensing, or a preschool program operated by a district.
Early childhood programs not operated by a district shall report data
only for pupils for which Head Start or child care scholarship funds are
received.
                                             
 VI. "Postsecondary institution'' means the university system of New
Hampshire or the community college system of New Hampshire.
                                             
 VII. "Random number generator'' means the electronic system that
creates unique pupil identification numbers and assigns a unique pupil
identification number to a pupil when an early childhood program, a
district, or a postsecondary institution enters a pupil's name, date of
birth, town of birth, and gender. The system shall maintain that
information and the name of the district of origin, and no other
information. This system shall not retain the unique pupil
identification number.
                                             
 VIII. "Unique pupil identifier'' means a randomly generated number
assigned to an early childhood program pupil, a district pupil, or
postsecondary institution pupil in order to gather pupil level data.
                                             
 IX. "Unique pupil identification system'' means an electronic system
comprised of the data warehouse and the random number generator.

**Source.** 2004, 147:3, eff. Aug. 1, 2004. 2010, 356:2, eff. Sept. 18,
2010.

### Section 193-E:5

 **193-E:5 Unique Pupil Identification. –**
                                             
 I. The department of education shall, using federal funds only,
implement and maintain a unique pupil identification system on a
statewide basis that complies with the following requirements:
                                             
 (a) No personally identifiable information about a pupil
including name and social security number, shall be collected or
maintained by the state in such a manner as to allow such information to
be connected with the unique pupil identifier. Under no circumstances
shall the department of education obtain or use a social security number
as an identifier for any pupil. The department shall not use unique
pupil identifiers except in connection with the data warehouse and such
use shall not be accessible to the public.
                                             
 (b) The random number generator shall make available to each
early childhood program, district, or postsecondary institution a unique
pupil identifier for each pupil pursuing an education in a New Hampshire
early childhood program, district, or postsecondary institution. The
unique pupil identifier itself shall not permit pupil identification
within a subcategory including, but not limited to, early childhood
program, district, postsecondary institution, sex, age, grade, or county
of residence.
                                             
 (c) The unique pupil identifier shall be requested and maintained
by the early childhood program, district, or postsecondary institution.
The unique pupil identifier shall remain in the pupil's file throughout
his or her academic career in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (d)(1) Access to the random number generator shall be limited to
an early childhood program director or designee, a district
superintendent or designee, or a postsecondary institution registrar or
designee, and only for pupils pursuing an education in that early
childhood program, district, or postsecondary institution.
                                             
 (2) A parent or legal guardian shall, upon request made in
person to the early child program director, school district
superintendent for the district which the child last attended, or
postsecondary institution registrar, have access to their child's unique
pupil identifier and their child's data maintained in the data
warehouse. A person who is 18 years of age or older shall, upon request
made in person to the early child program director, school district
superintendent for the district which the person last attended, or
postsecondary institution registrar, have access to their unique pupil
identifier and their data maintained in the data warehouse.
                                             
 (3) Any person who knowingly violates the provisions of this
subparagraph is guilty of a class B felony and may be subject to
involuntary termination of employment.
                                             
 (e) The random number generator shall create and maintain a
comprehensive audit trail for all users accessing the random number
generator.
                                             
 (f) The data warehouse shall create and maintain an audit trail
for all users accessing secure information.
                                             
 (g) No person, including an individual, business, government, or
governmental entity, shall require an individual to provide a unique
pupil identifier as a condition of doing business, providing a service,
or receiving a benefit of any kind, except as provided in RSA 193-E:5,
I(c). Any person or entity who knowingly violates the provisions of this
subparagraph shall be liable for actual damages or 
                                             $25,000, whichever
is greater, for each violation. Each denial of services or benefits
shall constitute a separate offense under this subparagraph.
                                             
 (h) If a pupil's records become part of an administrative action
outside of the pupil's early childhood program, district, or
postsecondary institution, or a part of any judicial or quasi-judicial
proceeding, the part of the record containing the pupil's unique pupil
identifier shall be redacted by the early childhood program, district,
or postsecondary institution prior to release.
                                             
 (i) The information maintained in the data warehouse shall be
available to the department of education and to the public using the
data maintained by the department of education. No personally
identifiable information shall be required as a condition of access or
usage under this subparagraph, nor shall such access or usage be
tracked. Under no circumstances shall the unique pupil identifier be
made available to the public.
                                             
 (j) Information maintained in the random number generator shall
be exempt from the provisions of RSA 91-A.
                                             
 (k) Authorized personnel at the department of education shall
administer and maintain the unique pupil identification system.
                                             
 (l) The department of education shall provide no personally
identifiable information collected pursuant to this chapter, including
but not limited to name, date of birth, or social security number to any
person or entity, other than an early childhood program, district, or
postsecondary institution authorized to access this data, absent a court
order. Under no circumstances shall personally identifiable information
or the unique pupil identifier be provided to any person or entity
outside of New Hampshire. Any person who knowingly violates this
provision is guilty of a class B felony and may be subject to
involuntary termination of employment.
                                             
 (m) Early childhood programs not receiving Head Start or child
care scholarship funds, private schools comprised of kindergarten
through grade 12, and all private postsecondary institutions may
participate in the data warehouse and random number generator.
Participating early childhood programs may volunteer to include data for
pupils for which Head Start or child care scholarship funds are not
received. Permission of a parent or legal guardian of a pupil enrolled
in an early childhood program shall be obtained before a pupil may
participate in the data warehouse and random number generator. For the
purposes of this section, such voluntary participating early childhood
programs shall be included in the definition set forth in RSA 193-E:4.
                                             
 (n) Notwithstanding subparagraphs (a)-(m), to enable the
department of education to ensure the accuracy of the data, the
commissioner of the department of education may, in writing, grant
individuals access to the data warehouse, including but not limited to,
access to the unique pupil identifier for the purpose of connecting
information in the warehouse with the random number generator.
                                             
 (o) At the request of an early childhood program, school
district, or postsecondary institution, the department of education
shall provide pupil-level data from the unique pupil identification
system to an early childhood program, school district, or postsecondary
institution for pupils pursing an education in that entity. Except as
otherwise specifically provided in statute, the department shall not
provide for any purpose any student personally-identifiable data to any
public or private individual or entity, including the local, state, or
federal government, or department or agency thereof, regardless of
whether such individual or entity is for profit or not-for-profit, and
regardless of whether the public or private individual or entity is
involved in any way with the pupil's education.
                                             
 (p) New Hampshire home educated pupils pursing an education in a
postsecondary institution who have not been assigned a unique pupil
identifier may, without penalty, opt out of being included in the unique
pupil identification system for postsecondary pupils.
                                             
 (q) Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit institutions in the
university system of New Hampshire and the community college system of
New Hampshire from exchanging data between themselves without the
consent or involvement of the department of education.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding RSA 193-E:3, II, the legislative oversight
committee established in RSA 193-C:7 shall perform any revisions to this
section through legislation filed for that purpose.
                                             
 III. Any contracts or agreements necessary to implement the
provisions of this section shall be approved by the governor with the
consent of the executive council.

**Source.** 2004, 147:3, eff. Aug. 1, 2004. 2010, 356:3, eff. Sept. 18,
2010. 2012, 224:1, 2, eff. Aug. 14, 2012; 247:24, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.
2014, 68:3, eff. July 1, 2014.
