---
title: 'CHAPTER 193-B DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 193-B
                                             
DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES
----------------------

### Section 193-B:1

 **193-B:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Controlled drug or its analog'' means those drugs or substances
included within the definitions provided in RSA 318-B:1, VI and VI-a.
                                             
 II. "Drug-free school zone'' means an area inclusive of any property
used for school purposes by any school, whether or not owned by such
school, within 1,000 feet of any such property, and within or
immediately adjacent to school buses.
                                             
 III. "School'' means any public or private elementary, secondary, or
secondary vocational-technical school or Head Start facility in New
Hampshire.
                                             
 IV. "School property'' means all real property, physical plant and
equipment used for school purposes, including but not limited to school
playgrounds and buses, whether public or private.

**Source.** 1991, 364:1. 1996, 290:1, eff. Aug. 9, 1996.

### Section 193-B:2

 **193-B:2 Drug-Free School Zones. –** Except as otherwise provided
by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell,
prescribe, administer, dispense, or possess with intent to sell,
dispense, or compound any controlled drug or its analog, within a
drug-free school zone at any time of the year.

**Source.** 1991, 364:1. 1994, 28:1, eff. June 21, 1994.

### Section 193-B:3

 **193-B:3 Maps of Drug-Free Zones; Exemption. –**
                                             
 I. Each school administrative unit within the state shall, in
consultation with the local police authority having jurisdiction over
drug enforcement where each drug-free zone is located, publish a map
clearly indicating the boundaries of each permanent drug-free school
zone in accordance with the provisions of RSA 193-B:1, II. Such map
shall be posted in a prominent place in the district or municipal court
of jurisdiction, the local police department, and in all schools
existing in the drug-free school zone.
                                             
 II. The mapping requirements under paragraph I shall not apply to
Head Start facilities.

**Source.** 1991, 364:1. 1996, 290:2, eff. Aug. 9, 1996.

### Section 193-B:4

 **193-B:4 Rulemaking; Notice; Posting. –** The state board of
education, in consultation with the New Hampshire Police Chiefs'
Association, shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 I. Developing a procedure by which to mark drug-free zones,
including the use of signs or other markings as appropriate. Such signs
or other markings shall:
                                             
 (a) Be posted in a prominent place:
                                             
 (1) On or near each school;
                                             
 (2) In each school bus; and
                                             
 (3) On or near non-school-owned property serving as a
temporary drug-free zone by virtue of its use for the school's
instructional program, for the duration of such use;
                                             
 (b) Indicate that the posted area is a drug-free zone which
extends to 1,000 feet surrounding such property; and
                                             
 (c) Warn that violation of this chapter shall subject the
offender to severe penalties under the law.
                                             
 II. Assisting each school administrative unit in providing for the
posting required in this section.

**Source.** 1991, 364:1. 1994, 28:2, 3, eff. June 21, 1994.

### Section 193-B:5

 **193-B:5 Toll-Free Hotline; Rulemaking; Local Hotlines; Notice.
–**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a toll-free statewide hotline for the
purpose of reporting anonymous information on drug activity to local law
enforcement agencies. The department of safety shall coordinate and
adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A for the establishment and operation of
the hotline.
                                             
 II. The toll-free statewide telephone number established under
paragraph I shall be displayed in the drug-free zone signs developed and
posted pursuant to RSA 193-B:4, I. If a local police hotline telephone
exists in a community, such telephone number shall be posted on relevant
signs in lieu of the toll-free statewide telephone number.

**Source.** 1991, 364:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 193-B:6

 **193-B:6 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be a violation for any person to cover, remove, deface,
alter or destroy any sign or other marking identifying a drug-free zone
as provided in RSA 193-B:4, I.
                                             
 II. Lack of knowledge that the prohibited act as defined in RSA
193-B:2 occurred on or within 1,000 feet of school property shall not be
a defense.
                                             
 III. A violation of RSA 193-B:2 shall not include an act which
occurs entirely within a private residence wherein no person 17 years of
age or under is present.

**Source.** 1991, 364:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 193-B:7

 **193-B:7 Penalty Assessment. –** In addition to the penalties
imposed under RSA 193-B:6, I and RSA 318-B:26, V, every court shall levy
a penalty assessment of 
                                             $100 for an offense in violation of RSA
193-B:2. The clerk of each court shall collect all penalty assessments
and, notwithstanding RSA 6:11, shall transmit the amount collected to
the general fund.

**Source.** 1994, 28:4, eff. Jan. 1, 1995. 2011, 224:225, eff. July 1,
2011.
