---
title: 'CHAPTER 193-H SCHOOL PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 193-H
                                             
SCHOOL PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY
-------------------------------------

### Section 193-H:1

 **193-H:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
education.
                                             
 I-a. "Competencies'' means student learning targets that represent
key content-specific concepts, skills, and knowledge applied within or
across content domains.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of education.
                                             
 III. "Effective teacher'' means a person who is certified by the
local school board and holds a valid teaching credential, and who has
demonstrated, through a process approved by the department of education,
teaching skills in the core subjects of instruction.
                                             
 IV. "Focus school'' means a low performing school that accepts
federal funds from Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act, and that has the largest within-school gaps between the
highest achieving subgroup or subgroups of students and the
lowest-achieving subgroup or subgroups of students or, for a high
school, has the largest within-school gaps in graduation rates.
                                             
 V. "Priority school'' means:
                                             
 (a) A school that accepts federal funds from Title I, Part A of
the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, and that is among the lowest
performing 5 percent of schools in the state based on the achievement of
all students on the statewide assessment pursuant to RSA 193-C and
which, when measuring the achievement of all students, has demonstrated
a lack of progress on the statewide assessment over 3 years; or
                                             
 (b) A high school with a graduation rate of less than 60 percent
over 3 consecutive years.
                                             
 VI. "Statewide assessment'' means the New Hampshire education
improvement and assessment program as established under RSA 193-C.
                                             
 VII. "Work-study practices'' means those behaviors that enhance
learning achievement and promote a positive work ethic such as, but not
limited to, listening and following directions, accepting
responsibility, staying on task, completing work accurately, managing
time wisely, showing initiative, and being cooperative.

**Source.** 2003, 314:6, eff. July 22, 2003. 2013, 263:2, eff. Sept. 22,
2013.

### Section 193-H:1-a

 **193-H:1-a Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. The purpose of this chapter is to create an accountability model
that will best support schools and educators as they work to enable all
students to progress toward college and career readiness with clearly
defined learning outcomes.
                                             
 II. New Hampshire's student assessment system should promote and
measure knowledge and skills that lead students to graduate from high
schools ready for college and career.
                                             
 III. Students best learn at their own pace as they master content
and skills, allowing them to advance when they demonstrate the desired
level of mastery rather than progressing based on a predetermined amount
of seat time in a classroom will assure that students will reach college
and career readiness.
                                             
 IV. New Hampshire's system of educator support should promote the
capacity of educators to deeply engage students in learning rigorous and
meaningful knowledge, skills, and work-study practices for success in
college, career, and citizenship.
                                             
 V. Competency-based strategies provide flexibility in the way that
credit can be earned and awarded and provide students with personalized
learning, including those that are offered through on-line, blended, and
community based opportunities.

**Source.** 2013, 263:1, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 193-H:2

 **193-H:2 Statewide Performance Targets. –**
                                             
 I. On or before the 2013-2014 school year, schools shall ensure that
all pupils are performing at the basic level or above on the statewide
assessment as established in RSA 193-C.
                                             
 II. In addition to the requirements of paragraph I, schools shall
meet statewide performance targets as approved by the legislative
oversight committee established in RSA 193-C and thereafter, as
established in rules adopted by the state board of education pursuant to
RSA 541-A which shall include rules for:
                                             
 (a) The statewide improvement and assessment program pursuant to
RSA 193-C.
                                             
 (b) Attendance rates.
                                             
 (c) The percentage of pupils who graduate with a diploma from an
approved high school.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding RSA 541-A, the state board of education shall
receive approval from the legislative oversight committee established in
RSA 193-C prior to the submission of any rules to the joint legislative
committee on administrative rules relative to statewide performance
targets required under this section.

**Source.** 2003, 314:6, eff. July 22, 2003. 2013, 263:3, eff. Sept. 22,
2013.

### Section 193-H:3

 **193-H:3 Identification and Public Disclosure of Priority Schools
and Focus Schools. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall annually compile and disseminate to the
governor and council, the president of the senate, the speaker of the
house of representatives, local school boards, superintendents of
schools, and the public, and shall make available on the department
website, a list of priority schools and focus schools based on the
statewide performance targets established in RSA 193-H:2.
                                             
 II. A school or school district designated by the commissioner as a
priority school or a focus school shall have 30 days from the date of
the report to appeal such designation to the state board of education.

**Source.** 2003, 314:6, eff. July 22, 2003. 2013, 263:4, eff. Sept. 22,
2013.

### Section 193-H:4

 **193-H:4 Local Education Improvement Plan; Strategic Responses.
–**
                                             
 I. (a) A school or school district shall have one year from the date
that a school or school district has been designated as a priority
school or a focus school pursuant to RSA 193-H:3 to take action to
remedy identified problems at the local level. The school or school
district shall create a plan that identifies actions that it intends to
correct the areas of concern. This plan shall be submitted to the state
board within 90 days of the date that the school or school district was
designated as a priority school or a focus school. If the plan does not
sufficiently address the areas of concern, the state board shall
disapprove the plan within 30 days. If the state board disapproves the
plan, the state board's designee shall work with the school or school
district to amend the plan so that it meets state board approval. One
year following the designation, if the school or school district is not
making satisfactory progress in implementing its plan, the commissioner
of education shall issue a notice to the school or school district and
shall initiate a process for providing assistance pursuant to paragraph
II; or
                                             
 (b) If a school or school district has been designated as a
priority school or a focus school, then the school or school district
may request assistance from the department of education. The department
shall provide technical assistance to those schools that request
assistance under this section.
                                             
 (c) On or before the one year anniversary of being designated as
a priority school or a focus school, the commissioner shall designate a
progress review team to evaluate the implementation of the improvement
plans and the progress toward state performance targets. The progress
review team shall deliver a report to the state board. This report shall
include evidence of satisfactory implementation and progress towards
state performance targets or lack thereof and recommendations regarding
future actions pursuant to subparagraph II(b).
                                             
 II. The department of education and the state board of education
shall work cooperatively with the school or school district to provide
assistance as follows:
                                             
 (a) Within 30 days of a school district's request for assistance
pursuant to subparagraph I(b), the commissioner of education may appoint
a peer review team to review the educational programming and
effectiveness of the school or school district. In cooperation with
local officials, the team shall prepare and present a report at a
regularly scheduled public meeting of the local school board and to the
state board. This report shall be issued within 30 days of the team's
appointment. Based on this report, the school or school district and
superintendent shall, within 90 days of the issuance of the report,
prepare a corrective action plan and submit it to the state board for
approval. If the plan is not approved, the school or school district may
revise the plan and resubmit it to the state board. The school or school
district may decide to implement the corrective action plan on its own,
through the use of a technical assistance advisor, or through the use of
a peer review team. Any such decision shall be included in the
corrective action plan.
                                             
 (b) If the state board does not approve a corrective action plan
in accordance with subparagraphs I(a) or II(a), or upon the state
board's adoption of a progress review team recommendations, the
commissioner of education shall work with the school or school district
to revise the corrective action plan. If the school or school district
does not revise the corrective action plan within 60 days or the state
board does not approve the revised corrective action plan, then the
commissioner of education shall submit in a timely manner a corrective
action plan, including methods for implementing it, to the state board
for approval. The state board shall direct the school board to implement
the plan pursuant to RSA 186:5.
                                             
 III. At a minimum, the corrective action plan filed by the
commissioner shall:
                                             
 (a) Identify the area in which the school needs to meet the
annual statewide performance targets established under RSA 193-H:2.
                                             
 (b) Identify and describe the strategy the school intends to
implement to improve its performance.
                                             
 (c) Establish and explain a strategy designed to promote family
and community involvement.
                                             
 (d) Detail how the school district budget reflects the goals of
the local education improvement plan.
                                             
 IV. In addition to the provisions of paragraph III, each plan filed
by the commissioner may include the following elements:
                                             
 (a) The school's curriculum including curricular priorities and
instructional materials.
                                             
 (b) Instructional models that incorporate research-based
practices that have been proven to be effective in improving student
achievement.
                                             
 (c) Formal and informal opportunities to assess and monitor each
child's progress.
                                             
 (d) Evidence of data-based decisions.
                                             
 (e) Structural reform strategies that may include schedule,
organization, support mechanisms, and resources.
                                             
 (f) Shared leadership structure to support school improvement.
                                             
 (g) Professional development that is aligned with school
improvement goals.
                                             
 (h) External support and resources based on their effectiveness
and alignment with the school improvement plan.
                                             
 (i) Extended learning activities for students.

**Source.** 2003, 314:6, eff. July 22, 2003. 2013, 263:5, 6, eff. Sept.
22, 2013.

### Section 193-H:5

 **193-H:5 Powers of the Department of Education. –** Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to permit either the department of education
or the state board of education to take control of the daily operations
of any local public school.

**Source.** 2003, 314:6, eff. July 22, 2003.
