---
title: 'CHAPTER 193-G PERSISTENTLY DANGEROUS SCHOOLS'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 193-G
                                             
PERSISTENTLY DANGEROUS SCHOOLS
------------------------------

### Section 193-G:1

 **193-G:1 Persistently Dangerous Schools. –**
                                             
 I. A persistently dangerous school is a school in which 3 of the
following acts have occurred as separate incidents during the period of
one school year for 3 consecutive years:
                                             
 (a) Homicide under RSA 630.
                                             
 (b) First or second degree assault under RSA 631:1 and RSA
631:2.
                                             
 (c) Aggravated felonious sexual assault under RSA 632-A:2.
                                             
 (d) Arson under RSA 634:1.
                                             
 (e) Robbery as a class A felony under RSA 636:1, III; or
                                             
 (f) Unlawful possession or sale of a firearm or other dangerous
weapon under RSA 159.
                                             
 II. Any act set forth in paragraph I must occur within the school or
on school grounds, during regular school hours or during a
school-sponsored event, or during transportation of pupils to or from
school, if such transportation is provided by the school district.
                                             
 III. No later than July 1 of each year, the commissioner of the
department of education shall report any persistently dangerous schools
to the state board of education and to the school board of such schools.

**Source.** 2003, 186:1, eff. Aug. 25, 2003.

### Section 193-G:2

 **193-G:2 Citizen's Advisory Committee. –** If a school is
classified as a persistently dangerous school, the local school board
shall establish a citizen's advisory committee to examine the conditions
which led to the designation and offer input to the school board and
administrators on steps which might be taken to remedy the designation
and prevent further incidents. The committee shall be appointed by the
local school board chairman with the advice of the local school board
members. It shall include but not be limited to the principal of the
designated school, the superintendent of the designated school, one
member of the school board, one teacher employed at the designated
school, one law enforcement official from the police department having
jurisdiction in the district in which the designated school is located,
and representatives of parents whose children are assigned to the
designated school. The committee shall serve until the designation of a
persistently dangerous school is removed.

**Source.** 2003, 186:1, eff. Aug. 25, 2003.

### Section 193-G:3

 **193-G:3 Removal of Designation. –** Any school which is designated
a persistently dangerous school, which for 2 consecutive years has
operated as a safe school, shall be decertified as a persistently
dangerous school. For the purposes of this section, a safe school is a
school which has not had the number or frequency of qualifying events
set forth in this section.

**Source.** 2003, 186:1, eff. Aug. 25, 2003.

### Section 193-G:4

 **193-G:4 School Choice. –**
                                             
 I. Any school which is designated a persistently dangerous school
shall, within 5 days of being notified of such designation, notify the
parents or guardian of the pupil attending such school of the option to
transfer the pupil from the school to a school within the same school
district, consistent with local school board policy.
                                             
 II. If a pupil is the victim of any offense set forth in RSA
193-G:1, I, the school district shall, within 5 days of being notified
of the incident, notify the parents or guardian of the pupil of the
option to transfer the pupil to another school within the same school
district, consistent with local school board policy.

**Source.** 2003, 186:1, eff. Aug. 25, 2003.

### Section 193-G:5

 **193-G:5 Department of Education Authority. –** The commissioner of
the department of education shall be the certifying authority under this
chapter.

**Source.** 2003, 186:1, eff. Aug. 25, 2003.

### Section 193-G:6

 **193-G:6 School Safety. –** Schools shall be authorized to
implement policies promoting school safety.

**Source.** 2003, 186:1, eff. Aug. 25, 2003.
