---
title: 'CHAPTER 194-D OPEN ENROLLMENT SCHOOLS'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 194-D
                                             
OPEN ENROLLMENT SCHOOLS
-----------------------

### Section 194-D:1

 **194-D:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Open enrollment public school'' or "open enrollment school''
means any public school which, in addition to providing educational
services to pupils residing within its attendance area or district,
chooses to accept pupils from other attendance areas within its district
and from outside its district.
                                             
 II. "Parent'' means a parent, guardian, or other person or entity
having legal custody of a child or, in the case of a child with a
disability, a surrogate parent who has been appointed in accordance with
state or federal law.
                                             
 III. "Pupil'' means any child who is eligible for attendance in
public schools in New Hampshire, and who lives with a parent.
                                             
 IV. "Receiving district'' means the school district to which a pupil
is sent to attend an open enrollment school.
                                             
 V. "Resident district'' means the school district in which the pupil
resides.
                                             
 VI. "School board'' means the school district school board.
                                             
 VII. "Sending district'' means the school district in which the
pupil resides.
                                             
 VIII. "State board'' means the state board of education.
                                             
 IX. "Teacher'' means any individual providing or capable of
providing direct instructional services to pupils, and who meets
requirements prescribed in the Elementary and Secondary Education Act
and the Individuals With Disabilities Education Act.

**Source.** 2009, 241:14, eff. Sept. 14, 2009.

### Section 194-D:2

 **194-D:2 Establishment; Parental Choice; Admission. –**
                                             
 I. Any school district legislative body may vote to designate one or
more of its schools as an open enrollment school.
                                             
 II. Open enrollment schools shall operate under the same laws,
rules, and policies as any other public school, except as provided in
this chapter.
                                             
 III. No public school, except a chartered public school, shall be
required to be an open enrollment school.
                                             
 IV. A school district may predetermine the number of pupils residing
outside an open enrollment school's district or attendance area it deems
appropriate to accept.
                                             
 V. Applications may be made on behalf of eligible pupils to more
than one open enrollment school within the state.
                                             
 VI. Every open enrollment school shall make available information
about its curriculum and policies to all persons, and parents and pupils
considering enrollment in that school.
                                             
 VII. There shall be no application fee for pupil admission to any
open enrollment school.
                                             
 VIII. A pupil who meets the admission requirements of an open
enrollment school, and who is a resident of the district where the
school is located, shall be given absolute admission preference over a
nonresident pupil. Once admitted and unless expelled, open enrollment
school pupils need not reapply for admission for subsequent years.
                                             
 IX. Attendance at an open enrollment school for the purposes of
transportation shall not constitute assignment under the provisions of
RSA 189:6 and RSA 189:8. Pupils who reside in the school district in
which the open enrollment school is located shall be provided
transportation to that school by the district on the same terms and
conditions as provided for in RSA 189:6 and RSA 189:8 and that
transportation is provided to pupils attending other public schools
within that district. However, any added costs for such transportation
services shall be borne by the open enrollment school. For the purposes
of open enrollment, neither the sending nor the receiving school
district shall be obligated to provide transportation services for
pupils attending an open enrollment school outside the pupil's resident
district.
                                             
 X. Upon approval by each of the district's legislative bodies and
after a public hearing, 2 or more school districts may consolidate
otherwise eligible resident pupils into one applicant pool for the
purposes of an admissions lottery for designated open enrollment
schools.

**Source.** 2009, 241:14, eff. Sept. 14, 2009.

### Section 194-D:3

 **194-D:3 Procedure for Adoption and Rescission; Limitations. –**
                                             
 I. Any school district may adopt the provisions of RSA 194-D, to
adopt an open enrollment school program, in the following manner:
                                             
 (a) A question shall be placed on the warrant of a special or
annual school district meeting which body shall have final authority to
adopt the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 (b)(1) In districts without annual meetings, the legislative body
of the school district shall consider and act upon the question in
accordance with their current procedures. To the extent and if permitted
by local ordinance, upon submission to the legislative body within 60
days of the legislative body's vote of a petition signed by 100 or by 2
percent, whichever is less, of the registered voters, the legislative
body shall place the question on the official ballot for any regular
election otherwise in accordance with their current procedures for
passage of referenda.
                                             
 (2) The school district legislative body shall hold a public
hearing on the question at least 15 days but not more than 30 days
before the question is to be voted on. Notice of the hearing shall be
posted in at least 2 public places in the municipality and published in
a newspaper of general circulation at least 7 days before the hearing.
                                             
 (3) In the event that the referendum is nonbinding, the
question shall be returned for reconsideration to the legislative body
which shall have final authority to adopt the provisions of this
chapter.
                                             
 (4) In the event that the referendum is binding, the public
vote shall be the final and binding authority to adopt the provisions of
this chapter.
                                             
 (c)(1) In adopting the provisions of RSA 194-D, a school district
shall impose limitations on the number of its resident pupils who may
attend open enrollment schools located inside and outside the school
district. These limitations shall be represented as any percentage
between zero and 100 percent of the school district's current pupil
enrollment.
                                             
 (2) In school districts with annual meetings, where no
limitation question receives a majority vote, the limitations applying
to the district shall be zero. Where 2 or more conflicting adoption
and/or limitation questions receive a majority vote, that combination of
adoption and limitation provisions receiving a majority vote granting
greatest latitude of parental choice shall apply.
                                             
 (d) For all limitation questions, the school board shall propose
a percentage limitation number. The number may also be proposed by
petition. To change limitation percentages, a district need only act
upon the relevant limitation questions. Where no limitations are to be
changed, no limitation questions shall be presented to the voters.
                                             
 (e) Adoption and limitation actions shall become effective on
July 1 immediately following the action to adopt or limit.
                                             
 II. (a) A school district which has adopted any provisions of RSA
194-D may rescind its action or modify the limitations imposed in the
manner described in paragraph I.
                                             
 (b) If a majority of those voting vote to rescind the provisions
of RSA 194-D or to reduce the percentages of pupils eligible to attend
open enrollment schools, then as of July 1 next:
                                             
 (1) If the percentage of pupils eligible for tuition to attend
open enrollment schools in other districts is reduced, a resident pupil
enrolled at a school outside the district shall continue to be eligible
for tuition for the period necessary to complete the highest grade level
offered by the school.
                                             
 (2) If the percentage of pupils eligible for tuition to attend
open enrollment schools in the resident district is reduced, the
resident district shall make alternate arrangements in accordance with
RSA 189:1-a for the education of any affected pupil.
                                             
 (c) If a host district rescinds its vote enabling the operation
of an open enrollment school located in that district, the open
enrollment school may retain its physical location and may continue to
receive students and tuition from other districts if any sending
district agrees to assume the responsibilities of the host district
within 18 months of the effective date of the rescission. The parent of
a pupil attending that school may apply to any other open enrollment
school eligible to receive pupils under the provisions of this chapter.
The pupil's sending district shall not be relieved of its obligation to
educate that pupil in accordance with the district's policies.
                                             
 III. This section shall apply to the establishment of each
individual open enrollment school.
                                             
 IV. Upon approval by each of the district's legislative bodies and
after a public hearing, 2 or more school districts may consolidate
otherwise eligible resident pupils into one applicant pool for the
purposes of an admissions lottery for designated open enrollment
schools.

**Source.** 2009, 241:14, eff. Sept. 14, 2009.

### Section 194-D:4

 **194-D:4 Pupil Selection and Enrollment. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Open enrollment schools may set maximum enrollment as they
deem appropriate.
                                             
 (b) Open enrollment schools may limit enrollment to specific
grade or age levels, pupil needs, or areas of academic focus including,
but not limited to, at-risk pupils, vocational education pupils,
mathematics, science, the arts, history, or languages.
                                             
 (c)(1) Open enrollment schools may select pupils on the basis of
aptitude, academic achievement, or need, provided that such selection is
directly related to the academic goals of the school.
                                             
 (2) If the number of otherwise eligible applicants to a
particular open enrollment school exceeds that school's maximum
published enrollment, that school shall use lottery selection as a basis
for admission.
                                             
 (3) If the number of otherwise eligible applicants to open
enrollment schools located inside and outside the school district
exceeds that district's published maximum percentage of pupils
authorized to attend such schools, the district shall use lottery
selection as a basis for pupil eligibility, and in accordance with RSA
194-D:2, VIII.
                                             
 II. A pupil may withdraw from an open enrollment school at any time
and enroll in a public school where the pupil resides, except that no
pupil shall change schools more than once each school year. The school
board of the pupil's resident district may waive this limitation after a
hearing.
                                             
 III. A pupil may be suspended or expelled from an open enrollment
school based on criteria determined by the principal and teachers in the
open enrollment school and in conformance with RSA 193:13. No open
enrollment school shall be obligated to enroll an expelled pupil.
                                             
 IV. For the purpose of this chapter, a pupil enrolled in an open
enrollment school shall be considered reassigned to the school district
in which the open enrollment school is located for purposes of school
attendance.
                                             
 V. The school board in the district in which the open enrollment
school is located may establish policies to implement open enrollment
schools as provided in this chapter.

**Source.** 2009, 241:14, eff. Sept. 14, 2009.

### Section 194-D:5

 **194-D:5 Funding. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be no tuition charge for any pupil attending an open
enrollment school located in that pupil's resident district. For an open
enrollment school authorized by the school district, the pupil's
resident district shall pay to such school an amount equal to not less
than 80 percent of that district's average cost per pupil as determined
by the department of education using the most recent available data as
reported by the district to the department.
                                             
 II. In accordance with current department of education standards,
the funding and educational decision-making process for children with
disabilities attending a chartered public or open enrollment school
shall be the responsibility of the school district and shall retain all
current options available to the parent and to the school district.
                                             
 III. Any federal or other funding available in any year to a sending
district shall, to the extent and in a manner acceptable to the funding
source, be directed to an open enrollment school in a receiving district
on an eligible per pupil basis.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner of the department of education shall apply for
all federal funding available to open enrollment schools under the No
Child Left Behind Act, Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education
Act, or other federal source of funds. The commissioner shall expend any
such funds received in a manner acceptable to the funding source.
                                             
 V. A sending district may provide funds, services, equipment,
materials, or personnel to an open enrollment school, in addition to the
amounts specified in this section in accordance with the policies of the
sending school district.
                                             
 VI. An open enrollment school may accept pupils at tuition rates at
less than the amounts established by this chapter.
                                             
 VII. An open enrollment school may receive financial aid, private
gifts, grants, or revenue as if it were a school district.

**Source.** 2009, 241:14, eff. Sept. 14, 2009.

### Section 194-D:6

 **194-D:6 Budgets. –** That portion of a school district's estimated
expenditures on open enrollment school tuition shall be shown as a
separate line item in a school district's budget.

**Source.** 2009, 241:14, eff. Sept. 14, 2009.

### Section 194-D:7

 **194-D:7 State Board; Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The state board shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
consistent with the provisions of this chapter relative to the
administration of open enrollment schools.
                                             
 II. The state board shall convene one or more working committees to
study and make recommendations regarding the implementation and
effectiveness of open enrollment schools. The recommendations shall be
provided to the legislative oversight committee in RSA 194-B:21.

**Source.** 2009, 241:14, eff. Sept. 14, 2009.
