---
title: CHAPTER 194 SCHOOL DISTRICTS
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 194
                                             
SCHOOL DISTRICTS
----------------

General Powers and Duties
-------------------------

### Section 194:1

 **194:1 What Constitutes a District. –** Each town shall constitute
a single district for school purposes; provided that districts organized
under special acts of the legislature may retain their present
organization, and the word "town,'' wherever used in the statutes in
connection with the government, administration, support, or improvement
of the public schools, shall mean district. The special state prison
school district, as established by RSA 194:60, shall constitute a single
district for school purposes, and shall be subject to the provisions of
RSA 194:60. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
in the case of unincorporated towns or unorganized places in a county,
the county shall constitute the district.

**Source.** RS 69:1. CS 73:1. GS 78:1. GL 86:1. 1885, 43:1. PS 89:1.
1909, 23:1. 1921, 85, IV:1. PL 119:1. RL 138:1. RSA 194:1. 1992, 124:1.
1998, 270:5. 2007, 99:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 194:1-a

 **194:1-a Single District School Administrative Units. –** As
provided in RSA 194-C:3, single district school administrative units
shall be considered the same as a single school district.

**Source.** 1996, 298:2, eff. Aug. 9, 1996.

### Section 194:1-b

 **194:1-b Legal Residence Defined. –** For the purposes of title XV,
"legal residence'' means legal residence as defined in RSA 193:12.

**Source.** 1998, 206:6, eff. June 18, 1998.

### Section 194:2

 **194:2 Districts to be Corporations. –** All districts legally
organized shall be corporations, with power to sue and be sued, to hold
and dispose of real and personal property for the use of the schools
therein, and to make necessary contracts in relation thereto.

**Source.** RS 70:1. CS 73:4. GS 78:14. GL 86:14. PS 89:2. 1909, 23:2.
1921, 85, IV:2. PL 119:2. RL 138:2.

### Section 194:3

 **194:3 Powers of Districts. –** School districts may raise money,
as required by law, or, in addition thereto:
                                             
 I. To procure land for lots for schoolhouses and school
administrative unit facilities, and for the enlargement of existing
lots;
                                             
 II. To build, purchase, rent, repair, or remove schoolhouses and
outbuildings, buildings to be used for occupancy by teachers in the
employ of such school district, and buildings to be used for educational
administration including office facilities for school administrative
units;
                                             
 III. To procure insurance against such risks of loss, cost or damage
to itself, its employees or its pupils as its school board may
determine;
                                             
 IV. To provide group plan life, accident, medical, surgical and
hospitalization insurance benefits, or any combinations of such
benefits, for all regular employees of the district and their
dependents, the cost thereof to be borne in whole or in part by the
district;
                                             
 V. To plant and care for shade and ornamental trees upon schoolhouse
lots;
                                             
 VI. To provide suitable furniture, books, maps, charts, apparatus
and conveniences for schools;
                                             
 VII. To purchase vehicles for the transportation of children;
                                             
 VIII. To provide for health and sanitation;
                                             
 IX. To provide for adult high school diploma and continuing
education programs; and
                                             
 X. To pay debts.

**Source.** RS 71:1. 1845, 224. CS 75:1. 1853, 1435. 1862, 2619:1, 2. GS
78:18; 80:1. GL 86:18; 88:1. 1889, 82:1. PS 89:3. 1911, 46:1. 1913,
51:1. 1921, 85, IV:3. PL 119:3. RL 138:3. 1951, 211:1. RSA 194:3. 1959,
164:1. 1967, 267:1; 449:1. 1975, 363:2. 1979, 459:4, eff. Aug. 24, 1979.

### Section 194:3-a

 **194:3-a Certain Districts may Assess Tuition. –** A local school
district may if federal funds are not appropriated sufficient to cover
the cost of educating school age pupils who live on federally owned or
leased property, assess tuition up to the state average costs against
parents or guardians of said pupils which cover the current per pupil
cost of the district, if there are more than 100 school age pupils
within the federal enclave.

**Source.** 1973, 552:1, eff. July 5, 1973.

### Section 194:3-b

 **194:3-b Deficit Reduction. –** School districts may vote, at any
annual meeting, to raise such sums of money as the voters judge
necessary for the purpose of reducing an accumulated general fund
deficit.

**Source.** 1994, 147:6, eff. July 22, 1994.

### Section 194:3-c

 **194:3-c Revolving Funds for Self-Supporting Programs. –**
                                             
 I. A school district may establish a revolving fund for the purpose
of providing moneys for school programs which are self-supporting, in
whole or in part. The purposes for which such fund is established shall
be specified by the district.
                                             
 II. (a) A school district may raise revenues from and appropriate
funds for such self-supporting school programs.
                                             
 (b) Revenue may include, but is not limited to, moneys derived
from the sale of goods or services associated with such programs or
tuition charged for such programs. Such revenue shall be appropriated to
fund only the program from which it was derived.
                                             
 (c) A school district may establish a line item in its budget to
supplement revenue derived from such programs. No supplemental
appropriation may be made except by such budget line item.
                                             
 (d) A school district shall establish regular intervals for
disbursing funds to such programs for program costs approved by the
local school board.
                                             
 III. The revolving fund shall be subject to annual audit, and all
records regarding the programs and revenue derived from such programs
shall be public.
                                             
 IV. Moneys in the revolving funds may be nonlapsing, if so specified
by the district.
                                             
 V. Upon termination of a school program funded under this section,
moneys derived from such program remaining in the revolving fund shall
be returned to the pupil if derived from tuition, or used as local
general funds to reduce the tax rate if derived from the sale of goods
or services associated with the program.

**Source.** 1996, 179:1, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 194:3-d

 **194:3-d School District Computer Networks. –**
                                             
 I. Every school district which has computer systems or networks
shall adopt a policy which outlines the intended appropriate and
acceptable use, as well as the inappropriate and illegal use, of the
school district computer systems and networks including, but not limited
to, the Internet.
                                             
 II. All users of a school district's computer systems or networks
who intentionally violate the district's policy and who intentionally
damage the computer system or network shall assume legal and financial
liability for such damage. For purposes of this section, "user'' means
any person authorized to access the school district's computer systems
or networks including, but not limited to, the Internet.

**Source.** 1997, 285:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 194:4

 **194:4 Notes of Districts. –** If the money is hired upon the note
or notes of the district, said note or notes shall be signed by the
district treasurer and by the school board.

**Source.** 1909, 138:1. 1921, 85, IV:4. PL 119:4. RL 138:4.

### Section 194:5

 **194:5 Taxation. –** In the assessment of school district taxes
every person shall be taxed in the district in which he lives for his
personal estate subject to taxation in town. Real estate shall be taxed
in the district in which it is situated.

**Source.** RS 71:9. CS 75:9. GS 80:10. GL 88:16. PS 89:6. 1921, 85,
IV:6. PL 119:5. RL 138:5.

### Section 194:6

 **194:6 Invoice of Property. –** The selectmen may make a new
invoice of all the property in the district when necessary for the just
assessment of such taxes.

**Source.** 1844, 148:1. CS 75:10. GS 80:11. GL 88:17. PS 89:7. 1921,
85, IV:7. PL 119:6. RL 138:6.

### Section 194:7

 **194:7 Assessment. –** The selectmen shall annually assess upon the
ratable estate of the district a sum equal to the amounts determined by
the district, and shall pay over the same to the district treasurer.

**Source.** 1909, 22:2. 1921, 85, IV:10. PL 119:7. RL 138:7.

### Section 194:8

 **194:8 Collection. –** If such taxes are assessed after July 1 in
any year upon the property of nonresidents the collector shall send to
the owners of said property, or to their agents, if known, a bill of
their taxes within 2 months after the delivery of the list to him, and
shall, at the expiration of 4 months after such delivery, advertise and
sell the property on which the taxes have not been paid in the same
manner as if such taxes had been assessed in April preceding.

**Source.** 1844, 148:2. CS 75:11. GS 80:12. 1874, 105:1. GL 88:18. PS
89:8. 1921, 85, IV:8. PL 119:8. RL 138:8.

### Section 194:9

 **194:9 Apportionment of School Moneys. –** Every district situate
in 2 or more towns shall be entitled to its just proportion of school
taxes, income from school funds, according to the value of property
taxable therein.

**Source.** 1850, 974:1, 2. CS 73:18. GS 78:13. GL 86:13. PS 89:13.
1921, 85, IV:14. PL 119:9. RL 138:9.

### Section 194:10

 **194:10 Salaries of District Board and Officers. –** At its annual
meeting each school district shall determine the salaries of its school
board and other district officers, and the district clerk shall certify
the same to the selectmen.

**Source.** 1909, 22:1. 1921, 85, IV:9. PL 119:10. 1927, 14:1. RL
138:10.

### Section 194:11

 **194:11 Payment. –** The district treasurer shall pay to the school
board and other district officers their salaries granted by the
district, and he shall likewise pay the truant officer upon the order of
the school board, they certifying that he has performed the duties
required of him by law.

**Source.** 1909, 22:3. 1921, 85, IV:11. PL 119:11. 1927, 14:2. RL
138:11.

### Section 194:12,-13

 **194:12, 194:13 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1963, 117:1, eff. Jan. 1,
1964.
                                             ]

### Section 194:14

 **194:14 Nonresident Pupils. –** A district may determine upon what
terms scholars from other districts may be admitted to its schools, and
if a district neglects to make such determination the school board may
do it.

**Source.** RS 73:7. CS 77:7. GS 78:19. GL 86:19. PS 89:12. 1921, 85,
IV:13. PL 119:14. RL 138:14.

### Section 194:15

 **194:15 School Year. –** The fiscal and scholastic year for all
school districts shall end June 30 in each year.

**Source.** 1917, 122:1. 1921, 85, IV:15. PL 119:15. RL 138:15.

### Section 194:15-a

 **194:15-a Lord's Prayer in Public Elementary Schools. –** As an
affirmation of the freedom of religion in this country, a school
district may authorize the recitation of the traditional Lord's prayer
in public elementary schools. Pupil participation in the recitation of
the prayer shall be voluntary. Pupils shall be reminded that this Lord's
prayer is the prayer our pilgrim fathers recited when they came to this
country in their search for freedom. Pupils shall be informed that these
exercises are not meant to influence an individual's personal religious
beliefs in any manner. The exercises shall be conducted so that pupils
shall learn of our great freedoms, which freedoms include the freedom of
religion and are symbolized by the recitation of the Lord's prayer.

**Source.** 1975, 225:1. 2002, 277:1, eff. July 17, 2002.

### Section 194:15-b

 **194:15-b Instruction in New Hampshire's Cultural Heritage and
Ethnic History Authorized. –** A school district may include
one-semester courses at the elementary and secondary levels in the
cultural heritage and ethnic history of New Hampshire's people, and may
raise and appropriate money for this purpose.

**Source.** 1988, 122:1, eff. June 18, 1988.

### Section 194:15-c

 **194:15-c New Hampshire School Patriot Act. –**
                                             
 I. As a continuation of the policy of teaching our country's history
to the elementary and secondary pupils of this state, this section shall
be known as the New Hampshire School Patriot Act.
                                             
 II. A school district shall authorize a period of time during the
school day for the recitation of the pledge of allegiance. Pupil
participation in the recitation of the pledge of allegiance shall be
voluntary.
                                             
 III. Pupils not participating in the recitation of the pledge of
allegiance may silently stand or remain seated but shall be required to
respect the rights of those pupils electing to participate. If this
paragraph shall be declared to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid,
the remaining paragraphs in this section shall not be affected, and
shall continue in full force and effect.

**Source.** 2002, 277:2, eff. July 17, 2002.

### Section 194:16

 **194:16 Military Drill, Etc. –** A school district may include
military drill and physical exercises in its course of instructions, and
may raise and appropriate money for that purpose.

**Source.** 1917, 100:2. 1921, 85, IV:16. PL 119:16. RL 138:16.

### Section 194:17

 **194:17 Instruction in Use of Firearms. –** A school district may
include instruction in the safe and proper use of firearms including
instruction in game laws and good hunting practices, and may raise and
appropriate money for said purposes.

**Source.** 1953, 50:1, eff. March 26, 1953.

### Section 194:18

 **194:18 Evening Schools. –** Any school district may maintain an
evening school as a part of its public school system, and every district
in which reside or are employed 15 or more persons between the ages of
16 and 18 years who cannot read and speak the English language
understandingly shall maintain an evening or special day school for the
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this title for such
time in each year, and under such conditions and with such exceptions,
as the state board may prescribe.

**Source.** 1919, 106:15. 1921, 85, IV:17. PL 119:17. RL 138:17. RSA
194:18. 1973, 72:30, eff. June 3, 1973.

### Section 194:19

 **194:19 School for Adults. –** Every school district in which
reside or are employed 20 or more persons above the age of 18 years who
cannot read and speak the English language understandingly shall
maintain schools for the instruction of such non-English-speaking
persons for such time in each year, and under such conditions and with
such exceptions, as the state board may prescribe.

**Source.** 1919, 106:16. 1921, 85, IV:18. PL 119:18. RL 138:18. RSA
194:19. 1973, 72:15, eff. June 3, 1973.

### Section 194:19-a

 **194:19-a Definition of Elementary School. –** For the purposes of
this chapter, an elementary school is as set forth in RSA 189:25.

**Source.** 1967, 362:1. 1981, 318:7, eff. Aug. 16, 1981.

High Schools
------------

### Section 194:20

 **194:20 Establishment. –** Any school district may by vote or bylaw
establish and maintain a high school in which the higher English
branches of education, Latin, Greek and modern languages may be taught.

**Source.** 1866, 4255. GS 82:2. 1874, 56:1. GL 90:2. 1881, 23:1. PS
89:9. 1901, 96:1. 1921, 85, IV:19. PL 119:19. RL 138:19.

### Section 194:21

 **194:21 Joint Maintenance Agreements. –**
                                             
 I. Two or more adjoining districts in the same or different towns
may make contracts with each other for establishing and maintaining
jointly a high school or other public school for the benefit of their
pupils, and may raise and appropriate money to carry the contracts into
effect; and their school boards, acting jointly or otherwise, shall have
such authority and perform such duties in relation to schools so
maintained as may be provided for in the contracts.
                                             
 II. (a) The school boards of the component school districts shall
hold at least one public hearing in each district. Reasonable notice of
each hearing shall be provided no less than 10 days prior to the date of
the hearing. Upon adoption of the joint maintenance agreement by the
component districts, a copy of the agreement executed by each component
school board shall be submitted to the state board of education for
approval. If the state board of education approves the agreement, it
shall forward it to the clerks of the component school districts for
submission to the voters as soon as may be reasonably possible at an
annual meeting or a special meeting called for the purpose. A majority
of voters present and voting in each component district shall be
required for approval of the joint maintenance agreement.
                                             
 (b) If after review the state board of education determines that
the joint maintenance agreement fails to comply with the provisions of
this section, the state board shall forward written notice of its
findings, including specific areas of deficiency, to the school boards
of the component school districts. Such school boards shall correct any
deficiencies and resubmit the agreement to the state board for review
within 30 days of the state board's deficiency notice.
                                             
 (c) The state board shall act on all joint maintenance agreement
proposals within 30 days of receipt.
                                             
 III. The school boards of the component school districts shall be
authorized to incur indebtedness by the issuance and sale of bonds or
notes, or otherwise, in the name of the joint maintenance agreement
subject to approval by the legislative body of the component districts
pursuant to RSA 33. The school boards of the component school districts
shall be authorized to engage in collective bargaining pursuant to RSA
273-A and to hire staff in the name of the joint maintenance agreement,
as may be necessary.

**Source.** 1845, 221:1, 2. CS 79:1. 1862, 2618:1. GS 82:3. 1869, 7:1.
GL 90:3. PS 89:10. 1921, 85, IV:20. PL 119:20. RL 138:20. 2000, 215:1,
eff. July 31, 2000.

### Section 194:21-a

 **194:21-a Long-Term Contracts. –** The school districts of the
state may enter into a contract with each other for the establishing and
maintaining jointly a high school for the benefit of their pupils and
may raise and appropriate money to carry said contracts into effect. The
school boards of said districts, acting jointly or otherwise, shall have
the authority and perform such duties in relation to schools so
maintained as may be provided for in the contracts. The term of any such
contract may be for a term not to exceed 20 years from the date of the
contract. In entering into such contract either of said school districts
may bind itself to the payment of tuition for the entire term of the
contract and may also bind itself to annual payments on account of
capital investments.

**Source.** 1959, 218:1, eff. Aug. 11, 1959.

### Section 194:21-b

 **194:21-b Special Meetings. –** The adoption of a long-term
contract as provided for by RSA 194:21-a may be taken by the school
district at a regular annual meeting or a special meeting called for the
purpose provided that an article is inserted in the warrant for said
meeting relative to said contract.

**Source.** 1959, 218:2, eff. Aug. 11, 1959.

### Section 194:21-c

 **194:21-c Application of Statutes. –** The provisions of RSA 194:21
relative to joint maintenance of schools, and the provisions of RSA
194:27, as amended, relative to limitations on the payment of tuition,
shall not apply to the school districts of the state if any long-term
contract herein provided for is adopted by said districts.

**Source.** 1959, 218:3, eff. Aug. 11, 1959.

### Section 194:22

 **194:22 Contracts With Schools. –** Any school district may make a
contract with an academy, high school or other literary institution
located in this or, when distance or transportation facilities make it
necessary, in another state, and raise and appropriate money to carry
the contract into effect. If the contract is approved by the state board
the school with which it is made shall be deemed a high school
maintained by the district.

**Source.** 1874, 69:1. GL 90:15. 1885, 89:2. 1887, 111:1. PS 89:11.
1901, 96:6. 1903, 118:1. 1905, 90:1. 1909, 100:1. 1911, 137:1. 1915,
126:1. 1917, 219:1. 1921, 85, IV:21. PL 119:21. RL 138:21.

### Section 194:23

 **194:23 Definition of High School. –**
                                             
 I. The term "high school'' shall mean a public school or public
academy comprising a span of grades beginning with the next grade
following an approved elementary, middle or junior high school as
defined by RSA 189:25 and ending with grade 12. Such a school shall:
                                             
 (a) Offer those subjects prescribed by statute, including
instruction in history, government, and constitutions of the United
States and New Hampshire and of the organization and operation of New
Hampshire municipal, county, and state government;
                                             
 (b) Provide such other subjects as the school district
maintaining such school shall determine by its school board or by vote
of the district;
                                             
 (c) Comply with standards prescribed by the state board of
education which shall be uniform in their application to all schools;
and
                                             
 (d) Qualify a pupil to receive a diploma upon completion.
                                             
 II. In this section, "public academy'' means an independent school
which contracts with one or more school districts to provide education
services to such districts in compliance with RSA 194:23. All contracts
between a public academy and a school district shall be subject to
approval by the state board of education. In this section, "independent
school'' means a school which is governed by a board of trustees or
other officials who are not publicly elected. An independent school
shall not include a chartered public school established under RSA
194-B.
                                             
 II-a. In this section, the term "high school'' shall include the
regional career and technical education center in the Manchester school
district which complies with the provisions of RSA 188-E.
                                             
 III. The enactment of paragraph II shall not affect a determination
of the New Hampshire retirement system board of trustees under RSA 100-A
regarding the eligibility of an employer or its employees to participate
in the New Hampshire retirement system.

**Source.** 1901, 96:1. 1903, 31:1; 118:1. 1905, 19:1. 1921, 85, IV:22.
PL 119:22. RL 138:22. RSA 194:23. 1959, 246:1. 1975, 183:3. 1985, 151:1.
2006, 191:1. 2007, 71:3, eff. Aug. 10, 2007. 2008, 354:1, eff. Sept. 5,
2008. 2012, 221:2, eff. June 13, 2012. 2015, 252:13, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 194:23-a

 **194:23-a Definition of Comprehensive High School. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1985, 151:6, eff. July 21, 1985.
                                             ]

### Section 194:23-b

 **194:23-b Approval of High Schools. –**
                                             
 I. In order to satisfy compulsory school attendance laws, a high
school student less than 16 years old must attend a high school which
has been approved by the state board of education as complying with the
provisions of RSA 194:23, or its equivalent; and the state board of
education shall annually publish a list of all high schools which it has
approved as meeting the requirements of RSA 194:23.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of the department of education may, through an
agreement with another state when such state and New Hampshire are
parties to an interstate agreement, allow New Hampshire pupils to attend
schools that meet the standards established by one of the 2 states.

**Source.** 1959, 246:2. 1985, 151:2. 1999, 224:3. 2000, 98:1, eff. June
26, 2000.

### Section 194:23-c

 **194:23-c Standards and Uniformity. –** The state board of
education shall have the power to approve for a reasonable period of
time a high school that does not fully meet the requirements of RSA
194:23 if in its judgment the financial condition of the school district
or other circumstances warrant delay in full compliance.

**Source.** 1959, 246:2. 1985, 151:3, eff. July 21, 1985.

### Section 194:23-d

 **194:23-d State Financial Aid. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2003, 314:9, eff.
July 22, 2003.
                                             ]

### Section 194:23-e

 **194:23-e Receipt of Tuition Students. –** In order to be entitled
to accept tuition students, a public high school must be approved by the
state board of education as complying with the provisions of RSA 194:23.

**Source.** 1959, 246:2. 1985, 151:5, eff. July 21, 1985.

### Section 194:23-f

 **194:23-f High School Student as School Board Member. –** The
provisions of this section shall apply only to high schools located in a
school district in which the school board has voted to have a nonvoting
student member pursuant to RSA 189:1-c.
                                             
 I. In addition to the school board members authorized in RSA 671:4,
a high school shall select, in accordance with the directives of
paragraph II and the provisions of RSA 189:1-c, one or more students
from among its members to be nonvoting members of the school board for
the district in which the high school is located. A student member shall
have all the rights of a regular school board member regarding school
board business except the right to vote.
                                             
 II. A student board member shall be chosen by a simple majority vote
of the high school student body. The student government of the high
school shall establish procedures for the nomination and election of
candidates. The student government shall also establish a procedure for
any public high school student in the school district to petition a
student board member to present proposals and opinions to the school
board.
                                             
 III. A student board member shall serve for a term of one year. The
school board shall decide the date at which the term shall begin. Any
student who will graduate during the term's duration is not eligible to
be a candidate and is not eligible to vote. The student government of
the high school shall establish a procedure for filling any vacancy that
may occur in this position. A student board member shall serve without
pay.
                                             
 IV. The duties of a student school board member shall include:
                                             
 (a) Attending all school board meetings except as specified in
paragraph V;
                                             
 (b) Representing all public high school students within the
district;
                                             
 (c) Presenting to the school board specific proposals and
opinions from students as directed in paragraph II; and, when
appropriate, placing proposals on the school board agenda in accordance
with the board procedures;
                                             
 (d) Serving as a liaison between students and the principal,
other faculty, student government advisors, and appropriate outside
agencies;
                                             
 (e) Keeping public high school students informed of the business
of the school board.
                                             
 V. A student school board member shall be excluded from discussions
and procedures of the school board involving subjects which are
confidential under RSA 91-A.

**Source.** 1983, 111:3, eff. July 24, 1983. 2009, 5:2, eff. June 16,
2009.

### Section 194:24

 **194:24 Transfer of Scholar. –** Whenever it shall appear that the
attendance of a pupil at the school with which the contract is made will
work a manifest hardship, which may be avoided by permitting the child
to attend another approved school, the pupil through his parents,
guardian or some other responsible person may apply to the school board
for an order transferring the pupil to the more accessible school.

**Source.** 1901, 96:6. 1903, 118:1. 1905, 90:1. 1915, 126:1. 1917,
219:1. 1921, 85, IV:23. PL 119:23. RL 138:23.

### Section 194:25

 **194:25 Hearing. –** The school board shall thereupon order a
hearing within 10 days thereafter, and, if it shall appear to the board
that the claim is well-founded, the board shall make the order prayed
for, and the district in which the pupil resides shall be liable to the
school to which the pupil is assigned for the pupil's tuition not to
exceed in any one year a sum based upon the costs as set forth in RSA
194:27.

**Source.** 1901, 96:6. 1903, 118:1. 1905, 90:1. 1915, 126:1. 1917,
219:1. 1921, 85, IV:23. PL 119:24. RL 138:24. 1949, 139:1, eff. July 1,
1949.

### Section 194:26

 **194:26 Appeal. –** The person applying for the pupil's transfer,
or the governing board of the school with which the district has made
the contract, may appeal from the decision of the school board to the
state board within 10 days from the date of the filing of the order, or
if no order is filed within 10 days after the application. The state
board may upon such appeal, or if application is made directly therefor,
modify the provisions of RSA 194:22 when conditions of transportation or
accessibility require such action for the best interests of the pupil,
and the order of the board shall be final and binding upon any school
board affected thereby.

**Source.** 1901, 96:6. 1903, 118:1. 1905, 90:1. 1915, 126:1. 1917,
219:1. 1921, 85, IV:23. PL 119:25. RL 138:25. 1943, 149:1, eff. May 4,
1943.

### Section 194:27

 **194:27 Tuition. –** Any district not maintaining a high school or
school of corresponding grade shall pay for the tuition of any pupil who
with parents or guardian resides in said district or who, as a resident
of said district, after full investigation by the state board of
education is determined to be entitled to have his or her tuition paid
by the district where the pupil resides, and who attends an approved
public high school or public school of corresponding grade in another
district or an approved public academy. Except under contract as
provided in RSA 194:22, the liability of any school district hereunder
for the tuition of any pupil shall be the current expenses of operation
of the receiving district for its high school, as estimated by the state
board of education for the preceding school year. This current expense
of operation shall include all costs except costs of transportation of
pupils.

**Source.** 1901, 96:1. 1903, 118:1. 1917, 16:1. 1921, 85, IV:24. 1923,
89:1. 1925, 129:1. PL 119:26. 1927, 18:1. 1933, 126:1. RL 138:26. 1949,
139:2. RSA 194:27. 1955, 166:1. 1957, 51:1. 1973, 299:1. 1998, 271:2,
eff. Aug. 25, 1998.

### Section 194:27-a

 **194:27-a Tuition Liability for Nongraduating Pupils. –** A pupil
who has attended a high school, or schools of corresponding grades, for
such time as is usually required and who has not been graduated may be
required to certify to the school board of the district liable for the
pupil's tuition that he will make the effort required to profit from his
attendance before he is entitled to any further tuition payments on his
behalf. The school board of the district liable for tuition for any such
pupil may refuse tuition for such pupil when it has been determined that
such pupil is grossly neglecting his school work. A decision of the
board to refuse tuition under such circumstances stands, subject only to
review by the state board of education. The decision of the state board
of education is binding and final on both the district and the pupil.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a school board
from making tuition payments beyond the time usually required for the
completion of a high school program if in the board's judgment it is
desirable to extend the educational opportunity for a pupil.

**Source.** 1969, 356:9, eff. July 1, 1969.

### Section 194:28

 **194:28 Recovery of. –** If any town in which a high school or
school of corresponding grade is not maintained neglects or refuses to
pay for tuition as provided in RSA 194:27, such town shall be liable
therefor to the parent or guardian of the child furnished with such
tuition, if the parent or guardian has paid the same; otherwise to the
town or city furnishing the same in an action of assumpsit.

**Source.** 1901, 96:2. 1921, 85, IV:25. PL 119:27. RL 138:27.

### Section 194:29,-30

 **194:29, 194:30 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1969, 356:11, eff. July 1,
1969.
                                             ]

### Section 194:31

 **194:31 Registers; Reports. –** All academies, private schools and
public schools shall be furnished with copies of the school register,
and shall make an annual report of membership to the department of
education in accordance with RSA 189:28.

**Source.** 1901, 96:5. 1921, 85, IV:30. PL 119:30. RL 138:30. RSA
194:31. 1991, 169:3. 2005, 189:2, eff. Aug. 29, 2005.

### Section 194:31-a

 **194:31-a Student Records. –** All elementary and secondary
educational institutions including academies, private schools and public
schools shall, upon request of a private school or a school district as
authorized by a parent, student, or former student, furnish a student
record to any elementary or secondary educational institution. There
shall be no charge for any record furnished pursuant to this section.

**Source.** 1993, 147:1, eff. July 16, 1993.

### Section 194:32

 **194:32 Catalogues. –** The principal of each college, academy,
seminary or other institution of learning, incorporated by the laws of
this state, shall annually, and before November 1 of each year, forward
to the New Hampshire Genealogical Society, for its library, one copy of
each printed catalogue of its officers and students and courses of
studies published during the year next preceding said date.

**Source.** 1907, 40:1. 1921, 85, IV:31. PL 119:31. RL 138:31.

### Section 194:33

 **194:33 Union of Districts. –** Whenever any school district
organized under a special act of the legislature shall vote to abolish
such district and to unite with the town district, if said town district
shall vote to receive said special district, and the special district
has for the 5 years next preceding such vote maintained a high school,
it shall be incumbent on the town district with which it unites to
thereafter keep and maintain a high school within the limits of said
special district for at least 34 weeks in each year, of equal grade to
that which had been previously maintained therein by such special
district, said high school to be open to all scholars in the town
district, of suitable age and qualifications.

**Source.** 1891, 64:4. 1921, 85, IV:32. PL 119:32. RL 138:32.

### Section 194:34

 **194:34 Maintenance of High Schools. –** It shall be the duty of
said town district to raise and appropriate each year thereafter
sufficient money, in addition to the school money which the town in
which it is situated may raise, to properly maintain such high school,
or schools, as may be established under RSA 194:33.

**Source.** 1891, 64:2. 1921, 85, IV:33. PL 119:33. RL 138:33.

### Section 194:35

 **194:35 Discontinuance. –** No high school shall be discontinued,
or the location thereof be changed, except by the superior court, on
petition of 20 or more legal voters of the town or district in which
such high school is located, in addition to a majority of the school
board for said town or district, after such notice as the court may
order and proof that the educational interests of the town or district
require such discontinuance or change.

**Source.** 1905, 20:1. 1921, 85, IV:34. PL 119:34. RL 138:34. 1943,
41:1, eff. March 3, 1943.

### Section 194:36

 **194:36 Penalty. –** Any town district failing to comply with any
of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined for such neglect.

**Source.** 1891, 64:4. 1921, 85, IV:35. PL 119:35. RL 138:35.

Dissolution of Districts
------------------------

### Section 194:37

 **194:37 By Vote. –**
                                             
 I. Any special district organized under a special act of the
legislature may, by a majority vote of the qualified voters present and
voting at a legal meeting, dissolve its corporate existence and unite
with the town district.
                                             
 II. Any special district or pre-existing special district may vote
by warrant article presented at the annual meeting of the school
district of which the special district is a part. Only legally
registered voters within the boundaries of the special district may vote
on the warrant article. Such warrant articles shall be placed on school
district warrants in accordance with RSA 197:6.

**Source.** 1885, 89:1. PS 89:14. 1921, 85, IV:36. PL 119:36. RL 138:36.
RSA 194:37. 1988, 7:1, eff. Feb. 24, 1988.

### Section 194:38

 **194:38 By Petition. –** When a town or city is divided into 2 or
more districts, either district may petition the state board of
education to unite the districts, and, if the board after notice and
hearing finds that justice requires action, it may make an order
consolidating the districts, and when and after that order is filed and
recorded in the office of the secretary of state said town shall
constitute a single school district.

**Source.** 1921, 123:1. PL 119:37. RL 138:37.

### Section 194:39

 **194:39 Taking Over Property. –** In any such case the town
district so formed shall forthwith take possession of the schoolhouses,
lands, apparatus and other property owned and used for school purposes
by the district so dissolved which the district might lawfully sell or
convey.

**Source.** 1887, 110:1. PS 89:15. 1921, 85, IV:37. PL 119:38. RL
138:38.

### Section 194:40

 **194:40 Adjustments. –** The property so taken, and also like
property of the district to which the special district is united, shall
be appraised by the selectmen of the town, and at the next annual
assessment a tax shall be levied upon the whole town district equal to
the amount of the whole appraisal; and there shall be remitted to the
taxpayers of each district the appraised value of its property.

**Source.** 1885, 43:2. 1887, 110:1. PS 89:16. 1921, 85, IV:38. PL
119:39. RL 138:39.

### Section 194:41

 **194:41 Continuance; Trust Funds. –** The corporate powers of a
district shall continue for the purpose of settling up its affairs and
of holding, managing and enjoying any property held by it in trust,
notwithstanding its dissolution, but the school board of the district of
which it forms a part shall be its agents to expend the income of any
such trust property that is devoted to the support of schools.

**Source.** 1854, 1540:1. GS 78:24. 1870, 8:5. GL 86:28. 1887, 87:1. PS
89:24. 1921, 85, IV:46. PL 119:40. RL 138:40.

### Section 194:42

 **194:42 Application of Funds. –** The school board shall first give
to such district or districts such term or character of schooling as
would be just and reasonable if no such fund were in existence, and only
use the income to lengthen the school or schools, or to carry out the
purposes of the trust under which the funds are held.

**Source.** 1887, 87:2. PS 89:25. 1921, 85, IV:47. PL 119:41. RL 138:41.

### Section 194:43

 **194:43 Meetings. –** Any justice of the peace may, upon
application of 3 or more voters, resident within the limits of the
dissolved district, call a meeting thereof in the same manner as other
school district meetings are called, at which a moderator, clerk and
agents may be chosen and any other business transacted for the purposes
mentioned in RSA 194:41.

**Source.** 1887, 75:1. PS 89:26. 1921, 85, IV:48. PL 119:42. RL 138:42.

### Section 194:44

 **194:44 Records. –** The records of dissolved school districts
whose corporate existence is not continued for any purpose shall be
returned by the clerks of such districts to the town clerk's office for
preservation with the public records of the town.

**Source.** 1885, 43:3. PS 89:27. 1921, 85, IV:29. PL 119:43. RL 138:43.

Dissolution of Districts in 2 Towns
-----------------------------------

### Section 194:45

 **194:45 Adjustments. –** If a district so dissolved is formed of
parts of 2 or more towns an equitable apportionment of its assets and
liabilities between such parts shall be made by the selectmen of the
towns in which they are situate, acting as a joint board, within 60 days
after the dissolution.

**Source.** 1885, 43:2. 1887, 110:1. PS 89:17. 1921, 85, IV:39. PL
119:44. RL 138:44.

### Section 194:46

 **194:46 Petition for Referee. –** If such joint board fails to make
an apportionment within the time limited therefor any taxpayer within
the district may apply by petition to a justice of the superior court
for the appointment of a referee to make the apportionment.

**Source.** 1885, 43:2. 1887, 110:1. PS 89:18. 1921, 85, IV:40. PL
119:45. RL 138:45.

### Section 194:47

 **194:47 Hearing. –** The justice shall appoint a time and place of
hearing upon the petition, and order notice thereof to be given to all
parties interested, and after hearing he shall appoint a referee.

**Source.** PS 89:19. 1921, 85, IV:41. PL 119:46. RL 138:46.

### Section 194:48

 **194:48 Notice. –** The notice shall be served by posting copies of
the petition and order thereon in at least 2 public places in each of
said parts, and by giving to the clerk of the dissolved district, and
the clerk of each town district in which any part thereof is located,
like copies 10 days at least before the day of hearing.

**Source.** PS 89:20. 1921, 85, IV:42. PL 119:47. RL 138:47.

### Section 194:49

 **194:49 Referee's Procedure. –** The referee shall cause notice of
his hearing to be given to all parties interested, in the same manner as
is provided in RSA 194:48. He shall hear the parties, make his report in
writing, and file a copy thereof with the clerk of the dissolved
district and the clerk of each town interested; and the report, so made
and filed, shall be final.

**Source.** 1885, 43:2. 1887, 110:1. PS 89:21. 1921, 85, IV:43. PL
119:48. RL 138:48.

### Section 194:50

 **194:50 Assessment. –** Upon receiving a copy of the apportionment,
the selectmen shall assess upon that part of the district within their
town the amount for which it is charged, and cause the same to be
collected and paid to the town district in which the creditor part of
the dissolved district is situated.

**Source.** 1885, 43:2. 1887, 110:1. PS 89:22. 1921, 85, IV:44. PL
119:49. RL 138:49.

### Section 194:51

 **194:51 Equalization. –** The town district shall take the property
and assets of that part of the dissolved district which is situate in
such town district, and the selectmen of the town shall assess and remit
taxes with reference to the property so taken, and like property of the
town district, the same as in other cases.

**Source.** 1885, 43:2. 1887, 110:1. PS 89:23. 1921, 85, IV:45. PL
119:50. RL 138:50.

Changing District Boundaries
----------------------------

### Section 194:52

 **194:52 Petition to Selectmen. –** Any person interested in
severing part of any town therefrom and annexing it to another town, or
school district therein, for school purposes may apply therefor by
petition to the selectmen of the town from which it is proposed to sever
such territory, and to the selectmen of the town to which it is proposed
to annex the same.

**Source.** 1893, 72:1. 1921, 85, IV:50. PL 119:51. RL 138:51.

### Section 194:53

 **194:53 Hearing. –** It shall be the duty of said selectmen, upon
notice to such petitioners and to the school boards of the respective
towns and school districts interested in the proposed transfer, to hear
the parties, and determine whether the reasonable accommodation of such
petitioners or others requires such transfer, and to make return of
their findings to the clerks of their respective towns in writing within
30 days.

**Source.** 1893, 72:2. 1921, 85, IV:51. PL 119:52. RL 138:52.

### Section 194:54

 **194:54 Certificate. –** If a majority of each of said boards of
selectmen report in favor of such transfer they shall sign a certificate
of that fact, describing such territory, and stating that it is annexed
to such adjoining town, or district therein, for school purposes, which
certificate shall be recorded by the town clerk of each town.

**Source.** 1893, 72:4. 1921, 85, IV:52. PL 119:53. RL 138:53.

### Section 194:55

 **194:55 Restoration. –** Any territory annexed for school purposes
to an adjoining town, or school district therein, may, upon proceedings
such as have been prescribed in this subdivision, be restored to the
town or district from which it was severed. Such proceedings may be
initiated by any person in either the school district to which the
territory has been annexed, or the school district of which it was
originally a part. The vote to restore annexed territory shall take
effect on July 1 of the calendar year one year subsequent to the date on
which the restoration vote is passed. For 3 years after such vote
becomes effective, the restored territory shall be allowed to send their
school children to the schools in the district to which the territory
was previously annexed. The district in which the schools are located
shall receive tuition for these school children.

**Source.** 1893, 72:4. 1921, 85, IV:53. PL 119:54. RL 138:54. RSA
194:55. 1988, 112:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1989.

### Section 194:56

 **194:56 Validity. –** The annexation of territory under this
subdivision shall have the same force and validity as if made by a
special act of the legislature.

**Source.** 1893, 72:5. 1921, 85, IV:54. PL 119:55. RL 138:55.

### Section 194:57

 **194:57 Effect. –** The selectmen and collector of any town to
which part of any other town is annexed for school purposes shall have
the same powers and duties in respect to such annexed territory, of
furnishing blank inventories and of assessing and collecting taxes for
school purposes, and the inhabitants and owners thereof shall for such
purposes be subject to the same liabilities, as if such territory were
in the town to which it is annexed.

**Source.** 1893, 72:6. 1897, 26:1. 1921, 85, IV:55. PL 119:56. RL
138:56.

### Section 194:58

 **194:58 Applicability of Provision. –** The foregoing provisions of
this subdivision shall not apply to special districts, but only to town
districts.

**Source.** 1897, 26:1. 1921, 85, IV:56. PL 119:57. RL 138:57.

### Section 194:59

 **194:59 Special Districts. –** The selectmen of any town, and the
school board of any high school or other special district in the same
town, may, upon petition of persons interested, after notice to the
school board of the town school district of such town, and after hearing
the parties, unite parts of either district to the other, a majority of
the board of selectmen and majority of the school board of such special
district and a majority of the school board of the town school district
concurring therein, and their decision in writing being recorded on the
town records.

**Source.** 1893, 72:7. 1895, 75:1. 1921, 85, IV:57. PL 119:58. RL
138:58.

Department of Corrections Special School District
-------------------------------------------------

### Section 194:60

 **194:60 Special School District; Department of Corrections. –**
                                             
 I. A special school district is established within the department of
corrections, under RSA 21-H, solely for the purpose of providing
approved education programs pursuant to subparagraph IV(b) of this
section to eligible adult offenders under the age of 21 who wish to
participate.
                                             
 II. The special school district shall be exempt from state board of
education rules, except that the standards for the education of students
with disabilities and all education programs shall be set by an
interagency agreement between the department of education and the
department of corrections.
                                             
 III. The special school district shall be exempt from the
organizational and budgetary requirements regarding other school
districts or chartered public schools. The special state prison school
district shall not be required to file financial reports with the
department of education or the department of revenue administration.
                                             
 IV. The special school district shall have authority to perform all
duties necessary to operate a school including, but not limited to, the
following:
                                             
 (a) Timely submission of all required education program approval
documents and reports to appropriate agencies.
                                             
 (b) Maintenance of approved education programs which comply with
the requirements as provided for in the interagency agreements between
the department of corrections and the department of education. The
interagency agreements shall set forth the standards for approval of a
school program for department of corrections facilities, the graduation
requirements necessary for the special school district to issue a high
school diploma, and the standards for special education program
approval.
                                             
 (c) Issuance of transcripts.
                                             
 (d) Performing assessments and developing individual education
programs.
                                             
 (e) Providing fiscal management for the state and
federally-funded approved education programs.
                                             
 (f) Operation of approved education programs in a manner
consistent with the legitimate security and safety concerns of a penal
institution.
                                             
 V. The special state prison school district shall not be assigned to
a school administrative unit, nor shall it be subject to the provisions
of RSA 194-C.
                                             
 VI. The special state prison school district shall not be eligible
to receive any form of state aid to education pursuant to RSA 198,
including but not limited to, state building aid, state aid, dual
enrollment grants, foundation aid, or alternative foundation aid.
                                             
 VII. The special state prison school district shall not have a
school board.
                                             
 VIII. The special school district shall not be required to provide
special education programs or services to children with disabilities
aged 18 through 21 who, in the educational placement prior to their
incarceration in an adult correctional facility, were not actually
identified as being a child with a disability under RSA 186-C:2, or who
did not have an individualized education program prior to their
incarceration in an adult correctional facility.

**Source.** 1998, 270:6, eff. July 1, 1999. 2008, 354:1, eff. Sept. 5,
2008.
