---
title: 'CHAPTER 195-G COLLEGE SAVINGS BOND PROGRAM'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 195-G
                                             
COLLEGE SAVINGS BOND PROGRAM
----------------------------

### Section 195-G:1

 **195-G:1 Declaration of Policy. –** It is declared to be the policy
of this state that for the benefit of the people of the state, the
increase of their commerce, welfare, and prosperity and the improvement
of their health and living conditions, it is essential that students
attending higher educational institutions be given the fullest
opportunity to learn and develop their intellectual and mental
capacities. It is recognized that the financial costs to obtain an
education beyond the high school level are often burdensome or
prohibitive, and it is essential that qualified students or their
parents be provided with methods to finance postsecondary education. It
is essential that state residents be provided with an appropriate method
of financing their postsecondary educations so that they might achieve
the required levels of learning and development of their intellectual
and mental capacities. Therefore, the general court has conferred
certain powers on the state treasurer to accomplish the purposes of this
chapter, all to the public benefit and good. It is further declared that
the exercise by the state treasurer of the powers conferred under this
chapter shall constitute the performance of an essential governmental
function.

**Source.** 1989, 394:1, eff. Aug. 4, 1989.

### Section 195-G:2

 **195-G:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter "college saving bonds''
means general obligation bonds of the state issued pursuant to RSA 6-A
and this chapter.

**Source.** 1989, 394:1, eff. Aug. 4, 1989.

### Section 195-G:3

 **195-G:3 College Savings Bonds. –** Bonds sold pursuant to RSA
6-A:12 may be designated by the state treasurer as college savings
bonds. Such college savings bonds shall mature not less than 5 years nor
more than 20 years from the date of issuance, unless the state treasurer
determines otherwise, and shall be subject to such financial incentives
as may be otherwise provided.

**Source.** 1989, 394:1, eff. Aug. 4, 1989.

### Section 195-G:4

 **195-G:4 Negotiated Sale of Bonds. –** No college savings bonds
shall be sold at a negotiated sale unless the underwriter or
underwriters to which such bonds are sold:
                                             
 I. Are organized, incorporated or have their principal place of
business in the state; or
                                             
 II. In the judgment of the state treasurer, have sufficient
capability to make a broad distribution of such bonds to investors
residing in the state.

**Source.** 1989, 394:1, eff. Aug. 4, 1989.
