---
title: 'CHAPTER 195-H COLLEGE TUITION SAVINGS PLAN'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 195-H
                                             
COLLEGE TUITION SAVINGS PLAN
----------------------------

### Section 195-H:1

 **195-H:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commission'' means the New Hampshire college tuition savings
plan advisory commission.
                                             
 II. "Eligible educational institution'' means that which is defined
in 26 U.S.C. section 529(e)(5).
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. "Savings plan'' means any plan administered as the New Hampshire
college tuition savings plan.

**Source.** 1997, 304:2. 1998, 150:1. 2007, 196:1, 7, I, eff. Aug. 17,
2007.

### Section 195-H:2

 **195-H:2 Advisory Commission Established; Reports. –**
                                             
 I. (a) There is established the New Hampshire college tuition
savings plan advisory commission which shall ensure the proper
administration and management of the savings plan. The advisory
commission shall ensure that the savings plan complies with the
requirements of section 529 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended, and any related federal law applicable to the savings plan. The
commission shall also be responsible for ensuring the proper
administration, implementation, and management of the New Hampshire
excellence in higher education endowment trust fund established in RSA
6:38. The commission shall consist of the following members:
                                             
 (1) The state treasurer.
                                             
 (2) Two members of the house of representatives, one of whom
shall be a member of the house finance committee, appointed by the
speaker of the house.
                                             
 (3) Two members of the senate, appointed by the senate
president.
                                             
 (4) The governor, or designee.
                                             
 (5) Two public members, one of whom shall have business
experience, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (6) One member representing the college and university system
of New Hampshire, appointed by the chancellor.
                                             
 (7) One member of the higher education commission established
in RSA 21-N:8-a, II, appointed by majority vote of the members of the
commission.
                                             
 (8) One member representing the community college system of
New Hampshire, appointed by the chancellor of the community college
system of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (9) One member representing the New Hampshire college and
university council, appointed by the members of the council.
                                             
 (10) One member representing the New Hampshire Higher
Education Assistance Foundation, appointed by the foundation.
                                             
 (b) Except for the members appointed under subparagraphs
(a)(1)-(4), members shall be appointed for 2-year terms. II. Members of
the commission shall serve without compensation, except that legislative
members shall receive mileage at the legislative rate.
                                             
 III. The commission shall keep written records of all its
proceedings.
                                             
 IV. No member of the commission shall have any personal interest in
the gains or profits of any investment made by the commission; nor shall
any member of the commission, directly or indirectly, for such member or
as an agent, in any manner use the same except to make such current and
necessary payments as are authorized by the commission; nor shall any
member of the commission become an endorser or surety, or in any manner
an obligor, for money loaned to or borrowed from the commission.
                                             
 V. Members of the commission shall be held harmless from either
criminal or civil liability for any decisions made or services rendered
under the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 VI. (a) The state treasurer shall make quarterly reports regarding
the status of the savings plan to the commission.
                                             
 (b)(1) At least annually, the commission shall issue to each
participant, a statement which shall include the participant's beginning
balance, contributions, and earnings credited to their account during
the previous fiscal year.
                                             
 (2) At least annually, the commission shall make annual
reports regarding the status of the savings program to each participant
in the savings plan and to the state library.

**Source.** 1997, 304:2. 1999, 328:2. 2007, 196:2, eff. Aug. 17, 2007;
361:27, eff. July 17, 2007. 2011, 224:133, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 195-H:3

 **195-H:3 Rulemaking. –** The commission shall adopt rules relative
to:
                                             
 I. The administration, management, promotion, and marketing of the
savings plan.
                                             
 II. Maintaining the tuition savings program in compliance with
Internal Revenue Service standards for qualified state tuition
programs.
                                             
 III to VII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VIII. The administration, implementation, and promotion of the New
Hampshire excellence in higher education endowment trust fund
established in RSA 6:38.

**Source.** 1997, 304:2. 1998, 150:2. 1999, 328:3. 2007, 196:7, II, eff.
Aug. 17, 2007.

### Section 195-H:4

 **195-H:4 College Tuition Savings Plan. –**
                                             
 I. (a) The treasurer shall, as needed, issue requests for
proposals to evaluate and determine the vehicle for investments of the
savings plan and its administration.
                                             
 (b) The commission shall consider and, if appropriate, give
preference to proposals best meeting the following criteria:
                                             
 (1) Ability to administer financial programs with individual
account maintenance and reporting.
                                             
 (2) Ability to develop and administer an investment program of
a nature similar to the objectives of the college tuition savings plan.
                                             
 (3) Ability to augment the college tuition savings plan with
other programs or informational services considered beneficial by the
commission.
                                             
 (c) The final selection of the vehicle for investments and its
administration shall be made by the commission. II. The commission shall
determine and make recommendations regarding the use of personnel in the
treasurer's office with costs for such administrative support to be
funded from the savings plan.
                                             
 III. The savings plan shall be on a "cash only'' basis, and shall
include provisions for automatic deductions.
                                             
 IV. The savings plan shall be established in such form as shall be
determined by the commission and may be established as a trust to be
declared by the state treasurer. The savings plan or such trust may be
divided into multiple investment portfolios. If so divided, and if
distinct records are maintained for any such portfolio and the assets
associated with any such portfolio are accounted for separately from the
other assets of the trust, then the debts, liabilities, obligations, and
expenses incurred, contracted for, or otherwise existing with respect to
a particular portfolio shall be enforceable against the assets of such
portfolio only, and not against the assets of the trust generally.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1997, 304:2. 1998, 150:3. 2007, 196:3, 4, eff. Aug. 17,
2007. 2011, 224:123, eff. July 1, 2011. 2013, 144:92, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 195-H:5

 **195-H:5 Residency. –** Persons shall be eligible to participate in
and benefit from the savings plan, regardless of state of residency.

**Source.** 1997, 304:2. 2007, 196:5, eff. Aug. 17, 2007.

### Section 195-H:6-8

 **195-H:6 to 195-H:8 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2007, 196:7, III, eff.
Aug. 17, 2007.
                                             ]

### Section 195-H:9

 **195-H:9 Liability Exemption. –** Neither the state nor any
eligible educational institution shall be liable for any shortage of
funds in the event that the accruals from the savings plan are
insufficient to meet the tuition requirements of such institution chosen
by the student for which the plan was intended.

**Source.** 1997, 304:2. 2007, 196:6, eff. Aug. 17, 2007.

### Section 195-H:10

 **195-H:10 Funds Exempt From Interest and Dividends Tax. –** Income
and distributions from any qualified tuition program as defined in the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, shall be exempt from the New
Hampshire interest and dividends tax pursuant to RSA 77:4-e, provided
that distributions from the plan which are subject to federal income tax
shall be subject to the interest and dividends tax pursuant to RSA 77 on
the accrued income portion of the savings plan distribution.

**Source.** 1997, 304:2. 2003, 64:2. 2007, 196:6, eff. Aug. 17, 2007.
