---
title: 'CHAPTER 195-C SCHOOL BUILDING AUTHORITY--STATE GUARANTEE'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 195-C
                                             
SCHOOL BUILDING AUTHORITY--STATE GUARANTEE
------------------------------------------

### Section 195-C:1

 **195-C:1 School Building Authority. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a school building authority, referred to in this
chapter as the authority, consisting of the state treasurer, the
commissioner of education, the state fire marshal or designee, and 3
other members appointed by the governor, one of whom shall have
expertise in education, one of whom shall have expertise in finance, and
one of whom shall have expertise in building construction or
engineering, with the advice and consent of the council, for terms of 3
years and until their successors are appointed and qualify. The governor
shall designate one of said members as chairman. In case of vacancy
among the appointive members of the authority, the governor, with the
advice and consent of the council, shall fill the same for the unexpired
term. The appointive members of the authority shall receive as
compensation for their services, while actually engaged in the business
of the authority, the sum of 
                                             $8 per day plus their necessary
subsistence expenses. The appointive members of the authority shall be
paid mileage at the state employees rate, plus necessary travel
expenses, only when performing activities at the request of the state
board of education.
                                             
 II. It shall be the duty of the authority to consider and
investigate all applications of school districts for awards of state
guarantees with respect to borrowings authorized by such districts for
school projects of not less than 
                                             $100,000 involving the construction,
enlargement or alteration of school buildings, and to make a written
report on each application to the governor and council. If the authority
finds that a school project will be of public use and benefit and that
the amount of the authorized borrowing appears to be within the
financial means and available resources of the school district making
the application, the authority may include in its report a
recommendation that a state guarantee be awarded on a split issue basis
with respect to a specific amount of the bonds or notes of the district
or that a state guarantee be awarded on a declining balance basis with
respect to a specific percentage of each of such bonds or notes. In
determining what amount or percentage to recommend under the provisions
of this chapter, the authority shall consider the need for the project
in comparison with the need for other projects throughout the state and
the capacity of the state to guarantee indebtedness within the limits
contained in this chapter.
                                             
 III. The authority may make reasonable procedural rules and
regulations and prescribe forms to be used in its proceedings. The
authority may also establish from time to time schedules of service
charges to be paid by districts which issue bonds or notes guaranteed by
the state pursuant to this chapter, but no charge shall exceed 1/10 of
one percent of the principal amount of the bonds or notes which are
issued and with respect to which the state guarantee is applicable. The
charge to a district shall not be payable until after the bonds or notes
on which the charge is based have been issued, and such charge may be
paid from the proceeds of the bonds or notes including premiums, but
exclusive of accrued interest. Service charges shall be paid to the
state treasurer and shall be credited to the account of the authority.
Such account shall not lapse and shall be available to the authority as
a continuing fund subject to expenditure for the use of the authority
pursuant to votes thereof.
                                             
 IV. (a) The authority shall advise the state board of education by
investigating matters concerning school facilities referred to them by
the state board of education. Such matters shall include, but shall not
be limited to, standards for school building construction pursuant to
RSA 21-N:9, II(c), safety standards related to school buildings,
financing of school construction projects, award of high performance
school construction grants under RSA 198:15-b, I-b, and any other
specific concerns about particular school buildings that have been
brought to the attention of the state board of education.
                                             
 (b) The authority shall seek the assistance and expertise of
state and local agencies and private entities as may be necessary.

**Source.** 1967, 154:1. 1970, 51:7. 1985, 240:1, eff. Aug. 3, 1985.
2008, 289:1, 2, eff. Aug. 26, 2008. 2012, 275:7, eff. Aug. 18, 2012.

### Section 195-C:2

 **195-C:2 State Guarantee. –** Upon the receipt of a report from the
authority containing a recommendation that bonds or notes of a school
district should be guaranteed by the state, the governor with the advice
and consent of the council may award an unconditional state guarantee
with respect to such bonds or notes in accordance with the authority's
recommendation or in some lesser amount or percentage, or on the
alternative basis of guarantee, as the best interests of the state may
require. The full faith and credit of the state are and shall be pledged
for any such guarantees, and the total outstanding amount of the
principal of and interest on such bonds and notes which has been
guaranteed by the state under this section shall at no time exceed

                                             $95,000,000. The governor, with the advice and consent of the council,
is authorized to draw a warrant for such a sum out of any money in the
treasury not otherwise appropriated, for the purpose of honoring any
guarantee awarded under this section. In the event that any state funds
shall be so used, the state may recover the amount thereof as provided
in RSA 530.

**Source.** 1967, 154:1. 1970, 51:8. 1971, 294:1. 1985, 240:2. 1986,
172:1. 1987, 191:1. 1999, 335:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2000. 2008, 49:2, eff.
July 1, 2008. 2009, 144:200, eff. July 1, 2009.

### Section 195-C:3

 **195-C:3 Definition and Limit of Split Issue Guarantee. –** An
award of a state guarantee on a split-issue basis under RSA 195-C:2
shall specify the face amount of the bonds or notes which shall comprise
the guarantee portion of the total authorized borrowing, and such
guarantee shall be applicable with respect to that amount of the bonds
or notes and interest on such bonds or notes. The guaranteed portion of
the total authorized borrowing shall not exceed 75 percent thereof.
Bonds or notes bearing a state guarantee awarded on a split-issue basis
shall be offered and sold at public sale, after such advertisement as
the school board deems appropriate, as a separate and distinct issue
from any issue of bonds or notes which are not guaranteed by the state.
All state guaranteed bonds or notes issued to finance a particular
project shall be made payable no later than the payment date of the last
maturing unguaranteed bond or note which is issued to finance the same
project. The bonds or notes comprising the guaranteed portion of an
authorized borrowing and the bonds or notes comprising the unguaranteed
portion of an authorized borrowing may be issued from time to time,
provided that the guaranteed portion which shall have been issued at any
time shall not exceed 3 times the unguaranteed portion which shall then
have been issued. The state's guarantee shall be evidenced on each
guaranteed bond or note by an endorsement signed by the state treasurer
in substantially the following form:
                                             
 The State of New Hampshire hereby unconditionally guarantees the
payment of the whole of the principal and interest of the within (bond)
(note) and for the performance of such guarantee the full faith and
credit of the State are pledged.

  ------------------------------------------
  
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
  ------------------------------------------

  -----------------
  State Treasurer
  -----------------

**Source.** 1967, 154:1. 1970, 51:9. 1985, 240:3, eff. Aug. 3, 1985.

### Section 195-C:4

 **195-C:4 Definition and Limit of Declining Balance Guarantee. –**
An award of a state guarantee on a declining balance basis under RSA
195-C:2 shall specify the percentage of the guarantee, and such
guarantee shall be applicable in such percentage with respect to any
amount of a bond, note or coupon comprising the authorized borrowing
which the issuing district is unable to pay or refuses to pay upon the
presentation of such bond, note or coupon. Such percentage shall not be
more than 75 percent. The bonds or notes comprising an authorized
borrowing guaranteed on a declining balance basis may be issued from
time to time and may be sold at public or private sale. The state's
guarantee shall be evidenced on each bond or note by an endorsement
signed by the state treasurer in substantially the following form:
                                             
 The State of New Hampshire hereby unconditionally guarantees the
payment of ... percent of any amount of the principal of or the interest
on this (bond) (note) which the issuer of this (bond) (note) is unable
to pay or refuses to pay upon presentation, and for the performance of
such guarantee the full faith and credit of the State are pledged.

  ------------------------------------------
  
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
  ------------------------------------------

  -----------------
  State Treasurer
  -----------------

**Source.** 1967, 154:1. 1970, 51:10. 1985, 240:4, eff. Aug. 3, 1985.

### Section 195-C:5

 **195-C:5 Application to Pending Issues. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 240:6,
eff. Aug. 3, 1985.
                                             ]
