---
title: 'CHAPTER 195-J NEW HAMPSHIRE CHILDREN''S SAVINGS ACCOUNT PROGRAM'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 195-J
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE CHILDREN'S SAVINGS ACCOUNT PROGRAM
------------------------------------------------

### Section 195-J:1

 **195-J:1 Program Established. –** There is hereby established in
the office of the state treasurer the New Hampshire children's savings
account program. The purpose of the program is to increase opportunities
for college and career success for all students, to encourage positive
postsecondary education savings behavior for low and moderate income
families, and to provide, in cooperation with the public schools,
financial literacy education for all students and their parents.

**Source.** 2015, 271:2, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 195-J:2

 **195-J:2 Commission Established. –**
                                             
 I. The children's savings account program commission is hereby
established to ensure the proper administration, management, and
development of the children's savings account program. The members of
the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) Two members from the house of representatives, appointed by
the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (b) One member from the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (c) The state treasurer, or designee.
                                             
 (d) The director of the division of higher education, department
of education, or designee.
                                             
 (e) The chairperson of the university system of New Hampshire
board of trustees, or designee.
                                             
 (f) The director of the New Hampshire financial literacy
education program, or designee.
                                             
 (g) One member from a community philanthropic organization,
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (h) One member representing the interests of the New Hampshire
children's trust fund, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (i) One member from the New Hampshire Higher Education Assistance
Foundation, appointed by the foundation.
                                             
 (j) One member from the Coos Coalition for Young Children and
Families, appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (k) One member representing the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,
appointed by the bank.
                                             
 (l) One member representing the New Hampshire Community Loan
Fund, appointed by that organization.
                                             
 II. The commission shall elect a chairperson from its membership,
and any other officers it deems necessary. The terms of the elected
members of the commission shall be coterminous with their terms in
office; the terms of all other appointed members shall be 3 years. In
the event of a vacancy, a new member shall be appointed for the
unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. Eight
members of the commission shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 III. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but
shall be reimbursed for necessary travel and other necessary expenses.
Legislative members shall receive mileage at the legislative rate when
attending to the duties of the commission.
                                             
 IV. The department of education shall provide administrative and
clerical support to the commission as may be necessary.
                                             
 V. The commission shall keep written records of all its
proceedings.
                                             
 VI. No member of the commission shall have any personal interest in
the gains or profits of any investment made by the commission; nor shall
any member of the commission, directly or indirectly, for such member or
as an agent, in any manner use the same except to make such current and
necessary payments as are authorized by the commission; nor shall any
member of the commission become an endorser or surety, or in any manner
an obligor, for money loaned to or borrowed from the commission.
                                             
 VII. Members of the commission shall be held harmless from either
criminal or civil liability for any decisions made or services rendered
under the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 271:2, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 195-J:3

 **195-J:3 Duties of the Commission. –** The commission shall:
                                             
 I. Investigate methods for encouraging increased participation of
families with young children, including those of low and moderate
income, in the New Hampshire college tuition savings plan as defined in
RSA 195-H and other children's savings plans.
                                             
 II. Establish and promote kindergarten to college savings plans
pilot programs in Coos county and in the city of Manchester no later
than September of 2016, which would consist of creating a savings
account at a local financial institution with a minimum deposit of

                                             $50.00 for each eligible child attending public kindergarten in Coos
county and in the city of Manchester, and would include financial
literacy education for such children and their families in cooperation
with local public schools. The pilot programs shall be funded to the
extent of any gifts, grants, or donations received from any source.
                                             
 III. Establish policies that ensure that children's savings accounts
are accessible and eventually offered on an opt-out basis statewide, are
seeded with gifts, grants, or donations from local or private
philanthropic foundations, and are connected to local public school
financial literacy education programs.
                                             
 IV. Develop administrative and operational practices such as
staffing, structuring, managing, marketing, and funding mechanisms to
sustain a statewide children's savings accounts program and include
clearly stated objectives, action plans, and evaluation procedures.
                                             
 V. Establish recordkeeping and reporting procedures regarding the
status of the children's savings account program fund, including records
of beginning balances, contributions, earnings, bonuses, and matches
earned by each program participant during the fiscal year.
                                             
 VI. Establish a fund raising plan to secure state matching funds
from federal, state, or private sources.
                                             
 VII. Establish ongoing communication with the New Hampshire college
tuition savings plan advisory commission established in RSA 195-H to
ensure that more families become educated about the potential of
investing in the New Hampshire college tuition savings program, and to
facilitate the advisory committee's future administration and
responsibility for the children's savings account program.

**Source.** 2015, 271:2, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 195-J:4

 **195-J:4 Reports. –**
                                             
 I. (a) The treasurer shall, as needed, issue requests for proposals
to evaluate and determine proposals which are best suited to the
reporting and recordkeeping needs of the children's savings account
program and fund.
                                             
 (b) The commission shall consider and, if appropriate, give
preference to proposals which best demonstrate experience in
administering financial programs requiring individual account
maintenance and reporting.
                                             
 (c) The final selection of the proposal shall be made by the
commission.
                                             
 II. The state treasurer shall make quarterly reports regarding the
status of the children's savings account program and children's savings
account fund to the commission.
                                             
 (a) At least annually, the commission shall issue or cause to be
issued to each participant, a statement which shall include the
participant's beginning balance, contributions, and earnings credited to
their account during the previous fiscal year.
                                             
 (b) At least annually, the commission shall make or cause to be
made an annual report regarding the status of the children's savings
account program to each participant in the program, to the speaker of
the house of representatives, the senate president, and the state
library.
                                             
 (c) Prior to the implementation of the pilot programs in Coos
county and in the city of Manchester, the commission shall submit a
report to the speaker of the house of representatives and the senate
president regarding the policies adopted by the commission pursuant to
RSA 195-J:3.

**Source.** 2015, 271:2, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 195-J:5

 **195-J:5 Children's Savings Account Fund Established. –** There is
established a children's savings account fund in the office of the state
treasurer. This fund shall be kept distinct and separate from other
funds. The fund shall be administered by the children's savings account
commission established in RSA 195-J:2 and shall be nonlapsing and
continually appropriated to the commission for the purposes of
establishing children's savings accounts initially through pilot
programs, and eventually statewide, pursuant to RSA 195-J:3. The
commission may accept and shall deposit any gifts, grants, donations, or
other moneys from any source into the fund.

**Source.** 2015, 271:2, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 195-J:6

 **195-J:6 Privacy. –**
                                             
 I. In establishing the pilot programs in Coos county and in the city
of Manchester, and in establishing policies, practices, and procedures
pursuant to RSA 195-J:3 and RSA 193-E:5, the commission shall insure
that neither the commission, the state, nor any political subdivision of
the state, nor any office, department, or agency of any of the
foregoing, obtains or retains social security numbers of any applicant
or participant.
                                             
 II. Neither the state, any political subdivision of the state, nor
any office, department, or agency of any of the foregoing, except for
the commission and the office of the state treasurer, shall have access
to individually-identifiable information with respect to applicants or
participants in the program.
                                             
 III. The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and any other
individually-identifiable information about applicants or participants
in the program shall be exempt from the provisions of RSA 91-A. This
paragraph shall not apply to aggregated data from which individuals
cannot be identified.

**Source.** 2015, 271:2, eff. July 1, 2015.
