---
title: CHAPTER 199 SCHOOLHOUSES
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 199
                                             
SCHOOLHOUSES
------------

Location and Building
---------------------

### Section 199:1

 **199:1 Location and Construction by District. –** The district may
decide upon the location of its schoolhouses by vote or by a committee
appointed for the purpose, provided, however, that all plans,
specifications, and the selection of site for any new school buildings
for any school district within the state shall be approved by the school
board of the district in which it is proposed to construct such a
building. The provisions of this section shall apply to all new
construction and substantial renovation of public school buildings,
including those constructed by grant or loans of funds from state, the
federal government, or other sources. The district shall investigate
feasible options in the course of deciding to renovate or replace an
existing school building. In considering such options, the district
shall hold at least one public hearing and shall seek input from
municipal boards and departments. The district shall also review the
municipality's zoning regulations and master plan in order to maximize
best planning practices. For the purposes of this chapter, in addition
to their usual meanings, the words "schoolhouse'' and "school building''
also mean educational administration building, including school
administrative unit facilities.

**Source.** 1845, 224:1. RS 71:1. CS 75:1. GS 80:2. GL 88:2. PS 91:1.
1921, 85, VII:1. PL 122:1. RL 141:1. 1945, 127:1. 1947, 156:10. RSA
199:1. 1967, 449:4. 1979, 459:4, eff. Aug. 24, 1979. 2008, 289:5, eff.
Aug. 26, 2008. 2010, 327:1, eff. Sept. 18, 2010.

### Section 199:2

 **199:2 Location in Cities. –** The school board of cities shall
have sole power to select and purchase land for schoolhouse lots. When
said board has secured, by vote of the city councils, an adequate
appropriation for the purchase of a specified lot at a specific price,
said board may make the purchase.

**Source.** 1897, 65:1. 1921, 85, VII:2. PL 122:2. RL 141:2.

### Section 199:3

 **199:3 Construction in Cities; Joint Building Committees. –**
                                             
 I. No schoolhouse shall be erected, altered, remodeled or changed in
any city school district unless the plans have been previously submitted
to the school board of that district and received its approval.
                                             
 II. (a) All construction relating to schoolhouses in any city school
district shall be done under the direction of a joint building committee
which shall be established and chosen in equal numbers by the city
council and the school board.
                                             
 (b) The chairperson of a joint building committee shall be chosen
by a majority vote of the committee members.
                                             
 (c) Any vacancy in the committee membership shall be filled by
the respective appointing authority on or before the close of the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the appointing authority following the
creation of the vacancy.
                                             
 (d) The joint building committee shall meet monthly and at other
times as the chairman deems necessary.
                                             
 III. The joint building committee shall have the following duties:
                                             
 (a) Oversee and decide all matters relating to any construction
on schoolhouse buildings.
                                             
 (b) Prepare and submit monthly status reports relating to
construction progress to the city council and the school board.
                                             
 (c) Prepare and submit monthly financial reports relating to the
total authorized construction budget and expenditures to date to both
the city council and the school board.
                                             
 IV. All funds appropriated by the city council for construction of a
new schoolhouse shall be administered by the appropriate joint building
committee, and those funds shall be disbursed upon authorization of the
committee until final acceptance of the schoolhouse by the city council.

**Source.** 1897, 65:2. 1921, 85, VII:3. PL 122:3. RL 141:3. RSA 199:3.
1993, 185:1, eff. Aug. 8, 1993.

### Section 199:4

 **199:4 Transfer of Building. –**
                                             
 I. Upon final completion of the new schoolhouse as determined by the
joint building committee, the committee shall vote to accept the
building and transfer it to the care and control of the school board.
                                             
 II. Whenever a schoolhouse shall no longer be needed for public
school purposes, the school board shall transfer its care and control to
the city.

**Source.** 1897, 65:3. 1921, 85, VII:4. PL 122:4. RL 141:4. RSA 199:4.
1993, 185:2, eff. Aug. 8, 1993.

### Section 199:4-a

 **199:4-a Final Report; Dissolution of Joint Building Committee. –**
Upon vote of the joint building committee to accept the new schoolhouse
and to transfer it to the school board, the joint building committee
shall remain in existence for the sole purpose of preparing and
submitting a final report relating to the schoolhouse construction and
related financial matters to the city council and the school board. Any
funds appropriated for the schoolhouse construction which have not been
expended shall be returned to the control of the municipality, subject
to RSA 33:3-a. The joint building committee shall be dissolved upon the
return of unexpended funds and submission of the final report.

**Source.** 1993, 185:3, eff. Aug. 8, 1993.

### Section 199:5

 **199:5 Exception. –** The provisions of RSA 199:2-199:4-a shall not
apply to the Union School District of Concord and to the school
districts of Keene, Lebanon, and Claremont.

**Source.** 1897, 65:4. 1921, 85, VII:5. PL 122:5. RL 141:5. RSA 199:5.
1993, 185:4, eff. Aug. 8, 1993.

### Section 199:6

 **199:6 Power of Committees. –** No committee shall have power to
bind the district beyond the amount of money voted by it, and the
district shall not be bound by any act, as a ratification of the doings
of such committee, beyond their authority, unless by express vote of the
district.

**Source.** GS 80:3. GL 88:3. PS 91:2. 1921, 85, VII:6. PL 122:6. RL
141:6.

### Section 199:7

 **199:7 Location by Board. –** If the district does not agree upon a
location for a schoolhouse, or upon a committee to locate the same, or
if the same is not located by such committee within 30 days after its
appointment, the school board, upon petition of 10 percent or more of
the voters, shall determine the location.

**Source.** RS 71:5. CS 75:5. GS 80:5. GL 88:5. PS 91:4. 1921, 85,
VII:8. 1921, 88:1. PL 122:7. RL 141:7.

### Section 199:8

 **199:8 Relocation by Board. –** If 10 percent or more of the voters
of a district are aggrieved by the location of a schoolhouse by the
district or its committee, they may apply by petition to the school
board, who shall hear the parties interested and determine the location.

**Source.** RS 71:2. CS 75:2. GS 80:4. GL 88:4. 1887, 105:7. PS 91:3.
1921, 85, VII:7. 1921, 88:1. PL 122:8. RL 141:8.

### Section 199:9

 **199:9 Relocation by State Board of Education. –** If 10 percent or
more of the voters of a school district are aggrieved by the location of
a schoolhouse by the district or its committee, or by the school board,
they may, within 10 days after the making of the location, apply by
petition to the state board of education, who shall hear the parties
interested and determine the location.

**Source.** 1871, 4:1. GL 88:6. 1887, 105:7. PS 91:5. 1921, 85, VII:9.
1921, 88:1. PL 122:9. RL 141:9. 2008, 289:6, eff. Aug. 26, 2008.

### Section 199:10

 **199:10 Notice of Hearing Upon Question of Location. –** The
chairman of the state board of education shall appoint a time and place
within the district for a hearing upon every such petition, and shall
give notice thereof by causing attested copies of the petition and order
of notice to be posted at 2 or more public places within the district
and to be given in hand to, or left at the abode of, the clerk of the
district and of one of the school board, 14 days before the day of
hearing.

**Source.** 1871, 4:2. GL 88:7. PS 91:6. 1921, 85, VII:10. PL 122:10. RL
141:10. 2008, 289:7, eff. Aug. 26, 2008.

### Section 199:11

 **199:11 Vacancies in Board of Commissioners. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008,
289:9, I, eff. Aug. 26, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 199:12

 **199:12 Hearing. –** The hearing shall be closed within 60 days.
The state board of education shall hear all parties interested who
desire to be heard, and shall make a decision in writing and file it
with the clerk of the district.

**Source.** 1871, 4:2. GL 88:7. PS 91:8. 1921, 85, VII:12. PL 122:12. RL
141:12. 2008, 289:8, eff. Aug. 26, 2008.

### Section 199:13

 **199:13 Fees of Commissioners. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008, 289:9, II, eff.
Aug. 26, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 199:14

 **199:14 Proceedings Pending. –** The district shall take no steps
to carry into effect a former location while any subsequent proceedings
authorized by law for a change thereof are pending.

**Source.** 1871, 4:2. GL 88:7. PS 91:9. 1921, 85, VII:13. PL 122:14. RL
141:14.

### Section 199:15

 **199:15 New Proceedings. –** The location of schoolhouses, however
made, shall be conclusive for the term of 5 years, unless an appeal
therefrom shall be prosecuted as provided in this chapter.

**Source.** GS 233:6. GL 43:6. PS 91:11. 1921, 85, VII:15. PL 122:15. RL
141:15.

### Section 199:16

 **199:16 Enlargement of Lot. –** The school board may enlarge any
existing lot used for school purposes upon such petition to it and
proceedings thereon as are required to authorize it to determine the
location for a schoolhouse.

**Source.** 1872, 13:3. GL 88:10. 1877, 106:1. PS 91:12. 1921, 85,
VII:16. PL 122:16. RL 141:16. 1949, 146:1, eff. April 21, 1949.

### Section 199:17

 **199:17 Taking Land. –** If any school district shall neglect or
refuse to procure the lot of land selected for the location of a
schoolhouse, or for the enlargement of an existing schoolhouse lot, as
provided in this chapter, or if the owner of the land shall refuse to
sell the same to the district for a reasonable price, the selectmen,
upon petition to them by the school board, or by 3 or more voters of the
district, shall appraise the damages occasioned to the landowner by the
taking of his land. The appraisal shall be made in writing, and be filed
with the clerk of the district.

**Source.** 1871, 41:1. 1872, 13:1. GL 88:11, 12. PS 91:13. 1921, 85,
VII:17. PL 122:17. RL 141:17.

### Section 199:18

 **199:18 Appeal From Appraisal. –** Any landowner aggrieved by such
appraisal of his damages may appeal therefrom to the superior court by
petition within 60 days after the appraisal is filed with the clerk of
the district; and the procedure and remedies upon such appeal shall be
the same as in appeals from the assessment of damages by selectmen in
highway cases, except that service of papers shall be made upon the
clerk of the district and one of the school board, instead of the town
clerk and one of the selectmen, and except as provided in RSA 199:19.

**Source.** 1872, 13:1. GL 88:11. PS 91:14. 1921, 85, VII:18. PL 122:18.
RL 141:18.

### Section 199:19

 **199:19 Payment of Damages. –** Upon payment or tender of the
damages awarded, the land shall vest in the district, and it may take
possession of it. Such payment or tender may be made in accordance with
the award of the selectmen before an appeal is taken, or while an appeal
is pending, and shall have like effect. In such case if the damages are
increased upon appeal the landowner shall have judgment for the excess;
if decreased, the district shall have judgment for the amount of the
decrease. If the result of the appeal is to change the award of damages
in favor of the landowner he shall recover costs; otherwise he shall pay
costs.

**Source.** RS 71:8. CS 75:8. GS 80:7. 1871, 41:2. 1872, 13:2. GL 88:11,
13. PS 91:15. 1921, 85, VII:19. PL 122:19. RL 141:19.

### Section 199:19-a

 **199:19-a Record. –** Whenever a school district shall take land
for the location of a schoolhouse or for the enlargement of an existing
schoolhouse lot as provided by RSA 199:17 the school district clerk
shall forward to the registry of deeds for the county for filing where
said land is located a copy of the petition of the school board to the
selectmen containing a description of said land, together with the name
of the owner from whom the land is taken.

**Source.** 1965, 234:1, eff. Aug. 30, 1965.

### Section 199:20

 **199:20 Neglect to Build, Etc. –** If a district shall refuse or
neglect to build, repair, remove or fit up a schoolhouse, or shall
refuse or neglect to build a schoolhouse upon or to remove it to the lot
designated as aforesaid, the selectmen, upon petition of 3 or more
voters of the district, after hearing the parties, may assess upon the
district and collect such sums of money as may be necessary, and
therewith cause such schoolhouse to be built, removed, repaired or
fitted up.

**Source.** RS 71:6. CS 75:6. GS 80:8. GL 88:14. PS 91:16. 1921, 85,
VII:20. PL 122:20. RL 141:20.

Use and Manner of Construction
------------------------------

### Section 199:21

 **199:21 Accommodations. –** The schools of a district shall be kept
in its schoolhouses, if it has suitable houses that will accommodate the
scholars; if not, the school board shall provide suitable accommodations
for the schools at the expense of the district.

**Source.** RS 72:7. CS 76:8. GS 80:9. GL 88:15. PS 91:17. 1921, 85,
VII:21. PL 122:21. RL 141:21.

### Section 199:22

 **199:22 Other Uses. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008, 289:9, III, eff. Aug. 26,
2008.
                                             ]

### Section 199:22-a

 **199:22-a Use to Feed Elderly. –**
                                             
 I. Any school board may operate or allow to be operated for the
benefit of persons age 60 or over a meal program on school property
including the use of school equipment. Such program may be operated on a
profit basis and any surplus funds may be used to defray expenses or
otherwise as the school board shall direct. Provided that such program
shall be operated at no expense to the district and shall not interfere
with the education of the students. The price charged for any meal may
be based on the recipient's ability to pay as determined by the school
board.
                                             
 II. The use in such program of food service equipment, food, and
other items which are restricted in use to the benefit of the students
is not authorized by this section unless such program is granted the
permission upon such conditions as the restricting federal or state
authority deems necessary. In addition to any such conditions, the
school board shall maintain such records as will accurately reflect the
percentage of use of school property, school food service equipment,
food, and other such restricted items between the geriatric program and
the child nutrition program. Further, insofar as practicable, grants in
aid for replacement and original equipment shall be requested on the
basis of the percentage of use from both available child nutrition funds
and from available geriatric program grants.

**Source.** 1973, 513:1, eff. Aug. 31, 1973.

### Section 199:23-26

 **199:23 to 199:26 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008, 289:9, IV-VII,
eff. Aug. 26, 2008.
                                             ]
