---
title: |
    CHAPTER 200-N EPINEPHRINE ADMINISTRATION IN POSTSECONDARY EDUCATIONAL
    INSTITUTIONS AND INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 200-N
                                             
EPINEPHRINE ADMINISTRATION IN POSTSECONDARY EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 200-N:1

 **200-N:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Anaphylaxis'' means a rapidly progressing, life-threatening
allergic reaction that can occur following exposure to certain
allergens, most commonly, but not limited to, foods, insect stings,
medications, and latex. Signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis include, but
are not limited to, difficulty breathing, coughing, throat clearing,
altered heart rhythms, hives, redness or blotches on the skin, nausea
and vomiting, low blood pressure, shock, and loss of consciousness.
Failure to treat these symptoms promptly, with epinephrine, may result
in serious consequences up to and including death.
                                             
 II. "Independent school'' means a school which is governed by a
board of trustees or other officials who are not publicly elected. An
independent school shall not include a chartered public school
established pursuant to RSA 194-B, but shall include a private school as
provided in Ed 401.01(d).
                                             
 III. "Licensed campus medical professional'' means any of the
following individuals who are employed by or have contracted with a
postsecondary educational institution or an independent school and are
designated by the postsecondary educational institution or independent
school to serve in such a capacity:
                                             
 (a) A physician licensed under RSA 329.
                                             
 (b) A physician assistant licensed under RSA 328-D.
                                             
 (c) An advanced practice registered nurse or registered nurse who
is licensed under RSA 326-B.
                                             
 IV. "Member of the campus community'' means an individual who is a
student, faculty member, or staff member of a postsecondary educational
institution or an independent school.
                                             
 V. "Trained designee'' means a member of the campus community
trained by a licensed campus medical professional in the emergency
administration of auto-injectable epinephrine.

**Source.** 2015, 45:1, eff. July 17, 2015. 2016, 42:1, eff. July 2,
2016.

### Section 200-N:2

 **200-N:2 Emergency Administration of Epinephrine; Policies and
Guidelines. –**
                                             
 I. A postsecondary educational institution or independent school
accredited to operate in this state may develop a policy in accordance
with this chapter and guidelines issued under RSA 200-N:4 for the
emergency administration of auto-injectable epinephrine to a member of
the campus community for anaphylaxis when a licensed campus medical
professional is not available.
                                             
 II. Such policy shall include:
                                             
 (a) Permission for a trained designee to do the following:
                                             
 (1) Administer auto-injectable epinephrine to a member of the
campus community for anaphylaxis when a licensed campus medical
professional is unavailable.
                                             
 (2) When responsible for the safety of at least one member of
the campus community, carry in a secure but accessible location a supply
of auto-injectable epinephrine that is prescribed under a standing
protocol from a health care provider who is licensed in New Hampshire
and whose scope of practice includes the prescribing of medication.
                                             
 (b) Provisions that a licensed campus medical professional has
responsibility for training designees in the following:
                                             
 (1) The administration of auto-injectable epinephrine.
                                             
 (2) Identification of an anaphylactic reaction and indications
for when to use epinephrine.
                                             
 III. Each postsecondary educational institution and independent
school that develops a policy under this chapter shall designate a
licensed campus medical professional.
                                             
 IV. A licensed campus medical professional may:
                                             
 (a) Establish and administer a standardized training protocol for
the emergency administration of epinephrine by trained designees.
                                             
 (b) Ensure that trained designees have satisfactorily completed
the training protocol.
                                             
 (c) Obtain a supply of auto-injectable epinephrine under a
standing protocol from a physician licensed under RSA 329.
                                             
 (d) Control distribution to trained designees of auto-injectable
epinephrine.

**Source.** 2015, 45:1, eff. July 17, 2015. 2016, 42:1, eff. July 2,
2016.

### Section 200-N:3

 **200-N:3 Requirements for Trained Designees. –** An individual
shall comply with the following requirements in order to act as a
trained designee:
                                             
 I. Be at least 18 years of age.
                                             
 II. Have or reasonably expect to have, responsibility for at least
one other member of the campus community as a result of the individual's
employment.
                                             
 III. Have satisfactorily completed the standardized training
protocol established and administered by a licensed campus medical
professional in accordance with guidelines developed under RSA 200-N:4.

**Source.** 2015, 45:1, eff. July 17, 2015.

### Section 200-N:4

 **200-N:4 Department of Health and Human Services Guidelines. –**
The commissioner of the department of health and human services shall
establish guidelines for the development of a policy by a postsecondary
educational institution or an independent school for the emergency
administration of epinephrine to a member of the campus community for
anaphylaxis when a licensed campus medical professional is not
available. The guidelines shall address issues including, but not
limited to, the responsibilities of the postsecondary educational
institution or independent school, the licensed campus medical
professional, and the trained designee for the emergency administration
of epinephrine. The commissioner shall disseminate the guidelines to the
president of each postsecondary educational institution or head of an
independent school.

**Source.** 2015, 45:1, eff. July 17, 2015. 2016, 42:1, eff. July 2,
2016.

### Section 200-N:5

 **200-N:5 Storage of Epinephrine. –**
                                             
 I. A postsecondary educational institution or independent school may
fill a prescription for auto-injectable epinephrine and store the
auto-injectable epinephrine on the campus if a licensed health care
provider whose scope of practice includes the prescribing of medication
writes the prescription for auto-injectable epinephrine for the
postsecondary educational institution or independent school.
                                             
 II. The postsecondary educational institution or independent school
shall store the auto-injectable epinephrine in an unlocked safe location
in which only postsecondary educational institution or independent
school personnel have access.
                                             
 III. A health care provider who is licensed in this state and whose
scope of practice includes the prescribing of medication may write a
prescription, drug order, or protocol for auto-injectable epinephrine
for the postsecondary educational institution or independent school.
                                             
 IV. A pharmacist licensed under RSA 318 may dispense a valid
prescription, drug order, or protocol for auto-injectable epinephrine
issued in the name of a postsecondary educational institution or an
independent school.

**Source.** 2015, 45:1, eff. July 17, 2015. 2016, 42:1, eff. July 2,
2016.

### Section 200-N:6

 **200-N:6 Immunity From Civil Liability. –**
                                             
 I. A licensed campus medical professional who acts in accordance
with this chapter shall not be liable for civil damages for any act or
omission committed in accordance with this chapter unless the act or
omission constitutes gross negligence or willful misconduct.
                                             
 II. A trained designee who administers auto-injectable epinephrine
in accordance with this chapter shall not be liable for civil damages
resulting from the administration of auto-injectable epinephrine under
this chapter unless the act or omission constitutes gross negligence or
willful misconduct.
                                             
 III. A licensed health care provider who writes a prescription, drug
order, or protocol under this chapter is not liable for civil damages
resulting from the administration of auto-injectable epinephrine under
this chapter unless the act or omission constitutes gross negligence or
willful misconduct.
                                             
 IV. A licensed pharmacy, whether with a physical presence or doing
business though mail order, that fulfills a prescription, drug order, or
protocol under this chapter is not liable for civil damages resulting
from the administration of auto-injectable epinephrine under this
chapter unless the act or omission constitutes gross negligence or
willful misconduct.

**Source.** 2015, 45:1, eff. July 17, 2015.

### Section 200-N:7

 **200-N:7 Applicability. –** Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to:
                                             
 I. Permit a trained designee to perform the duties or fill the
position of a licensed campus medical professional.
                                             
 II. Prohibit the administration of a pre-filled auto-injector of
epinephrine by a person acting under a lawful prescription.
                                             
 III. Prevent a licensed health care provider from acting within the
individual's scope of practice in administering auto-injectable
epinephrine.
                                             
 IV. Establish a standard of care under which a postsecondary
educational institution or an independent school would have a duty to
employ or contract with a licensed campus medical professional or to
establish guidelines for the emergency administration of epinephrine.
Except as set forth in RSA 200-N:6, a postsecondary educational
institution or an independent school shall not be held liable for any
act or omission related to the availability or nonavailability of
epinephrine for emergency administration on campus.

**Source.** 2015, 45:1, eff. July 17, 2015. 2016, 42:1, eff. July 2,
2016.
