---
title: |
    CHAPTER 200-M CART PROVIDER AND SIGN LANGUAGE INTERPRETER NET TUITION
    REPAYMENT PROGRAM
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 200-M
                                             
CART PROVIDER AND SIGN LANGUAGE INTERPRETER NET TUITION REPAYMENT PROGRAM
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 200-M:1

 **200-M:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "CART provider'' means a person who provides computer-aided,
realtime translation of spoken language into English text by using a
stenotype machine, notebook computer, and real time software to display
the spoken text on a computer monitor, or other display device for
individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing.
                                             
 II. "Net tuition'' means tuition costs for postsecondary school
education that was directed toward the completion of a degree or
certificate in judicial reporting, broadcast captioning, real time
transcription, or sign language interpretation, or any other degree or
certificate that the department of education, division of higher
education deems acceptable for purposes of CART provider and sign
language interpreter net tuition repayment.
                                             
 III. "Sign language interpreter'' means a person who provides
American Sign-Language based interpreting, which is the process of
conveying information between American Sign Language and English.

**Source.** 2009, 207:1, eff. July 15, 2009. 2011, 224:137, eff. July 1,
2011.

### Section 200-M:2

 **200-M:2 CART Provider and Sign Language Interpreter Net Tuition
Repayment Program Established. –** The department of education, division
of higher education shall administer a program for the promotion,
acquisition, and retention of CART providers and sign language
interpreters in the state.

**Source.** 2009, 207:1, eff. July 15, 2009. 2011, 224:138, eff. July 1,
2011.

### Section 200-M:3

 **200-M:3 Application; Repayment. –** An individual who has
completed eligible CART or sign language interpreter training in
accordance with rules adopted pursuant to RSA 200-M:5, including
internships and residencies, and agrees to work as a CART provider or a
sign language interpreter in this state, may apply to the department of
education, division of higher education for repayment under the CART
provider and sign language interpreter net tuition repayment program and
become eligible to be reimbursed up to 100 percent of his or her
qualifying tuition not to exceed the cost of 4 years of in-state tuition
at the university of New Hampshire, during a 5-year period of working as
a CART provider or sign language interpreter. A 10 percent net tuition
repayment shall be made upon completion of the first year of employment
in this state, with an additional 10 percent made after the second year
of work, an additional 20 percent after the third year of work, an
additional 30 percent after the fourth year of work, and an additional
30 percent after the fifth year of work.

**Source.** 2009, 207:1, eff. July 15, 2009. 2011, 224:138, eff. July 1,
2011.

### Section 200-M:4

 **200-M:4 Fund Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established in the office of the state treasurer
a fund to be known as the CART provider and sign language interpreter
net tuition repayment fund. The fund shall include any sums appropriated
for such purpose. In addition, the department of education, division of
higher education may accept public sector and private sector grants,
gifts, or donations of any kind for the purpose of funding the
provisions of this chapter. The moneys in this fund shall be nonlapsing
and shall be continually appropriated to the department of education.
The fund may be expended by the department of education to accomplish
the purposes of this chapter. The state treasurer may invest moneys in
the fund as provided by law, with interest received on such investment
credited to the fund.
                                             
 II. A minimum balance of 
                                             $100,000 shall be in the CART provider and
sign language interpreter net tuition repayment fund prior to the
selection of the first participant.

**Source.** 2009, 207:1, eff. July 15, 2009. 2011, 224:139, eff. July 1,
2011.

### Section 200-M:5

 **200-M:5 Administration; Rulemaking. –** The department of
education, division of higher education shall adopt rules, pursuant to
RSA 541-A, relative to procedures, eligibility, and qualifications for
applicants, qualifying educational costs, criteria for terms of service
by a CART provider and/or sign language interpreter, procedures for
repayment of net tuition costs, and the administration of the program by
the department of education, division of higher education. The
commissioner of the department of education shall annually report to the
general court on the effectiveness of this program.

**Source.** 2009, 207:1, eff. July 15, 2009. 2011, 224:140, eff. July 1,
2011.
