---
title: 'CHAPTER 200-C VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION PROGRAMS'
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 200-C
                                             
VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION PROGRAMS
----------------------------------

### Section 200-C:1

 **200-C:1 Federal Vocational Rehabilitation Program. –** The
commissioner of education, or if the commissioner of education delegates
the authority in writing, the administrator of the bureau of vocational
rehabilitation of the department of education, is authorized to make
application to and receive funds from, to cooperate with, and to enter
into any agreements with the federal government or any agency of the
federal government to secure the participation of the United States
government through the allotment of federal funds in the vocational
rehabilitation program of this state. The bureau of vocational
rehabilitation shall comply with the requirements of the applicable
federal laws including the determination of eligibility for the
determination of the nature and scope of, and the provision of,
vocational rehabilitation services under the state plan.

**Source.** 1967, 417:1. 1986, 41:24. 1994, 379:15, eff. June 9, 1994.

### Section 200-C:2

 **200-C:2 Cooperative Working Agreements. –** The commissioner or
his delegate is authorized to make agreements between the bureau of
vocational rehabilitation of the state department of education and any
other agency of the state or subdivisions of the state or agency of such
a subdivision, to assist in the vocational rehabilitation of persons
disabled because of a physical, mental, or social disability.

**Source.** 1967, 417:1. 1990, 140:2, X. 1994, 379:21, eff. June 9,
1994.

### Section 200-C:3

 **200-C:3 State Matching Funds. –** The federal funds anticipated
under this chapter are to match state funds on the basis of a state
matching share not less than the percentage established by federal law
of the total expenditure of funds provided for by the federal
legislation and the approved state plan of the bureau of vocational
rehabilitation. The funds made available to the bureau of vocational
rehabilitation by any state agency or subdivision of the state or agency
thereof in the form of use of personnel or facilities or in other ways,
may be construed as state matching funds if federal laws or the
regulations of the federal agency authorized such a construction.

**Source.** 1967, 417:1. 1969, 355:1. 1988, 192:1. 1994, 379:21, eff.
June 9, 1994.

### Section 200-C:4

 **200-C:4 Expansion of Programs. –** It is the intent of the general
court that the vocational rehabilitation program of cooperative
agreements may be expanded as additional federal funds become available.
In furtherance of this intent, the commissioner of education or his
delegate may expand any agreements or enter into new agreements with any
other departments or agencies of the state, subdivisions of the state,
or agencies of either, under this chapter, and may expand any agreements
or enter into new agreements with any federal agency charged with the
distribution of funds for the vocational rehabilitation program, as
federal funds become available for the program.

**Source.** 1967, 417:1. 1969, 355:2, eff. Aug. 30, 1969.

### Section 200-C:5

 **200-C:5 Additional Personnel. –** If additional federal funds
become available and the additional state matching funds as they are
construed under this chapter become available, and if the federal agency
approves of a new program under this chapter, and on the request of the
commissioner of education or his authorized delegate, the governor and
council may approve additional positions beyond those authorized by RSA
200-C and 1967, 417:2 as amended for personnel to operate the programs
and to fulfill the cooperative working agreements entered into by the
division.

**Source.** 1967, 417:1. 1969, 355:3, eff. Aug. 30, 1969.

### Section 200-C:6

 **200-C:6 Access to Records. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1994, 379:24, VII, eff.
June 9, 1994.
                                             ]

### Section 200-C:6-a

 **200-C:6-a Recovery of Costs; Right of Action. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever any person who has received services provided under this
chapter shall receive a settlement or an award from a liable third
person or party, including workers' compensation and social security
disability benefits, and such settlement or award is related to the
disability under which the person became eligible for such services, the
person shall repay the cost of such services to the extent that the
amount of the settlement or award makes repayment possible. No
attorneys' fees shall be deducted from the amount due the state from
such award or settlement.
                                             
 II. Amounts repaid under paragraph I shall be payable to the bureau
of vocational rehabilitation of the department of education and shall be
administered as follows:
                                             
 (a) If the settlement or award occurs within the same fiscal year
as the receipt of any portion of services furnished, the recovered
amount proportionate to the cost of services provided for such fiscal
year shall be credited to the division; and
                                             
 (b) If the settlement or award occurs after the fiscal year in
which receipt of any portion of services furnished takes place, that
part of the cost of services recovered pursuant to this section which
was federally funded shall be returned to the federal government in an
amount proportionate to the cost of services provided for such previous
fiscal year, while the remaining state-funded part of such cost shall
remain with the division.
                                             
 III. The state shall have a right of action over amounts due
pursuant to paragraph I.

**Source.** 1990, 131:2. 1994, 379:21, eff. June 9, 1994.

Telecommunications Equipment Program
------------------------------------

### Section 200-C:7

 **200-C:7 Telecommunications Equipment Program. –**
                                             
 I. The administrator, bureau of vocational rehabilitation, shall
develop a program to make special telecommunications equipment available
to deaf, hearing impaired, and speech impaired persons. The program
shall provide for the purchase, maintenance and repair of special
telecommunications equipment for deaf, hearing impaired, and speech
impaired persons. Any equipment purchased under the program shall be
property of the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. The program established under paragraph I shall include specific
criteria that will govern the priorities assigned to various persons who
require special telecommunications equipment. Persons who are profoundly
deaf or speech impaired so that they cannot use the telephone for
expressive or receptive communications, as verified by a written report
from an otologist, audiologist or physician, shall be eligible for
equipment under the program.

**Source.** 1985, 322:1. 1994, 379:21, eff. June 9, 1994.

### Section 200-C:8

 **200-C:8 Rulemaking Authority. –** The board of education shall
adopt rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Procedures for disbursement of moneys from the program
established under RSA 200-C:7.
                                             
 II. Eligibility criteria for equipment under the program, including
priority criteria assigned to persons seeking equipment under the
program.
                                             
 III. Procedures for the purchase, maintenance and repair of special
telecommunications equipment.

**Source.** 1985, 322:1. 1994, 379:23, eff. June 9, 1994.

Workers' Personal Care Assistance Program
-----------------------------------------

### Section 200-C:9

 **200-C:9 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Personal care assistance'' means attendant care, including, but
not limited to, assistance with bathing, bowel and bladder care,
dressing, personal grooming, moving in and out of bed, preparation and
consumption of food, housecleaning, laundry, or other services necessary
for daily living and self care in order to allow a person with severe
physical disabilities to become or remain employed. A person shall be
considered employed if he works a minimum of 20 hours per week for which
he receives remuneration at a rate which equals or exceeds the national
minimum wage.
                                             
 II. "Personal care attendant'' means a person who performs personal
care assistance tasks for a person with severe physical disabilities.

**Source.** 1986, 138:1, eff. July 1, 1986.

### Section 200-C:10

 **200-C:10 Establishment; Amount of Subsidies. –** The
administrator, bureau of vocational rehabilitation, shall develop and
implement a workers' personal care assistance program for persons with
severe physical disabilities. Upon application to the administrator,
subsidies shall be made to eligible persons for the purpose of employing
personal care attendants. An eligible person shall receive a maximum
amount of 
                                             $7,300 per year. Persons who receive reduced subsidies
pursuant to RSA 200-C:11 shall pay a portion of the cost of their
personal care services. The administrator may develop and maintain a
list of personal care attendants available to be hired by persons with
severe physical disabilities. The administrator may contract with
centers for independent living and community-based nonprofit agencies to
provide services pursuant to this section.

**Source.** 1986, 138:1. 1994, 379:21, eff. June 9, 1994.

### Section 200-C:11

 **200-C:11 Eligibility. –**
                                             
 I. Rules adopted by the board of education under RSA 200-C:15 shall
include eligibility standards for participation in the program, provided
no person with an annual income of over 
                                             $17,000, after payment of all
state and federal taxes and disability-related expenses specified by the
board of education in the rules, shall be eligible for a full subsidy.
Persons whose annual income, after such taxes and such expenses, exceeds
the limit for a full subsidy shall be eligible for subsidies which are
reduced by 1/2 the amount their income exceeds such limit. A person
whose need for personal care assistance services exceeds the amount of
the subsidy for which he is eligible may spend his own income for such
services, and such expenditure shall be considered a disability-related
expense for purposes of determining his income.
                                             
 II. Any person shall be eligible for participation in the program
who needs daily personal care assistance for a period of 2 or more hours
and who is:
                                             
 (a) Employed at the time of application for personal care
assistance and ineligible for any other state or federal personal care
assistance program; or
                                             
 (b) An employable person who is unable to seek or accept
employment due to a lack of personal care assistance or because
acceptance of such employment would render such person ineligible for or
cause a reduction in services from any other state or federal program
providing personal care assistance.
                                             
 III. When a person eligible for assistance under this section
obtains employment which renders him ineligible for, or causes a
reduction in services from, another program providing personal care
assistance, the director shall ensure a smooth transition between the 2
programs so that personal care subsidies provided under this section
shall commence immediately upon termination or reduction of services
under the other program.

**Source.** 1986, 138:1. 1994, 379:23, eff. June 9, 1994.

### Section 200-C:12

 **200-C:12 Appeals. –** The contested case provisions of RSA
541-A:31-36 shall apply when a person is aggrieved by a decision of the
administrator under this subdivision. Appeals shall be governed by the
provisions of RSA 541.

**Source.** 1986, 138:1. 1994, 379:22, eff. June 9, 1994; 412:25, eff.
Aug. 9, 1994.

### Section 200-C:13

 **200-C:13 Insufficient Funds. –** If personal care subsidies cannot
be provided to all eligible persons because of insufficient
appropriations, the administrator shall:
                                             
 I. Promptly notify the governor, the general court, the
Developmental Disabilities Advocacy Center, and the governor's
commission on disability; and
                                             
 II. Provide subsidies to employed persons first.

**Source.** 1986, 138:1. 1990, 140:1. 1994, 379:22, eff. June 9, 1994.
2010, 368:9, eff. Dec. 31, 2010.

### Section 200-C:14

 **200-C:14 Advisory Committee. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 368:1(19), eff.
Dec. 31, 2010.
                                             ]

### Section 200-C:15

 **200-C:15 Rulemaking. –** The board of education shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, to implement the workers' personal care
assistance program.

**Source.** 1986, 138:1. 1994, 379:23, eff. June 9, 1994.

Equipment Depository
--------------------

### Section 200-C:16

 **200-C:16 Equipment Depository. –** There is hereby established an
equipment depository within the bureau of vocational rehabilitation to
purchase adaptive equipment to enable disabled persons to become
gainfully employed by the state and any subdivision thereof. The bureau
shall determine the equipment to be purchased, subject to the approval
of governor and council. The purchases shall be limited to equipment
which provides reasonable, and not extraordinary, accommodations to the
needs of the disabled, such as telephone adapters, adjustable desks, and
other like equipment. The bureau shall have authority to reissue
equipment returned to the depository and to dispose of any equipment
that is no longer useful.

**Source.** 1986, 171:3. 1990, 140:2, X. 1994, 379:21. 2003, 174:13,
eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 200-C:17

 **200-C:17 Disabled Persons' Employment Fund. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2002,
254:5, VIII, eff. July 1, 2002.
                                             ]

Program for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing
----------------------------------------

### Section 200-C:18

 **200-C:18 Program for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing. –** There is
established a program for the deaf and hard of hearing within the bureau
of vocational rehabilitation which shall be administered by a
coordinator designated by the administrator, bureau of vocational
rehabilitation.

**Source.** 1989, 51:1. 1994, 379:21, eff. June 9, 1994.

### Section 200-C:19

 **200-C:19 Functions. –** The program established under this chapter
shall:
                                             
 I. Provide leadership and direction in the area of serving persons
with hearing impairment.
                                             
 II. Review, update and implement the state plan for the deaf and
hard of hearing and ensure it is an integral part of the operation of
the department of education.
                                             
 III. Administer and monitor the telecommunications equipment program
pursuant to RSA 200-C:7.
                                             
 IV. Provide administrative support upon request of the board of
licensure of interpreters for the deaf and hard of hearing established
in RSA 326-I. Such support may include the operation of a state
screening for New Hampshire interpreters.
                                             
 V. Collect data on the needs of the hearing impaired community and
investigate resources to meet those needs.
                                             
 VI. Provide technical assistance to state and private agencies
requesting such assistance in order to ensure accessibility for the
hearing impaired.
                                             
 VII. Assist in development of legislation affecting hearing impaired
people in the state as approved by the state board of education.
                                             
 VIII. Work with the New Hampshire registry of interpreters for the
deaf, the New Hampshire Association of the Deaf, Self-Help for the Hard
of Hearing, and any other consumer group interested in hearing loss, as
needed, to ensure quality of services for the hearing impaired.
                                             
 IX. Serve as an information and referral source for the state on the
subject of hearing impairment.

**Source.** 1989, 51:1. 2001, 232:2, eff. July 1, 2001.

### Section 200-C:20

 **200-C:20 Rulemaking Authority. –** The board of education, shall
adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, to implement the program for the
deaf and hard of hearing.

**Source.** 1989, 51:1. 1994, 379:23, eff. June 9, 1994.

### Section 200-C:20-a

 **200-C:20-a National Level and State Level Examination Fee;
Revolving Fund Established. –**
                                             
 I. Interpreters seeking to be licensed under RSA 326-I who are
required to be examined by the department of education shall be charged
a fee for the national level or state level examination by the
department of education, as appropriate. The state board of education
shall establish, pursuant to RSA 541-A, a fee schedule for such purpose.
The administrator, bureau of vocational rehabilitation, shall assess and
collect such fees.
                                             
 II. The administrator, bureau of vocational rehabilitation, shall
establish a revolving fund into which shall be deposited fees collected
under paragraph I. The revolving fund shall be nonlapsing. The
commissioner of education, with approval of the governor and council, is
authorized to use moneys from the revolving fund for the purposes of
funding the program as provided in this subdivision.

**Source.** 1990, 131:3. 1994, 379:21. 2001, 232:3, eff. July 1, 2001.

Supported Employment Program
----------------------------

### Section 200-C:21

 **200-C:21 Supported Employment Program. –** There is established a
supported employment program within the bureau of vocational
rehabilitation which shall train eligible persons with disabilities in
their employment situations by providing appropriate support services.

**Source.** 1989, 145:1. 1990, 140:2, IV. 1994, 379:21, eff. June 9,
1994.

### Section 200-C:22

 **200-C:22 Services. –** Services provided by the supported
employment program shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
                                             
 I. Providing vocational rehabilitation programs administered by the
bureau of vocational rehabilitation.
                                             
 II. Providing ongoing job support services, either at the job site
or in another location, which are directly related to maintaining
employment.

**Source.** 1989, 145:1. 1994, 379:21, eff. June 9, 1994.

### Section 200-C:23

 **200-C:23 Rulemaking. –** The board of education, shall adopt
rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, to implement the supported employment
program.

**Source.** 1989, 145:1. 1994, 379:23, eff. June 9, 1994.

Independent Living Program
--------------------------

### Section 200-C:24

 **200-C:24 Independent Living Program. –** There is established an
independent living program within the bureau of vocational
rehabilitation which is intended to assist eligible persons with
disabilities in increasing their independence.

**Source.** 1989, 145:1. 1990, 140:2, IV. 1994, 379:21, eff. June 9,
1994.

### Section 200-C:25

 **200-C:25 Services. –** Services provided by the independent living
program shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
                                             
 I. Providing vocational rehabilitation programs administered by the
bureau of vocational rehabilitation.
                                             
 II. Establishing, improving, or maintaining independent living
centers.
                                             
 III. Providing services to the elderly blind for the purpose of
increasing independence.

**Source.** 1989, 145:1. 1994, 379:21, eff. June 9, 1994.

### Section 200-C:26

 **200-C:26 Rulemaking. –** The board of education shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, to implement the independent living program.

**Source.** 1989, 145:1. 1994, 379:23, eff. June 9, 1994.
