---
title: |
    CHAPTER 200-L INTERSTATE AGREEMENT ON QUALIFICATION OF EDUCATIONAL
    PERSONNEL (NORTHEASTERN STATES)
---

TITLE XV
                                             
EDUCATION
=========

CHAPTER 200-L
                                             
INTERSTATE AGREEMENT ON QUALIFICATION OF EDUCATIONAL PERSONNEL (NORTHEASTERN STATES)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 200-L:1

 **200-L:1 Administration Authorized. –** The commissioner of
education shall execute all documents and perform all other acts
necessary to enter into and carry out the provisions of the interstate
agreement on qualification of educational personnel as provided in this
chapter.

**Source.** 1990, 42:1, eff. May 22, 1990.

### Section 200-L:2

 **200-L:2 Agreement. –** This contract is entered into and shall be
in force in accordance with its terms and is between and among the
following states party to the "Interstate Agreement on Qualification of
Educational Personnel'' which have subscribed hereto as evidenced by an
attached signature page properly executed by the appropriate officials
of the states involved: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New
Hampshire, New York, Rhode Island, and Vermont. In each instance, such a
signature page shall specifically identify this contract in such manner
as to make clear that the signatures thereon represent and constitute
execution of this contract. The states entering into this contract
hereby covenant and agree as follows:
                                             
 Article 1. Consideration and Authority. The consideration for this
contract is the mutual implementation of the policy and purpose set
forth in the interstate agreement on qualification of educational
personnel and the benefits flowing therefrom as declared in the said
interstate agreement. The authority for the making of this contract is
the interstate agreement on qualification of educational personnel, as
enacted by each of the contracting states, and the applicable statutes
of each such state in implementation of the agreement.
                                             
 Article 2. Incorporation of Interstate Agreement and Definitions.
                                             
 (a) This contract is pursuant to and in implementation of the
interstate agreement on qualification of educational personnel. All
provisions of that agreement shall govern, to the extent that they apply
to the subject matter of this contract, whether or not such provisions
are specifically set forth or referred to herein.
                                             
 (b) As used in this contract:
                                             
 1. "Designated state official'' means the education official
of a state selected by that state to negotiate and enter into, on behalf
of his/her state, contracts pursuant to the interstate agreement.
                                             
 2. "State'' means the states of Connecticut, Maine,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, Rhode Island, and Vermont.
                                             
 3. "School support professional'' means any person other than
a teacher or school administrator, as defined below, on either the state
or local level who is required by law to hold a certificate/license
based on the minimum of a baccalaureate degree in order to be employed
in a professional capacity in a school system.
                                             
 4. "School administrator'' means a school professional
required by law to hold a certificate/license whose primary duties
involve the development, supervision, or internal management of a
school, school system or school program rather than the furnishing of
direct instructional or other services to pupils.
                                             
 5. "Teacher'' means a school professional required by law to
hold a certificate/license whose primary function is to provide
instruction to students at the preschool or kindergarten level, or in
any one or more grades from grade 1 to grade 12, inclusive.
                                             
 Article 3. Interstate Acceptance; Northeast Regional Credential. Any
teacher, school administrator, or school support professional who holds
an initial or advanced certificate/license issued by a state party to
this contract, which certificate/license is still in force and which has
been classified as comparable pursuant to Article 4 of this contract,
shall be eligible for a northeast regional credential. The northeast
regional credential shall be issued upon request by the state which has
issued the state certificate/license and in accordance with the
administrative procedures and payment of fee established by unanimous
agreement of the designated state officials. Such credential will allow
the individual to perform those professional duties allowed by the
comparable state certificate/license in any school system within any
state which is a party to this contract. The northeast regional
credential shall be valid for 24 months from the date of issuance and
shall be non-renewable. Each state may designate a period of time, not
to exceed 24 months, during which an individual may be employed in that
state while possessing a northeast regional credential. No northeast
regional credential issued pursuant to the terms of this contract shall
be revoked or otherwise impaired because the contract has expired or
been terminated.
                                             
 Article 4. Comparability of Certificates/Licenses. The designated
state officials shall determine by unanimous agreement which
certificates/licenses are comparable for the purposes of this contract.
Such determination of comparability is set forth in an appendix which is
attached to and made a part of this contract. The designated state
officials or their representatives shall meet at least annually to
consider whether the list of comparable certificates/licenses should be
revised. Any revisions shall be made by amendment to this contract as
set forth in Article 7.
                                             
 Article 5. Suspension and Revocation. Revocation or suspension of an
individual's certificate/license imposed by the issuing state shall
automatically result in the imposition of the same penalty with respect
to the northeast regional credential held by that individual. The state
in which the individual is employed under the northeast regional
credential may revoke or suspend the northeast regional credential on
any ground which would be sufficient for revocation or suspension of a
certificate/license initially granted by that state and in accordance
with its procedural due process.
                                             
 Article 6. Construction and Severability. This contract shall be
liberally construed so as to effectuate the purposes thereof. The
provisions of this contract shall be severable and if any phrase,
clause, sentence, or provision of this contract is declared to be
contrary to the constitution of any of the party states or of the United
States, or the application thereof to any government, agency, person, or
circumstance is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of this
agreement and the applicability thereof to any government, agency,
person, or circumstance shall not be affected thereby. If this contract
shall be held contrary to the constitution of any state participating
therein, the contract shall remain in full force and effect as to the
state affected as to all severable matters.
                                             
 Article 7. Amendment of Contract. In addition to those
responsibilities in Article 4, the designated state officials or their
representatives may evaluate the effectiveness of the northeast regional
credential and may recommend amendments to this contract. Any provisions
of this contract may be amended upon unanimous agreement of the
designated state officials.
                                             
 Article 8. Term. This contract shall be for a term to commence on
April 1, 1990, and shall terminate on March 31, 1995. It may be renewed
for successive periods of 5 years. Withdrawal, except withdrawal by
failure to renew, may be on one year's written notice to the designated
state officials and central state recordkeeping agencies of the other
party states.

**Source.** 1990, 42:1, eff. May 22, 1990.

### Section 200-L:3

 **200-L:3 Designated State Official. –** The "designated state
official'' as provided in Article 2 for this state shall be the
commissioner of education.

**Source.** 1990, 42:1, eff. May 22, 1990.
