---
title: CHAPTER 444 STATUTORY LIENS ON PERSONAL PROPERTY
---

TITLE XLI
                                             
LIENS
==========

CHAPTER 444
                                             
STATUTORY LIENS ON PERSONAL PROPERTY
------------------------------------

### Section 444:1

 **444:1 Sale, No Due Date. –** Any person having a lien on personal
property, other than a security interest covered by RSA 382-A, Article
9, where no time is limited for the payment of the debt or redemption of
the property, may sell the same or so much thereof as is needful at
auction, notice of the sale being given as herein required, and from the
proceeds he may reimburse himself for his debt and the expenses incident
to the sale.

**Source.** 1865, 4082:1. GS 125:3. GL 139:3. PS 141:3. PL 217:5. RL
264:5. RSA 444:1. 1959, 247:2, eff. July 1, 1961.

### Section 444:2

 **444:2 Sale on Default. –** If a time is limited for the payment of
the debt or the redemption of the property, the property may be sold at
any time after the expiration of the limited time, upon like notice;
provided, that such sale will not be in conflict with the terms of the
contract under which the property is holden.

**Source.** 1865, 4082:2, 3. GS 125:4. GL 139:4. PS 141:4. PL 217:6. RL
264:6.

### Section 444:3

 **444:3 Posting Notice of Sale. –** Notice of such sale shall be
given by posting notices thereof in 2 or more public places in the town
where the property is situate 14 days at least before the sale, and, if
the value of the property exceeds 
                                             $100, by publishing the notice.

**Source.** 1865, 4082:1. GS 125:5. GL 139:5. PS 141:5. PL 217:7. RL
264:7.

### Section 444:4

 **444:4 Notice to Owner. –** A notice of the sale shall be served
upon the general owner, if resident in the county, the same number of
days before the sale, stating in writing the time and place of sale, the
property to be sold and the amount of the lien thereon.

**Source.** 1865, 4082:1. GS 125:6. GL 139:6. PS 141:6. PL 217:8. RL
264:8. RSA 444:4. 1959, 247:2, eff. July 1, 1961.

### Section 444:4-a

 **444:4-a Notice to Lienholder. –** A lienholder under this chapter
shall inquire by writing, by verified mail as defined in RSA 451-C:1,
VII, to determine from the division of motor vehicles of the department
of safety, the secretary of state, and the town clerk with regard to a
motor vehicle and from the secretary of state, and the town clerk with
regard to other personal property, whether a lien exists upon the title
to said motor vehicle or other personal property. Any such written
inquiry that requests information on financing statements filed under
RSA 382-A shall be in the form, and subject to the fees, required by
that chapter. If no response is received by the lienholder from the
department of safety, the secretary of state, or the town clerk within
14 days after such inquiry has been received, sale of the motor vehicle
or personal property may proceed as prescribed by this chapter. If
determination is made under the above procedure that a lien exists, a
notice of the sale under this chapter shall be sent by verified mail as
defined in RSA 451-C:1, VII to each lienholder having a recorded lien on
said automobile or personal property. The notice shall be sent at least
14 days prior to the date of the sale and shall include the date, time,
and place of said sale and the amount of the statutory lien claimed. Any
lienholder having a recorded lien shall be entitled to redeem the
personal property prior to the sale by payment of the amount of said
statutory lien, and the lienholder shall have the right of possession
from the individual or institution exercising said statutory lien.

**Source.** 1979, 318:1. 2001, 102:33, eff. July 1, 2001. 2012, 207:5,
eff. Aug. 12, 2012.

### Section 444:5

 **444:5 Disposal of Proceeds. –** The balance of the proceeds of
sale, if any, after payment of the amount of the lien and the reasonable
expenses incident to the sale, shall be paid to the general owner or
person entitled thereto, on demand.

**Source.** 1865, 4082:1. GS 125:7. GL 139:7. PS 141:7. PL 217:9. RL
264:9. RSA 444:5. 1959, 247:2, eff. July 1, 1961.

### Section 444:6

 **444:6 Record. –** The holder of the lien shall cause a copy of
such notices and an affidavit of service, with an account of the sale
and of the fees and charges thereon, to be recorded in the books of the
town where the sale takes place. A certified copy of the record may be
used in evidence.

**Source.** 1865, 4082:1. GS 125:8. GL 139:8. PS 141:8. PL 217:10. RL
264:10.
