---
title: 'CHAPTER 449 LIENS FOR CLEANING, PRESSING, LAUNDERING, ETC.'
---

TITLE XLI
                                             
LIENS
==========

CHAPTER 449
                                             
LIENS FOR CLEANING, PRESSING, LAUNDERING, ETC.
----------------------------------------------

### Section 449:1

 **449:1 Liens for Cleaning, Pressing, Glazing, Laundering or Dyeing.
–** Every person who maintains an establishment for cleaning, pressing,
glazing, laundering, or dyeing, who shall place in storage, or do any
work on, any article of personal property at the request of the owner or
legal possessor of such property shall have a lien for such service, and
may retain possession of such article until the charges for such work or
storage have been paid.

**Source.** 1945, 97:1, par. 41. RSA 449:1. 1963, 45:1, eff. June 19,
1963.

### Section 449:2

 **449:2 Sale or Disposal for Service Lien. –** If such lien remains
undischarged for a period of 60 days after work has been completed or
after expiration of agreed terms of storage, if any, or in the absence
of such agreement, after the expiration of 90 days from date of storage,
the lienholder may give such article to a duly organized charitable
corporation or sell such article at public or private sale. Provided,
however, that reasonable notice of the above policy shall be given by
posting the policy in a conspicuous place in the cleaning establishment
and by including the policy on the claim check.

**Source.** 1945, 97:1, par. 42. RSA 449:2. 1963, 45:2. 1983, 414:1,
eff. Sept. 21, 1983.

### Section 449:3

 **449:3 Notice and Record. –** Notice of such sale or disposal to a
charitable organization shall be given as provided in RSA 451:3 and
record shall be made as provided in RSA 444:6.

**Source.** 1945, 97:1, par. 43. RSA 449:3. 1963, 45:3, eff. June 19,
1963.
