---
title: CHAPTER 450 LIENS ON MOTOR VEHICLES OR AIRCRAFT
---

TITLE XLI
                                             
LIENS
==========

CHAPTER 450
                                             
LIENS ON MOTOR VEHICLES OR AIRCRAFT
-----------------------------------

### Section 450:1

 **450:1 For Storage. –** Any person who maintains a public garage,
public or private airport or hangar or trailer court for the parking,
storage or care of motor vehicles or aircraft or house trailers brought
to his premises or placed in his care by or with the consent of the
legal or equitable owner shall have a lien upon said motor vehicle or
aircraft or house trailer, so long as the same shall remain in his
possession, for proper charges due him for the parking, storage or care
of the same.

**Source.** 1925, 90:1. PL 217:35. RL 264:38. 1949, 58:1. RSA 450:1.
1955, 209:1. 1975, 104:1, eff. July 5, 1975.

### Section 450:2

 **450:2 For Labor. –** Any person who shall, by himself or others,
perform labor, furnish materials, or expend money, in repairing,
refitting or equipping any motor vehicle or aircraft, under a contract
expressed or implied with the legal or equitable owner, shall have a
lien upon such motor vehicle or aircraft, so long as the same shall
remain in his possession, until the charges for such repairs, materials,
or accessories, or money so used or expended have been paid.

**Source.** 1925, 90:1. PL 217:36. RL 264:39. 1949, 58:2, eff. March 11,
1949.

### Section 450:3

 **450:3 Notice and Sale. –** If any of the charges referred to in
this chapter shall remain unpaid for 60 days, the lienholder may sell
such motor vehicle or aircraft or house trailer at public sale, and the
proceeds, after first paying the expense of sale, shall be applied in
payment of the charges, the balance, if any, to be paid to the debtor.
Notice of such sale shall be given and record made as provided in RSA
444:3, 4 and 6.

**Source.** 1925, 90:1. PL 217:37. RL 264:40. 1949, 58:3. RSA 450:3.
1955, 209:2, eff. June 21, 1955.

### Section 450:4

 **450:4 Lien for Nonpayment of Aircraft Registration Fees. –**
                                             
 I. The state may, upon proper notification to the owner of an
aircraft, exercise its right to have a lien on each aircraft for which
the registration fees have not been paid according to RSA 422:31. Proper
notification to an owner shall be made via registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested. The lien, once perfected, shall be prior to
all other liens and encumbrances except (a) liens and encumbrances
recorded prior to the effective date of this section, and (b) sums
unpaid on any primary loans encumbering that aircraft which secure an
institutional lender and are promptly perfected. The provisions of this
paragraph shall not affect the priority of mechanics' and materialmen's
liens.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, or any
other provision of law, all liens arising under this section shall be
filed at the office of the secretary of state. The fees for filing such
liens and any releases thereof shall be in accordance with RSA 478:17-g.
A copy of the lien shall also be filed with the Federal Aviation
Administration, Federal Registry.
                                             
 III.(a) The state, in order to perfect a lien under this section,
shall include in the lien:
                                             
 (1) A specific description of the aircraft as required in
accordance with a certificate issued under RSA 422:26;
                                             
 (2) The name or names of the persons or entities designated as
an owner of the aircraft and the applicable addresses;
                                             
 (3) The amount of unpaid assessments currently due or past due
together with the date when each fell due; and
                                             
 (4) The date of issuance of the lien.
                                             
 (b) It shall be the duty of the secretary of state to file and
index the lien in the names of the persons or entities identified as the
owner, as well as in the name of the state. The cost of filing such lien
shall be taxed against the party found liable in any judgment or decree
enforcing such lien.
                                             
 IV. The judgment or decree in an action brought pursuant to this
section shall include, without limitation, reimbursement for costs and
attorneys' fees, plus interest at the maximum lawful rate for the sums
secured by the lien from the time such sum became due and payable.
                                             
 V. When payment or satisfaction is made of a debt secured by a lien,
the lien shall be released by filing a release of lien with the
secretary of state and the Federal Aviation Administration. For the
purposes of this section, the state shall be deemed the duly authorized
agent of the lien creditor and shall discharge the lien.
                                             
 VI. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit actions
at law to recover a sum for which paragraph I creates a lien.
                                             
 VII. Any aircraft owner or purchaser of an aircraft, having executed
a contract for the disposition of the aircraft, shall be entitled, upon
request, to a statement setting forth the amount of unpaid assessments
currently levied against the aircraft. Such request shall be made in
writing and directed to the commissioner. Payment of a fee not exceeding

                                             $10 may be required as a prerequisite to the issuance of such a
statement.

**Source.** 1997, 118:1. 2001, 102:35, 36, eff. July 1, 2001. 2009,
113:10, eff. June 22, 2009.
