---
title: 'CHAPTER 451-A RADIO AND TELEVISION MACHINE LIENS'
---

TITLE XLI
                                             
LIENS
==========

CHAPTER 451-A
                                             
RADIO AND TELEVISION MACHINE LIENS
----------------------------------

### Section 451-A:1

 **451-A:1 For Work. –** Any person who maintains an establishment
for repair on radio or television equipment, who shall at his
establishment or repair shop alter, repair or do any work on any such
equipment at the request of the owner or legal possessor of such
property shall have a lien upon and may retain the possession of any
such article until the charges for such alteration, repairing or other
work have been paid.

**Source.** 1959, 170:1, eff. Aug. 24, 1959.

### Section 451-A:2

 **451-A:2 Sale to Satisfy. –** If such lien remains undischarged for
a period of 60 days after work has been completed, the lienholder may
sell such article at private or public sale, and the proceeds, after
first paying the expense of the sale, shall be applied in payment of the
debt, the balance, if any, to be paid over to the county treasurer of
the county where the sale is held, in trust for the debtor.

**Source.** 1959, 170:1, eff. Aug. 24, 1959.

### Section 451-A:3

 **451-A:3 Notice to Debtor. –** Before any such sale is held, notice
in writing of the amount due and the time and place of sale shall be
given the debtor. If the debtor's residence is known, such notice shall
be mailed to him 14 days before the sale. If the debtor's address is
unknown, such notice shall be given by posting the same in the county
courthouse or the city or town hall where the lienholder resides, 30
days before the sale.

**Source.** 1959, 170:1, eff. Aug. 24, 1959.
