---
title: 'CHAPTER 451-C SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY LIENS'
---

TITLE XLI
                                             
LIENS
==========

CHAPTER 451-C
                                             
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY LIENS
-----------------------------------

### Section 451-C:1

 **451-C:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Lienholder'' means a person entitled to enforce a lien or
security interest legally acquired and properly recorded in accordance
with RSA 382-A or RSA 261.
                                             
 II. "Motor vehicle'' means a motor vehicle as defined in RSA 259:60,
a motorcycle as defined in RSA 259:63, and any boat, watercraft, or
motorized vehicle including any "off highway recreational vehicle'' as
defined in RSA 215-A:1, VI or any snowmobile as defined in RSA 215-C:1.
                                             
 III. "Occupant'' means a person, or any agent or representative of
the person, entitled to the use of storage space at a self-service
storage facility under a rental agreement, to the exclusion of others.
                                             
 IV. "Owner'' means the owner, operator, lessor, or sublessor of a
self-service storage facility, the owner's agent, or any other person
authorized by the owner to manage the facility, or to receive rent from
an occupant.
                                             
 V. "Personal property'' means moveable property not affixed to land,
and includes, but is not limited to goods, merchandise, motor vehicles,
and household items.
                                             
 VI. "Self-service storage facility'' means any real property
designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual
storage space to occupants who are to have access to such space for the
purpose of storing and removing personal property. A self-service
storage facility is not a warehouse as the term "warehouse'' is used in
RSA 382-A:7.
                                             
 VII. "Verified mail'' means any method of mailing that is offered by
the United States Postal Service or any other carrier, and which
provides evidence of mailing.

**Source.** 1999, 315:1, eff. Sept. 14, 1999. 2005, 210:61, eff. July 1,
2006. 2012, 207:1, eff. Aug. 12, 2012.

### Section 451-C:2

 **451-C:2 Storage Lien. –** Any owner of a self-service storage
facility shall have a lien upon all personal property located at the
self-service storage facility so long as the personal property shall
remain in the possession of the owner, or, in accordance with any rental
agreement or lease, shall have a lien for unpaid rent, charges, fees, or
expenses due for storage, care, or sale of the personal property. The
lien attaches as of the date the personal property is brought to the
self-service storage facility.

**Source.** 1999, 315:1, eff. Sept. 14, 1999.

### Section 451-C:3

 **451-C:3 Removal and Disposal of Personal Property. –** If any of
the rent, charges, fees, or expenses referred to in this chapter shall
remain unpaid for 5 days, the owner may place a lock on the storage
unit, in addition to any lock placed thereon by the occupant. The owner
may deny access to the unit until the unpaid rent, charges, fees, or
expenses are paid in full by the occupant. If after 30 days, any of the
rent, charges, fees, or expenses shall remain unpaid, the owner may
remove the occupant's lock as well as the owner's lock, remove any
personal property from the unit and retain such personal property, and
then, after first satisfying the notice provisions of RSA 451-C:4, RSA
451-C:5, and RSA 451-C:6, unless exempted by RSA 451-C:7, proceed to
sell such personal property to satisfy the lien. Proceeds from the sale
shall be distributed pursuant to RSA 451-C:6.

**Source.** 1999, 315:1, eff. Sept. 14, 1999.

### Section 451-C:4

 **451-C:4 Notice to Lienholder. –**
                                             
 I. An owner shall inquire in writing, by verified mail, to determine
from the division of motor vehicles and the secretary of state with
regard to a motor vehicle, and from the secretary of state with regard
to other personal property, whether a lien exists upon the title to said
motor vehicle or other personal property. Any such written inquiry that
requests information on financing statements filed under RSA 382-A shall
be in the form, and subject to the fees, required by that chapter. If no
lien is found, or in the case where the inquiry had been made in writing
and no response is received from the division of motor vehicles or the
secretary of state within 14 days after such inquiry is sent by verified
mail, the owner may proceed to sell or otherwise dispose of such
personal property as prescribed by this chapter.
                                             
 II. If determination is made under the procedure described in
paragraph I that a lien exists, a notice of sale under this chapter
shall be sent by verified mail to the last known address of each holder
of a security interest or lienholder in accordance with RSA 382-A:9. The
notice shall state the time and place of the sale, the property to be
sold, and the amount of the rent, charges, fees, or expenses owed. The
notice shall be sent at least 20 days prior to the date of the sale,
except that in the case of a motor vehicle, notice shall be sent at
least 30 days prior to the date of the sale. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, any lienholder having a properly perfected
lien or security interest shall be entitled to remove such personal
property from the owner's possession or from the occupant's self-service
storage facility unit within 20 days of the date of mailing of the
notice of the sale, without attachment of the lien established under RSA
451-C:2 or any further obligation to the owner of the self-service
storage facility. The lienholder's right to possession of the personal
property is established under this chapter notwithstanding the lack of
breach by the owner of such personal property under the debt instrument
or security agreement creating the lien or security interest on such
property. The owner shall not be responsible for determining priority as
between any competing lienholders. If the owner and the lienholder who
has received the notice agree to store the personal property at the
facility, the lienholder shall pay the amount of the rent, charges,
fees, or expenses due from and after the date of the notice to the
lienholder, and pay the monthly rental fee until such personal property
is removed from the facility.

**Source.** 1999, 315:1. 2001, 102:37, eff. July 1, 2001. 2004, 78:1,
eff. Jan. 1, 2005. 2012, 207:2, eff. Aug. 12, 2012.

### Section 451-C:5

 **451-C:5 Notice of Sale. –** A notice of the sale shall be served
upon the occupant in person or by verified mail at the last known
address, no less than 14 days before the sale, stating the time and
place of sale, the property to be sold, and the amount of the rent,
charges, fees, or expenses owed.

**Source.** 1999, 315:1, eff. Sept. 14, 1999. 2012, 207:2, eff. Aug. 12,
2012.

### Section 451-C:6

 **451-C:6 Sale. –** If any of the rent, charges, fees, or expenses
referred to in this chapter shall remain unpaid for 30 days, and after
complying with the provisions of RSA 451-C:4 and RSA 451-C:5, the owner
may sell such personal property at a private or public sale, and the
proceeds shall first be applied to satisfy such rent, charges, fees, or
expenses. Proceeds remaining after the sale and payment of rent,
charges, fees, or expenses to the owner shall then be paid to any
lienholders of record, as their interests may appear, with any remaining
proceeds to be paid to the occupant.

**Source.** 1999, 315:1, eff. Sept. 14, 1999.

### Section 451-C:7

 **451-C:7 Abandoned Property. –**
                                             
 I. In the event that a storage unit is unlocked, and the rent on the
unit is past due, and the entire contents of the unit have a total value
under 
                                             $500, the property shall be deemed abandoned. Such property may
then be removed from the self-service storage facility unit and shall be
retained for 30 days. If after 30 days, the occupant does not claim such
personal property and any of the rent, charges, fees, or expenses remain
unpaid, and there is no lienholder of record, the owner may dispose of
the property without notice to the occupant.
                                             
 II. In the event that a storage unit is locked, and the rent on the
unit is past due, and the entire contents of the unit have a total value
under 
                                             $500, the property shall be deemed abandoned. If after 30 days,
the occupant does not claim such personal property and any of the rent,
charges, fees, or expenses remain unpaid, and there is no lienholder of
record, the owner shall be exempt from requirements of RSA 451-C:5 and
RSA 451-C:6, may remove such property from the self-service storage
facility unit, and dispose of the property without notice to the
occupant.

**Source.** 1999, 315:1, eff. Sept. 14, 1999.

### Section 451-C:8

 **451-C:8 Liability. –** An owner acting in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall not be liable to the occupant or
lienholder for personal property disposed of under the provisions of
this chapter.

**Source.** 1999, 315:1, eff. Sept. 14, 1999.

### Section 451-C:9

 **451-C:9 Purchaser. –** Provided that the provisions of this
chapter are complied with by an owner conducting a sale of personal
property, a purchaser in good faith of personal property under the
provisions of this chapter shall take the personal property free and
clear of any rights of an occupant against whom the liens were placed by
a lienholder.

**Source.** 1999, 315:1, eff. Sept. 14, 1999.

### Section 451-C:10

 **451-C:10 Disclosure. –** An owner of a self-service storage
facility shall disclose, in any rental agreement or lease, the terms and
conditions of such rental agreement or lease and the notice provisions
of RSA 451-C to an occupant before renting or leasing the storage unit.

**Source.** 1999, 315:1, eff. Sept. 14, 1999.
