---
title: 'CHAPTER 451-B LIENS ON PERSONAL PROPERTY'
---

TITLE XLI
                                             
LIENS
==========

CHAPTER 451-B
                                             
LIENS ON PERSONAL PROPERTY
--------------------------

### Section 451-B:1

 **451-B:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Personal property'' means visible, movable, tangible goods,
including goods that have been severed from real estate and moved for
the purpose of being repaired. Personal property does not include real,
intangible, or fixed property, fixtures, animals, inventory, or goods
that are in the process of being made or manufactured.
                                             
 II. "Repair'' means to restore by replacing one or more parts or
putting together what is torn or broken. It also means to fix, mend, or
otherwise restore to a sound state.

**Source.** 1997, 302:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 451-B:2

 **451-B:2 Lien Upon Item for Work. –** Except to the extent
otherwise provided by law, every person who shall repair, at the request
of the owner, any article of personal property, the fair market value of
which is not greater than 
                                             $1,000, shall have a lien upon the property
and may retain the possession of the article of property until the
charges for such repair have been paid. Further, persons who repair
articles of personal property shall provide notice that the owner of
such personal property must disclose any prior lienholders having a
security interest in such personal property at the time repairs are
requested. The foregoing notice requirement may be satisfied either by
sign or by express written notification at the time that a repair order
is made.

**Source.** 1997, 302:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 451-B:3

 **451-B:3 Sale to Satisfy Debt. –** If a debt for repair services
remains unpaid for 60 days from the date that they are completed, the
holder of the lien established by the previous section may sell the
article at public sale in accordance with RSA 444:3, RSA 444:5, and, in
the event a prior lienholder has been disclosed by the property owner,
in accordance with the notice to lienholder provisions of RSA 444:4-a or
RSA 450-A:4, as applicable, provided that the lienholder gives a 30-day
written notice by verified mail, as defined in RSA 451-C:1, VII, to the
owner of the article before such sale. The proceeds, after first paying
the expense of sale, shall be applied in payment of the debt. After
satisfying the requirements of RSA 444:5, the excess proceeds from such
sale, if any, shall be paid over to the state treasurer in trust for the
debtor.

**Source.** 1997, 302:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1998. 2012, 207:6, eff. Aug. 12,
2012.
