---
title: 'CHAPTER 451 JEWELERS'' LIENS'
---

TITLE XLI
                                             
LIENS
==========

CHAPTER 451
                                             
JEWELERS' LIENS
---------------

### Section 451:1

 **451:1 Lien Upon Item for Work. –** Every jeweler, watchmaker or
silver-smith who shall alter, including manufacturing another article
from, repair, or do any work on any article of personal property at the
request of the owner or legal possessor of such property shall have a
lien upon and may retain the possession of any such article until the
charges for such alteration, repairing or other work have been paid.

**Source.** 1917, 134:1. PL 217:32. RL 264:35. RSA 451:1. 1994, 162:1,
eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 451:2

 **451:2 Sale to Satisfy Debt. –** If such debt remains unpaid for 90
days, the lienholder may sell such article at public sale; provided that
the lienholder gives a 30-day written notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner of the article before such sale, and the
proceeds, after first paying the expense of sale, shall be applied in
payment of the debt, the balance, if any, to be paid over to the county
treasurer of the county where the sale is held, in trust for the debtor.

**Source.** 1917, 134:1. PL 217:33. RL 264:36. RSA 451:2. 1994, 162:2,
eff. Jan. 1, 1995.

### Section 451:3

 **451:3 Notice to Debtor. –** Before any such sale is held, notice
in writing of the amount due and the time and place of sale shall be
given the debtor. If the debtor's residence is known, such notice shall
be mailed to him 14 days before the sale. If the debtor's address is
unknown, such notice shall be given by posting the same in the county
courthouse or the city, village or town hall, where the lienholder
resides, 30 days before the sale.

**Source.** 1917, 134:1. PL 217:34. RL 264:37.
