---
title: 'CHAPTER 454-B UNIFORM FEDERAL LIEN REGISTRATION ACT'
---

TITLE XLI
                                             
LIENS
==========

CHAPTER 454-B
                                             
UNIFORM FEDERAL LIEN REGISTRATION ACT
-------------------------------------

### Section 454-B:1

 **454-B:1 Scope. –** This chapter applies only to federal tax liens
and to other federal liens, notices of which under any act of Congress
or any regulation adopted pursuant to any act of Congress are required
or permitted to be filed in the same manner as notices of federal tax
liens.

**Source.** 1988, 116:1, eff. April 18, 1988.

### Section 454-B:2

 **454-B:2 Place of Filing. –**
                                             
 I. Notices of liens, certificates, and other notices affecting
federal tax liens or other federal liens including without limitation
releases, subordinations, refiled notices, and discharges shall be filed
in accordance with this chapter.
                                             
 II. Notices of liens upon real property for obligations payable to
the United States and certificates and notices affecting the liens,
including without limitation, releases, subordinations, refiled notices
and discharges, shall be filed in the registry of deeds of the county in
which the real property subject to the liens is situated. The register
of deeds shall receive, record, and index the same in accordance with
RSA 478.
                                             
 III. Notices of federal liens upon personal property, whether
tangible or intangible, for obligations payable to the United States,
certificates, and notices affecting the liens shall be filed in the
office of the secretary of state. In addition, certificates and notices
affecting federal liens previously filed in a city or town clerk's
office shall be filed in the office of the secretary of state.

**Source.** 1988, 116:1. 2001, 102:54, eff. June 26, 2001. 2005, 219:1,
eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 454-B:3

 **454-B:3 Execution of Notices and Certificates. –** Certification
of notices of liens, certificates, or other notices affecting federal
liens by the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States or his
delegate, or by any official or entity of the United States responsible
for filing or certifying of notice of any other lien, entitles them to
be filed and no other attestation, certification, or acknowledgement is
necessary.

**Source.** 1988, 116:1, eff. April 18, 1988.

### Section 454-B:4

 **454-B:4 Duties of Secretary of State. –**
                                             
 I. If a notice of federal lien, a refiling of a notice of federal
lien, or a notice of revocation of any certificate described in
subparagraph II(b) is presented to a filing officer, the filing officer
shall cause the notice to be marked, held, and indexed in accordance
with the provisions of RSA 382-A:9-519 as if the notice were a financing
statement within the meaning of RSA 382-A, the Uniform Commercial Code.
                                             
 II. If a certificate of release, non-attachment, discharge, or
subordination of any lien or any related instrument is presented to the
secretary of state for filing, the secretary shall:
                                             
 (a) Cause a certificate of release or non-attachment to be
marked, held, and indexed as if the certificate were a termination
statement within the meaning of RSA 382-A, the Uniform Commercial Code,
but the notice of lien to which the certificate relates may not be
removed from the files until one year after the certificate was
received, or 12 years after the notice was filed, whichever occurs
first; and
                                             
 (b) Cause a certificate of discharge or subordination to be
marked, held, and indexed as if the certificate were a release of
collateral within the meaning of RSA 382-A, the Uniform Commercial
Code.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. Upon request of any person, the secretary of state shall issue
his or her certificate showing whether there is on file, on the date and
hour stated therein, any notice of federal lien or certificate or notice
filed under this chapter or any notice of federal tax lien or
certificate or notice filed under former RSA 454-A, naming a particular
person, and if a notice or certificate is on file, giving the date and
hour of filing of each notice or certificate. The fee for such a
certificate, or a copy of any notice of federal lien or notice or
certificate affecting a federal lien shall be in accordance with the
fees established pursuant to RSA 382-A:9-525.

**Source.** 1988, 116:1. 2001, 102:38 to 40, eff. July 1, 2001. 2005,
219:2-4, 10, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 454-B:5

 **454-B:5 Fees. –**
                                             
 I. The fee for filing and indexing each notice of lien or
certificate or notice affecting the lien shall be 
                                             $30.
                                             
 II. Fees collected under this section shall be deposited in the
federal lien registration fund and allocated to the secretary of state
for the purposes specified in this chapter.

**Source.** 1988, 116:1. 2001, 102:41, eff. July 1, 2001. 2005, 219:5,
eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 454-B:5-a

 **454-B:5-a Disposition of Funds. –** The expenses of administering,
staffing, maintaining, and improving services provided by the secretary
of state under this chapter shall be paid out of a fund to be known as
the federal lien registration fund herein established in the office of
the state treasurer.

**Source.** 2005, 219:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 454-B:6

 **454-B:6 Uniformity of Application and Construction. –** This
chapter shall be applied and construed to effectuate its general purpose
to make uniform the law with respect to the subject of this chapter
among states enacting it.

**Source.** 1988, 116:1, eff. April 18, 1988.

### Section 454-B:7

 **454-B:7 Short Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the Uniform
Federal Lien Registration Act.

**Source.** 1988, 116:1, eff. April 18, 1988.

### Section 454-B:8

 **454-B:8 Tax Liens and Notices Filed Under Former RSA 454-A. –**
Each register of deeds who under former RSA 454-A maintained separate
records of federal tax liens and certificates or notices affecting said
liens shall continue to maintain said records, to the extent said
records are not also recorded in accordance with RSA 478.

**Source.** 1988, 116:1, eff. April 18, 1988.

### Section 454-B:9

 **454-B:9 Method of Communication. –** The filing officer shall
accept liens described in this chapter in the method or medium
authorized by the filing office in accordance with RSA 382-A:9-501-529,
inclusive.

**Source.** 2005, 219:7, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 454-B:10

 **454-B:10 Former Filing Office Duties. –**
                                             
 I. Every city or town clerk's office ("former filing office'') shall
maintain a record of every federal tax lien filed with such office under
RSA 454-B until the earlier of one year after a release or discharge is
filed with respect to such federal tax lien or June 30, 2017. As of July
1, 2017, all remaining records of, or relating to, financing statements
filed in such office under RSA 454-B may be destroyed.
                                             
 II. A former filing office shall not accept or file any initial
federal tax lien or any other record relating to a federal tax lien
filed with such office under RSA 454-B.
                                             
 III. Until July 1, 2017, a former filing office shall respond to a
request for information concerning its records in the same way and to
the same extent as is required of the secretary of state under RSA
382-A:9-523(c), (d), and (e), and shall be entitled to charge and retain
the same fees as are prescribed in RSA 382:9-525(d). Such a request for
information shall be prepared, submitted, and processed separately from
a request for information submitted under RSA 382-A:9-523(g), and the
fees prescribed in RSA 382-A:9-525(d) shall apply separately to each
request and the response thereto. Every city or town clerk shall post
notice that a search of the records held by the city or town clerk may
not reveal releases filed with the secretary of state.

**Source.** 2005, 219:8, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.
