---
title: 'CHAPTER 71-B BOARD OF TAX AND LAND APPEALS'
---

TITLE V
                                             
TAXATION
========

CHAPTER 71-B
                                             
BOARD OF TAX AND LAND APPEALS
-----------------------------

### Section 71-B:1

 **71-B:1 Board Established. –** There is hereby established a board
of tax and land appeals, hereinafter referred to as the board, which
shall be composed of 3 members who shall be learned and experienced in
questions of taxation or of real estate valuation and appraisal or of
both. The members of the board shall be full-time employees and shall
not engage in any other employment during their terms that is in
conflict with their duties as members of the board.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2. 1982, 42:72. 1994, 393:1. 2011, 224:336, eff.
July 15, 2011.

### Section 71-B:2

 **71-B:2 Appointment; Term; Chairman. –** The members of the board
shall be appointed by the supreme court and commissioned by the governor
for a term of 3 years and until their successors are appointed and
qualified; provided, however, that any vacancy on the board shall be
filled for the unexpired term. The supreme court shall designate one
member as chairman to serve in that capacity for the duration of his or
her term.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2. 1982, 42:73. 2011, 224:337, eff. July 15, 2011.

### Section 71-B:3

 **71-B:3 Removal. –** Any member may be removed by the same
authority for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office;
but, before removal, he shall be furnished with a copy of the charges
against him, and have an opportunity to be heard in defense.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 71-B:4

 **71-B:4 Compensation. –** Each member of the board shall receive
the annual salary prescribed by RSA 94:1 and reasonable expenses,
including transportation, subject to the approval of the governor and
council.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 71-B:5

 **71-B:5 Authority; Duties. –** It shall be the duty of the board
and it shall have power and authority:
                                             
 I. To hear and determine all matters involving questions of taxation
properly brought before it. Such matters may be brought before the board
at the pleasure of the taxpayer or as otherwise provided by law. In
determining matters before it, the board may institute its own
investigation, or hold hearings, or take such other action as it shall
deem necessary.
                                             
 II. (a) To hear and determine appeals by municipalities relating to
the equalized valuation of property determined by the commissioner of
revenue administration pursuant to RSA 21-J:3, XIII. Any municipality
aggrieved by its own equalized valuation as determined by the
commissioner of revenue administration must appeal to the board in
writing within 30 days of notice of its final equalized valuation by the
commissioner. The board shall hear and make a final ruling on such
appeal within 60 days of its receipt by the board. The board's decision
on such appeal shall be final pending a decision by the supreme court.
Such appeal shall be filed with the clerk of the supreme court within 20
days after the date the decision is mailed by the board to the
municipality. The supreme court shall give any appeal under this section
priority in the court calendar.
                                             
 (b) Decisions by the supreme court on appeals made under
subparagraph (a) that are issued prior to September 1 shall be used by
the commissioner of revenue administration in determining the taxes to
be raised by each municipality for that tax year.
                                             
 (c) Decisions by the supreme court on appeals made under
subparagraph (a) that are issued after September 1 shall be used by the
commissioner of revenue administration in determining the taxes to be
raised in the tax year commencing April 1 of the succeeding year. Any
adjustments that need to be made to a municipality's tax rate based on a
decision by the supreme court under this subparagraph shall be made by
the commissioner of revenue administration in the tax year commencing
April 1 of the succeeding year.
                                             
 III. To hear and determine all matters relating to the condemnation
of property for public uses and the assessment of damages therefor as
provided in RSA 498-A.
                                             
 IV. To hear and determine all matters relating to orders for
reassessment properly brought pursuant to RSA 71-B:16.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1973, 544:2. 1978, 48:2. 1981, 83:4. 1982, 42:74. 1985,
204:8. 1994, 393:2. 1999, 17:11. 2000, 239:5. 2001, 158:50. 2004,
203:16. 2006, 324:17, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 71-B:6

 **71-B:6 Quorum; Disqualification; Temporary Members. –**
                                             
 I. In all matters except in hearings and decisions relating to all
taxation and eminent domain matters, a majority of the board shall
constitute a quorum to transact business. In hearings and decisions in
all taxation and eminent domain appeals, the board may sit with a quorum
of 2; provided, however, that if the 2 members cannot reach a consensus
on the decision, a third member shall review the record and participate
in the decision, and the decision of the majority of the 3 shall
constitute the board's decision.
                                             
 II. No member of the board shall represent a party or testify as an
expert witness or render any professional service for any party or
interest before the board, and any member having an interest in the
subject matter shall be disqualified to act therein.
                                             
 III. If, in the event of a disqualification or temporary disability
of a member or members of the board, it shall become necessary to do so,
the board, subject to the approval of the supreme court, shall appoint
such number of temporary board members as shall be necessary to meet the
requirements herein imposed. Such temporary board members shall serve
with respect to such matter until the same has been fully disposed of
before the board.
                                             
 IV. Temporary board members shall have the same qualifications as
regular board members in whose place they are acting.
                                             
 V. A temporary board member shall be compensated at the rate of 
                                             $75
for each day devoted to the work of the board and shall be reimbursed
the necessary and reasonable expenses incurred by him in the performance
of his duties.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2. 1982, 42:75. 1988, 1:11. 1991, 386:1. 2009,
102:1, eff. June 15, 2009.

### Section 71-B:7

 **71-B:7 Hearing Procedure. –** Whenever the board shall hold
hearings, it shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence adhered
to in the superior courts in this state. The board shall introduce into
evidence and may take into consideration in determining any question any
information obtained through its own investigation, including
information obtained by persons employed under RSA 71-B:14. In addition
to the provisions of RSA 91-A, the board shall tape record the
proceedings of any taxation hearing before it and shall make such tape
recording available to the public for inspection and recording from the
date of the hearing to a date which is 15 working days after the board
has made a final decision on the matter which is the subject of the
hearing, or, if an appeal is made from such decision, the date upon
which the matter has been finally adjudicated, whichever date is later.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2. 1975, 341:1. 1983, 313:1, eff. Aug. 17, 1983.

### Section 71-B:7-a

 **71-B:7-a Representation by Nonattorneys. –** Nonattorneys may
commonly represent taxpayers in RSA 76:16, RSA 76:16-a, and RSA 83-F
appeals before municipalities and the board. Nothing in this section
shall prevent the board from denying representation by any individual it
deems to be improper, inappropriate, or unable to adequately represent
the interests of the taxpayer.

**Source.** 1995, 251:1. 2005, 171:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2006.

### Section 71-B:7-b

 **71-B:7-b Board Meetings. –** The board's deliberative processes in
adjudicatory proceedings held pursuant to RSA 541-A shall be exempt from
the public meeting and notice provisions of RSA 91-A. Decisions and
orders in adjudicatory proceedings shall be publicly available, but only
after they have been reduced to writing, signed by a quorum of the
board, and served upon the parties, and shall set forth the board's
rulings of law and findings of fact in support of its decisions.
Discussions and actions by the board concerning procedural,
administrative, legal, and internal matters shall be exempt from the
meeting and notice provisions of RSA 91-A:2.

**Source.** 2007, 371:1, eff. July 18, 2007.

### Section 71-B:8

 **71-B:8 Rules and Regulations. –** The board may make reasonable
rules and regulations for carrying out its functions including but not
limited to rules of procedure to be followed in hearings conducted by it
not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 71-B:9

 **71-B:9 Administration of Oaths, Subpoenas, Etc.; Fees. –** The
board shall have authority to administer oaths and to compel the
attendance of witnesses to proceedings before it. The board shall have
the power to subpoena and subpoena duces tecum. Witnesses compelled to
appear shall be paid the same fee and mileage that are paid to witnesses
in the superior court of the state. A subpoena or subpoena duces tecum
of the board may be served by any person designated in the subpoena or
subpoena duces tecum to serve it. Any testimony given by a person duly
sworn shall be subject to the pains and penalties of perjury. All
applications or petitions to the board for which no filing fee has been
otherwise specified by statute shall be accompanied by a 
                                             $65 filing
fee. Costs and attorney's fees may be taxed as in the superior court.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2. 1989, 408:6. 1993, 141:1. 2003, 133:2, eff.
Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 71-B:10

 **71-B:10 Notice. –** The board shall serve notice in writing of the
time, place, and cause of any hearing upon all parties at least 20 days
prior to the date of the hearing.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2. 1988, 1:1, eff. April 19, 1988.

### Section 71-B:11

 **71-B:11 Jurisdiction. –** In addition to where specifically
provided by law, wherever the superior courts have jurisdiction to
determine questions relating to taxation de novo, the taxpayer may elect
to bring such questions before the board which shall determine the issue
de novo. An election by a taxpayer to bring an action before the board
shall be deemed a waiver of any right to bring an action in the superior
court.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 71-B:12

 **71-B:12 Appeal. –** Decisions of the board may be appealed by
either party only in accordance with the provisions of RSA 541 as from
time to time amended; provided, however, that there shall be only one
appeal allowed per person on each parcel of land until such time as a
reassessment has been made.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2. 1983, 363:1, eff. Aug. 18, 1983.

### Section 71-B:13

 **71-B:13 Enforcement of Decisions. –** After a decision of the
board becomes final, the board shall, at the request of any party, file
a certified abstract thereof in the Merrimack county superior court. The
clerk of said court shall forthwith enter judgment thereon and such
judgment may be enforced as with any final judgment of the superior
court. The provisions of this section shall be in addition to any other
methods provided by law for enforcement of the tax laws.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 71-B:14

 **71-B:14 Staff. –** The board shall have upon its staff 2 review
appraisers who shall be classified state employees and who shall be
competent to review the value of property for tax and eminent domain
purposes. In addition, the board shall have such clerical and technical
staff as may be necessary within the limits of appropriation made
therefor.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2. 2003, 63:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 71-B:15

 **71-B:15 Office. –** The board shall be provided with an office in
Concord in which its records, documents and books shall be kept, and
with a suitable room in which it may hold hearings.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 71-B:16

 **71-B:16 Order for Reassessment. –** The board may order a
reassessment of taxes previously assessed or a new assessment to be used
in the current year or in a subsequent tax year of any taxable property
in the state:
                                             
 I. When a specific written complaint is filed with it, by a property
owner, within 90 days of the date on which the last tax bill on the
original warrant is sent by the collector of taxes of the taxing
district, that a particular parcel of real estate or item of personal
property not owned by him has been fraudulently, improperly, unequally
or illegally assessed. The board shall consider only one complaint from
a property owner for each parcel of land until such time as a
reassessment has been made. The complainant shall pay a fee of 
                                             $65 for
each specific particular parcel or specific item of personal property
complained of. The board shall send notice by certified mail to the
taxpayer against whose property the complaint is made; or
                                             
 II. When it comes to the attention of the board from any source,
except as provided in paragraph I, that a particular parcel of real
estate or item of personal property has not been assessed, or that it
has been fraudulently, improperly, unequally, or illegally assessed; or
                                             
 III. When in the judgment of the board, determined in accordance
with RSA 71-B:16-a, any or all of the property in a taxing district
should be reassessed or newly assessed; or
                                             
 IV. When a complaint is filed with the board alleging that all of
the taxable real estate or taxable property in a taxing district should
be reassessed or newly assessed for any reason, provided that such
complaint must be signed by at least 50 property taxpayers or 1/3 of the
property taxpayers in the taxing district, whichever is less; or
                                             
 V. When the commissioner of revenue administration files a petition
with it pursuant to RSA 21-J:3, XXV.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2. 1979, 130:1. 1983, 363:2. 1991, 306:2. 1992,
85:1. 1999, 17:12, eff. April 29, 1999.

### Section 71-B:16-a

 **71-B:16-a Criteria for Ordering Reassessment. –** Prior to making
any determination to order a reassessment or a new assessment under RSA
71-B:16, III, the board shall give notice to the selectmen or assessors
of the taxing district and, if requested, hold a hearing on the matter
at which the selectmen or assessors shall have the opportunity to be
heard. The board shall not order any such reassessment or new assessment
unless it determines a need therefor utilizing the following criteria:
                                             
 I. The need for periodic reassessment to maintain current equity.
                                             
 II. The time elapsed since the last complete reassessment in the
taxing district.
                                             
 III. The ratio of sales prices to assessed valuation in the taxing
district and the dispersion thereof.
                                             
 IV. The quality of the taxing district's program for maintenance of
assessment equity.
                                             
 V. The taxing district's plans for reassessment.

**Source.** 1979, 130:3, eff. Aug. 4, 1979.

### Section 71-B:17

 **71-B:17 Procedure for. –** When ordered to make an assessment or
reassessment the selectmen or assessors shall make it within such time
as the board orders. If a town meeting or a city council prior to the
expiration of the time prescribed in the order votes to have a complete
appraisal or reappraisal made of all of the taxable property in the town
or city, under terms and conditions satisfactory to the board, then the
order of the board is suspended until such time as the appraisal or
reappraisal is completed. If the appraisal or reappraisal is
satisfactory to the board the order shall be removed. If the assessment
or reassessment is not made in conformity with the order, except as
above provided, or if it is not satisfactory to the board, the board may
certify the order to the commissioner of revenue administration who
shall cause the reappraisal to be made by his department or by
professional appraisers employed for the purpose. The commissioner of
revenue administration is authorized to incur the expense of the
appraisal and to certify the cost thereof to the governor who shall draw
his warrant on the state treasury out of any money not otherwise
appropriated authorizing payment of the sum so certified.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 71-B:18

 **71-B:18 Expense of. –** The expense of such assessment or
reassessment, if made by the commissioner of revenue administration or
by professional appraisers employed by him, shall be promptly paid to
the state by the town or city in which the property assessed is situated
upon notification by the commissioner of the amount due.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 71-B:19

 **71-B:19 Effect. –** Any such assessment or reassessment if
satisfactory to the board shall when completed be returned to the clerk
of the city or town, and shall be treated as an original assessment and
the selectmen or assessors shall assess the taxes on the property
accordingly. If it is advisable or necessary for the commissioner of
revenue administration to make such assessment or reassessment it shall
when completed be returned to the clerk of such city or town and shall
be treated as an original assessment and the selectmen or assessors
shall assess the taxes on the property accordingly. The tax collector
shall have the same power to enforce payment of the tax, interest and
penalties as though such assessment or reassessment were imposed on
April 1. The lien provided in RSA 80:19 shall take effect on that
portion of the property supplementally assessed for a period of 18
months following the actual time of the supplemental assessment.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 71-B:20

 **71-B:20 Legal Counsel. –** Whenever an assessment or reassessment
made upon order of the board results in a petition being brought in the
superior court or before the board by a taxpayer against a city or town
for abatement of the tax so assessed the attorney general in his
discretion, upon request of the commissioner, may represent the town or
city involved at no cost or expense to the town or city. All costs and
expenses of said proceeding, for which the town or city would otherwise
be liable, excepting the salaries of the attorney general or his staff
member engaged therein, shall be a proper charge against the
appropriation for the department of revenue administration. Nothing
herein shall be construed as authorizing the attorney general to appear
for a town or city in any actions which may be brought against said town
or city in tax abatement proceedings other than as specifically
authorized hereunder.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 71-B:21

 **71-B:21 Neglect to Comply With Board's Orders. –** Neglect or
failure on the part of any selectman or assessor to comply with such
orders shall be deemed wilful neglect of duty, and he shall be subject
to the penalties provided by law in such cases.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 71-B:22

 **71-B:22 Appeal From. –** Any person aggrieved because of such
reassessment, whether made by the selectmen or by or upon order of the
board, shall have the same rights to apply for an abatement as are
conferred by RSA 76:16-a and RSA 76:17.

**Source.** 1973, 544:2. 1982, 42:76. 1983, 345:2, eff. Aug. 17, 1983.
