---
title: 'CHAPTER 77-B COMMUTERS INCOME TAX'
---

TITLE V
                                             
TAXATION
========

CHAPTER 77-B
                                             
COMMUTERS INCOME TAX
--------------------

### Section 77-B:1

 **77-B:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter the following
terms shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly
requires otherwise:
                                             
 I. "Adjusted gross income'' shall mean, for any taxable year, the
adjusted gross income as defined in the United States Internal Revenue
Code in effect for that taxable year but excluding income which under
the code is exempted from taxation by the state.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' shall mean the commissioner of revenue
administration.
                                             
 III. "Estimated tax'' shall mean the amount which the individual
estimates as the amount of the income tax imposed by this chapter for
the taxable year, minus the amount which the individual estimates as the
sum of any credits against such tax.
                                             
 IV. "Taxpayer'' shall mean any person subject to the provisions of
this chapter.
                                             
 V. "Individual'' shall mean a natural person.
                                             
 VI. "New Hampshire taxable income'' shall mean, for any taxable
year, taxable income as defined under the United States Internal Revenue
Code in effect for that taxable year less any New Hampshire derived
income, less an exemption of 
                                             $2,000 and less any taxable business
profits taxed pursuant to the business profits tax.
                                             
 VII. "Person'' shall mean any individual.
                                             
 VIII. "Taxable year'' shall mean the calendar or fiscal year, or
portion thereof, upon the basis of which the New Hampshire tax is
computed.
                                             
 IX. "Taxable nonresident'' shall mean any nonresident of the state
whose adjusted gross income that taxable year includes any amount of New
Hampshire derived income.
                                             
 X. "New Hampshire derived income'' shall mean, for any taxable
year:
                                             
 (a) Rents, royalties and gain derived from the ownership of
property within the state;
                                             
 (b) Wages, salaries, fees, commissions or other income received
with respect to personal services performed of whatever kind and in
whatever form paid derived from activities (1) performed within this
state, or (2) performed from a base of operations within this state and
not subject to an income tax within the state where the services are
performed;
                                             
 (c) Income derived from every business, trade, occupation or
profession of the taxpayer to the extent that the business, trade,
occupation or profession is carried on within the state. But New
Hampshire derived income shall not include any income excluded from
adjusted gross income as defined in this section nor any taxable
business profits taxed pursuant to the business profits tax.
                                             
 XI. "Resident'' shall mean:
                                             
 (a) An individual domiciled in the state except one who maintains
a permanent place of abode outside the state, does not maintain one
within the state and does not spend more than 30 days of the taxable
year within the state; or
                                             
 (b) An individual who maintains a permanent place of abode within
the state and spends more than 183 days of the taxable year within the
state.
                                             
 XII. For the purposes of this chapter, interest, dividends and
capital gains received by the taxpayer from the ownership or sale of
stock or from a beneficial interest in a trust and all income received
by the taxpayer from a retirement system of any kind or from an annuity
or other insurance plan shall be deemed to have been earned in the state
of residence of said taxpayer.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1; 57:8. 1973, 544:11, X, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77-B:2

 **77-B:2 Tax Imposed. –**
                                             
 I. On Residents, Income Earned Outside New Hampshire. A tax is
hereby imposed upon every resident of the state, which shall be levied,
collected and paid annually at the rate of 4 percent of their income
which is derived outside the state of New Hampshire as defined in RSA
77-B:1 "New Hampshire taxable income;'' provided, however, that if such
income shall be subject to a tax in the state in which it is derived,
such tax shall constitute full satisfaction of the tax hereby imposed;
and provided further, that if such income is exempt from taxation
because of statutory or constitutional provisions in the state in which
it is derived, or because the state in which it is derived does not
impose an income tax on such income, it shall be exempt from taxation
under this paragraph.
                                             
 II. On Nonresidents, Income Earned in New Hampshire. A tax is hereby
imposed upon every taxable nonresident, which shall be levied, collected
and paid annually at the rate of 4 percent of their New Hampshire
derived income as defined in RSA 77-B:1 less an exemption of 
                                             $2,000;
provided, however, that if the tax hereby imposed exceeds the tax which
would be imposed upon such income by the state of residence of the
taxpayer, if such income were earned in such state, the tax hereby
imposed shall be reduced to equal the tax which would be imposed by such
other state.
                                             
 III. Exception. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs I and
II, no tax shall be imposed upon salaries paid to men or women in the
armed forces of the United States.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1, eff. July 1, 1970.

### Section 77-B:3

 **77-B:3 When Taxed. –** The tax imposed by RSA 77-B:2 shall be
levied, collected, and paid by the fifteenth of the fourth month
following the close of the taxable year.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1, eff. July 1, 1970.

### Section 77-B:4

 **77-B:4 Administration. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 128:34, eff. May 11,
1981.
                                             ]

### Section 77-B:5

 **77-B:5 Credit for Taxes Withheld. –** Income upon which any tax is
required to be withheld at its source under RSA 77-B:10-16 shall be
included in the return of the recipient of such income, but any amount
of tax so withheld shall be credited against the amount of income tax as
computed in such return.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1, eff. July 1, 1970.

### Section 77-B:6

 **77-B:6 Reciprocal Provisions. –** The commissioner of revenue
administration is authorized to enter with any other state or country a
reciprocal agreement in which such other state or country agrees not to
impose a personal income tax upon income received by residents of this
state and this state agrees not to impose a personal income tax upon
income received by residents of such other state or country; provided,
however, that such reciprocal agreement shall not become effective until
the beginning of the next fiscal biennium after the date of such
agreement.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1. 1973, 544:9, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

Returns
-------

### Section 77-B:7

 **77-B:7 Returns and Refunds of Individuals. –**
                                             
 I. A taxpayer shall file a return of his net income for such a
period and on such accounting basis as is authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code. For each taxable year, returns shall be made to the
commissioner of revenue administration in such form and manner and to
such extent as he shall prescribe by regulations, by the following
taxpayers:
                                             
 (a) A resident having for such taxable year any New Hampshire
taxable income as defined in RSA 77-B:1; provided, however, that if it
shall appear to the satisfaction of the commissioner of revenue
administration that any residents of this state, or class of residents
of this state, who are subject to the tax imposed by this chapter, are
liable for tax upon the same income under the law imposed for the
taxable year by another state and are thereby entitled to a credit
allowed by RSA 77-B:5 against the tax otherwise due under this chapter,
the commissioner of revenue administration shall by regulation relieve
such residents or class of residents from being required to make any
return under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) A nonresident having for such taxable year New Hampshire
derived income of 
                                             $2,000 or more.
                                             
 II. A husband and wife may make a single joint return to the
commissioner of revenue administration for a taxable year for which such
a return is filed under the laws of the United States. If the taxpayer
is unable to make his own return, the return shall be made by a duly
authorized agent or by the guardian or other person charged with the
care of the person or property of such taxpayer.
                                             
 III. Whenever a taxpayer shall file a return which shows that his
withholding tax or estimated tax exceeds the amount of tax liability due
under this chapter, he shall be due a refund and the commissioner of
revenue administration shall forthwith certify the amount of said refund
to the state treasurer who shall pay the same to the taxpayer; provided,
however, that at the option of the taxpayer, said refund may be credited
against any tax due from said taxpayer for the succeeding calendar
year.
                                             
 IV. Any refund or credit due a taxpayer pursuant to paragraph III
for which said refund or credit is not requested within 5 years shall be
deemed the property of the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1; 57:10. 1973, 544:9, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77-B:8

 **77-B:8 Information Returns. –** Each individual, partnership,
corporation, joint stock company or association or insurance company,
being a resident or having a place of business in this state, in
whatever capacity acting, including lessees or mortgagors of personal
property, fiduciaries, employers and all officers and employees of the
state or of any political subdivision of the state, having the control,
receipt, custody, disposal or payment of salaries, wages, rentals, or
other compensation or income subject to the provisions of this chapter
paid or payable during any year to any individual subject to a tax under
this chapter shall on such date or dates as the commissioner of revenue
administration shall from time to time designate, make complete return
thereof to the commissioner of revenue administration.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1. 1973, 544:9, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77-B:9

 **77-B:9 Form and Verification of Returns. –** Returns shall be in
such form as the commissioner of revenue administration may from time to
time prescribe and shall be filed at any office which may be established
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the close
of the taxable year. In case of sickness, absence or other disability,
or whenever good cause exists, the commissioner of revenue
administration may allow further time for filing returns. Returns shall
be verified by written declarations that the statements therein are made
subject to the pains and penalties of perjury. When a return is made for
a corporation or partnership, the person signing such return shall be
deemed to be the person subject to the pains and penalties of perjury.
The commissioner of revenue administration shall cause to be prepared
blank forms for the returns and shall cause them to be distributed
throughout the state and to be furnished upon application, but failure
to receive or secure the form shall not relieve a taxpayer from the
obligation of making the return herein required.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1. 1973, 544:9, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

Withholding of Tax
------------------

### Section 77-B:10

 **77-B:10 Who Must Withhold. –** Every employer, as defined under
the laws of the United States in effect April 26, 1947, with respect to
income tax collected at its source, employing any person liable for a
tax pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall deduct and withhold
upon wages paid to said employee, a tax equal to 4 percent of such wages
subject to the provisions of RSA 77-B:13.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1; 57:11, eff. May 4, 1970.

### Section 77-B:11

 **77-B:11 Return of Withheld Taxes. –** Every employer required to
deduct and withhold any tax under RSA 77-B:10 shall make return thereof
to the commissioner of revenue administration on or before February 15
in each year and shall pay quarterly the tax withheld to the
commissioner of revenue administration, provided, however, that the
commissioner of revenue administration may, if such action is necessary
in any emergency where collection of the tax may be in jeopardy, require
such employer to make such return and pay such tax at any time, or from
time to time.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1. 1973, 544:9, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77-B:12

 **77-B:12 Employer's Liability. –** Every employer required to
deduct and withhold a tax under RSA 77-B:10 is hereby made liable for
such tax and is hereby indemnified against the claims and demands of any
individual, corporation or partnership for the amount of any payments
made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1, eff. July 1, 1970.

### Section 77-B:13

 **77-B:13 Use of Withholding Tables. –** At the election of the
employer with respect to such employee, the employer may deduct and
withhold upon the wages paid to such employee a tax determined on the
basis of tables to be prepared and furnished by the commissioner of
revenue administration, which tax shall be substantially equivalent to
the tax provided in RSA 77-B:10 and which shall be in lieu of the tax
required in such section.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1. 1973, 544:9, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77-B:14

 **77-B:14 Amount of Withheld Taxes as Lien Against Employer. –** If
any employer required to deduct and withhold a tax under RSA 77-B:10
neglects or refuses to pay the same after demand, the amount, including
interest after such demand, together with any costs that may accrue in
addition thereto, shall be a lien in favor of the state of New Hampshire
upon all property and rights to property, whether real or personal,
belonging to such employer. Such lien shall arise at the time the
assessment and demand is made by the commissioner of revenue
administration and shall continue until the liability for such sum, with
interest and costs, is satisfied or becomes unenforceable. Such lien
shall be valid as against any subsequent mortgagee, pledgee, purchaser
or judgment creditor when notice of such lien and the sum due has been
filed by the commissioner of revenue administration with the clerk of
the town or city in which the property subject to the lien is situated,
or, in the case of an unorganized town or grant, in the office of the
register of deeds for the county wherein such property is situated. In
the case of any prior mortgage on real or personal property so written
as to secure a present debt and also future advances by the mortgagee to
the mortgagor, the lien herein provided, when notice thereof has been
filed in the proper clerk's office, shall be subject to such prior
mortgage unless the commissioner of revenue administration also notifies
the mortgagee of the recording of such lien in writing, in which case
any indebtedness thereafter created from mortgagor to mortgagee shall be
junior to the lien herein provided for.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1. 1973, 544:9, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77-B:15

 **77-B:15 Release of Lien. –** The commissioner of revenue
administration shall issue and record a certificate of release of the
lien if:
                                             
 I. The commissioner of revenue administration finds that the
liability for the amount assessed and demanded, together with interest
and costs, has been satisfied or has become unenforceable; or
                                             
 II. There is furnished to the commissioner of revenue administration
a bond with surety approved by the commissioner of revenue
administration in a penal sum sufficient to equal the sum assessed and
demanded, together with interest and costs, said bond to be conditioned
upon the payment of any judgment rendered in proceedings regularly
instituted by the commissioner of revenue administration to enforce
collection thereof at law.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1. 1973, 544:9, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77-B:16

 **77-B:16 Foreclosure of Lien. –** The lien provided for by RSA
77-B:14 may be foreclosed in the case of real estate agreeably with the
provisions of law relating to foreclosure of mortgages on real estate,
and in the case of personal property, agreeably with the provisions of
law relating to the foreclosure of chattel mortgages.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1, eff. July 1, 1970.

Estimated Tax Declarations
--------------------------

### Section 77-B:17

 **77-B:17 Who Must File. –**
                                             
 I. Individuals liable for the tax assessed under this chapter shall
annually on the fifteenth of the fourth month following the close of the
taxable year furnish the commissioner of revenue administration with an
estimate of income subject to taxation under this chapter for the
current taxable year from which no New Hampshire withholding tax is
expected to be made if such income can reasonably be expected to exceed

                                             $10,000.
                                             
 II. The filing of estimates shall not be applicable to persons
receiving their income from farming as defined under the United States
Code.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1. 1973, 544:9, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77-B:18

 **77-B:18 Payment of Estimated Tax. –** Each taxpayer required to
file an estimated tax declaration shall include with his declaration of
estimated income payment of not less than 1/4 of the tax due thereon.
Thereafter, on the fifteenth days of the sixth and ninth months
following the close of the taxable year the taxpayer shall pay not less
than 1/4 of the tax due upon said estimated income or any revised
estimate thereof.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1, eff. July 1, 1970.

### Section 77-B:19

 **77-B:19 Payment of Fourth Installment--General Rule. –** Annually
on the fifteenth day following the close of the taxable year for which
the estimate of income was made, the taxpayer, whose income can
reasonably be expected to exceed his estimated income by 30 percent or
more shall file an amended declaration of estimated income on or before
such date and make payment in full of the balance of tax due thereon, or
in lieu thereof may file a return for the taxable year for which the
estimate was made and pay the tax in full as computed on the return on
or before the last day of the first month following the close of said
taxable year. Otherwise, the final quarterly payment may be made with
the taxpayer's return on the fifteenth day of the fourth month following
the close of the taxable year for which the taxes were due.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1, eff. July 1, 1970.

### Section 77-B:20

 **77-B:20 Exceptions. –** This requirement to amend or file a return
shall not apply, however, if the taxpayer files a declaration of
estimated income and makes payment of the tax due thereon as provided in
this chapter, based upon:
                                             
 I. The tax shown on the return by the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, if a return showing a liability for tax was filed by the
taxpayer for the preceding taxable year and such preceding year was a
taxable year of 12 months, or
                                             
 II. An amount equal to the tax computed at the rates applicable to
the taxable year, on the basis of the taxpayer's status for the taxable
year, but otherwise on the basis of the facts shown on his return for,
and the law applicable to, the preceding taxable year.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1, eff. July 1, 1970.

### Section 77-B:21

 **77-B:21 Adjustments; Procedure. –** The commissioner of revenue
administration is empowered to determine whether there has been error in
the assessment of the tax imposed by this chapter, in accordance with
the following provisions:
                                             
 I. The taxpayer may demand such a determination, in writing, within
3 years after the tax was due or paid, whichever is later.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of revenue administration may, on his own
motion, undertake such a determination upon written notice to the
taxpayer given within 3 years after the tax was due or paid, whichever
is later.
                                             
 III. After hearing, if requested by the taxpayer, the commissioner
of revenue administration shall affirm or shall increase or decrease the
tax theretofore assessed. Any increase ordered by the commissioner of
revenue administration shall be assessed against the taxpayer and shall
carry 10 percent interest from the date originally due. Any decrease
ordered by the commissioner of revenue administration shall, with 10
percent interest from the date the tax was paid, be credited against any
unpaid tax then due from the taxpayer and any balance due the taxpayer
shall be certified to the state treasurer who shall pay the balance to
the taxpayer, but such credit and payment together may not exceed the
amount of the tax originally paid, plus interest.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1. 1973, 544:9, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77-B:22

 **77-B:22 Appeal. –** Within 30 days after notice of any adjustment
of a tax by the commissioner under RSA 77-B:21, a taxpayer may appeal
the commissioner's determination either by written application to the
board of tax and land appeals or by petition to the superior court in
the county in which the taxpayer resides or, if not a resident, in the
county in which he has a place of business or resident agent. The board
of tax and land appeals or the superior court, as the case may be, shall
determine de novo the correctness of the commissioner's action.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1. 1973, 544:14, IV. 1983, 394:6, eff. Aug. 21,
1983.

Miscellaneous Provisions
------------------------

### Section 77-B:23

 **77-B:23 Penalty. –** Whoever violates any of the provisions of RSA
77-B shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of
a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1. 1973, 528:23, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 77-B:24

 **77-B:24 Disposal of Revenue. –** The revenue received from this
tax, after paying the expense of administrating this chapter shall be
paid into the general fund.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1, eff. July 1, 1970.

### Section 77-B:25

 **77-B:25 Investigation, Etc. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of revenue administration may take the oath of
any person in the course of any hearing authorized by this chapter. In
connection with hearings, the commissioner of revenue administration and
taxpayer have the power to compel attendance of witnesses and the
production of books, records, papers, vouchers, accounts or other
documents. The commissioner of revenue administration and taxpayer may
take the depositions of witnesses residing within or without the state
pertaining to a matter under this chapter, in the same way as
depositions of witnesses are taken in civil actions in the superior
court. Fees of witnesses are the same as those allowed to witnesses in
the superior court and in the case of witnesses summoned by the
commissioner of revenue administration shall be considered as an expense
of administration of this chapter.
                                             
 II. Any notice required by this chapter to be given by the
commissioner of revenue administration to a taxpayer shall be made by
certified mail to the last known address of the taxpayer and in the case
of hearings shall be given at least 10 days before the date thereof.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1; 57:9. 1973, 544:9, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77-B:26

 **77-B:26 Confidentiality of Department of Revenue Administration
Records. –** Notwithstanding any other provision of law and except as
hereinafter provided, the records and files of the department of revenue
administration respecting the administration of this chapter are
confidential and privileged. The department of revenue administration
and any employee engaged in the administration of this chapter or
charged with the custody of any such records or files, shall not
disclose any information obtained from the department's records or files
or from any examination, investigation or hearing authorized by this
chapter. Neither the department of revenue administration nor any
employee of the department of revenue administration may be required to
produce any of the records, files and information for the inspection of
any person or for use in any action or proceedings. The following
exceptions apply to this section:
                                             
 I. Testimony by a member or employee of the department of revenue
administration and production of records, files and information in
behalf of the department of revenue administration or a taxpayer in any
action or proceeding under the provisions of this chapter where such
testimony or the records or files or information, or the facts shown
thereby are directly involved in the action or proceeding;
                                             
 II. Delivery to a taxpayer or his duly authorized representative of
a copy of any return or other paper filed by the taxpayer pursuant to
this chapter;
                                             
 III. Publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the
identification of a particular return and the items of the return;
                                             
 IV. Exchange of information with the United States internal revenue
service in accordance with compacts made and provided for such cases;
                                             
 V. Disclosure in confidence to the governor and council or their
agent in the exercise of their general supervisory powers, or to any
person authorized to audit the accounts of the department of revenue
administration in pursuance of such audit, or the attorney general or
other legal representative of the state in connection with an action or
proceeding under this chapter.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1. 1973, 544:10, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77-B:27

 **77-B:27 Preference. –** The taxes and interest imposed by this
chapter have preference in any distribution of the assets of the
taxpayer, whether in insolvency or otherwise.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1, eff. July 1, 1970.

### Section 77-B:28

 **77-B:28 Dissolution of Corporations. –** No corporation organized
under any law of this state may be dissolved until all taxes and
interest required to be withheld by said corporation under this chapter
have been fully paid. The secretary of state shall not issue a
certificate of dissolution, and no decree of dissolution shall be signed
in any court without a certificate from the commission that no taxes and
interest imposed by this chapter are due and unpaid.

**Source.** 1970, 20:1, eff. July 1, 1970.
