---
title: 'CHAPTER 77-E BUSINESS ENTERPRISE TAX'
---

TITLE V
                                             
TAXATION
========

CHAPTER 77-E
                                             
BUSINESS ENTERPRISE TAX
-----------------------

### Section 77-E:1

 **77-E:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Accumulated revenues and profits'' means:
                                             
 (a) In the case of a corporation, other than a subchapter S
corporation, the amount determined to be earnings and profits for
federal income tax purposes; or
                                             
 (b) In the case of all other business enterprises, including
subchapter S corporations, the total undistributed revenues of the
enterprise from whatever source derived, except that no distribution of
capital, whether in liquidation or otherwise, shall be included in the
enterprise value tax base.
                                             
 II. "Business activity'' means a transfer of legal or equitable
title to or rental of property, whether real, personal or mixed,
tangible or intangible, or the performance of services, or a combination
thereof, made or engaged in, or caused to be made or engaged in, whether
in intrastate, interstate, or foreign commerce, with the object of gain,
benefit, income, revenue or advantage, whether direct or indirect, to
the business enterprise or to others, but shall not include the services
rendered by an employee to an employer or services as a director of a
corporation. Although an activity of an enterprise may be incidental to
another of its business activities, each activity shall be considered to
be business engaged in or carried on within the meaning of this chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this paragraph, a holder of an
ownership interest in a qualified investment company as defined in RSA
77-E:1, XIV, shall not be deemed to be carrying on any business activity
within this state due solely to its holding an ownership interest in
such qualified investment company.
                                             
 III. "Business enterprise'' means any profit or nonprofit enterprise
or organization, whether corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, proprietorship, association, trust, business trust, real estate
trust or other form of organization engaged in or carrying on any
business activity within this state, except such enterprises as are
expressly made exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of
the United States Internal Revenue Code to the extent such enterprise
does not engage in any business activity constituting unrelated business
activity as defined by section 513 of the United States Internal Revenue
Code. Each business enterprise under this definition shall be subject to
the tax imposed under RSA 77-E as a separate entity except that trusts
treated as grantor trusts under section 671 of the United States
Internal Revenue Code shall be included in the return of their owners,
and such owners shall be subject to the tax thereon to the extent any
such owners would be considered a business enterprise hereunder
notwithstanding the existence of the trust. The use of consolidated
returns as defined in the United States Internal Revenue Code or of
combined reporting is not permitted. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this paragraph, an enterprise shall not be characterized as a
business enterprise and shall be excluded from taxation at the entity
level if it is a qualified investment company as defined in RSA 77-E:1,
XIV.
                                             
 IV. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of revenue
administration.
                                             
 V. For taxable periods beginning on or after January 1, 2013,
"compensation'' means:
                                             
 (a) All wages, salaries, fees, bonuses, commissions, or other
payments paid directly or accrued by the business enterprise in the
taxable period on behalf of or for the benefit of employees, officers,
or directors of the business enterprise and subject to or specifically
exempt from withholding under section 3401 of the United States Internal
Revenue Code except such payments as are made expressly exempt from
withholding under sections 3401(a)(1), (9), (10), (13), (14), (15),
(16), (18), (19), and (20); and except any tips required to be reported
by the employee to the employer under section 6053(a) of the United
States Internal Revenue Code; and
                                             
 (b) The amount of any deduction taken under RSA 77-A:4, III in
the taxable period; and
                                             
 (c) Any net earnings from self-employment subject to tax under
section 1401 of the United States Internal Revenue Code to the extent
not included in the amount of any deduction taken under RSA 77-A:4, III
in the taxable period.
                                             
 VI. "Dividends'' means any distribution of money or property, other
than the distribution of newly issued stock of the same enterprise, to
the owners of a business enterprise with respect to their ownership
interest in such enterprise from the accumulated revenues and profits of
the enterprise. The term "dividends'' shall not include:
                                             
 (a) Distributions of money or property to beneficiaries of a
trust qualified under section 401 of the United States Internal Revenue
Code;
                                             
 (b) Cash or non-cash payments of life, sickness, accident, or
other benefits to members or their dependents or designated
beneficiaries from a voluntary employee's beneficiary association
qualified under section 501(c)(9) of the United States Internal Revenue
Code;
                                             
 (c) Distributions of money or property to participants from any
common trust fund as defined under section 584 of the United States
Internal Revenue Code;
                                             
 (d) Policyholder dividends as defined under section 808 of the
United States Internal Revenue Code, to the extent such dividends are
not reduced pursuant to section 809 of the United States Internal
Revenue Code;
                                             
 (e) Payment of interest on deposits of depositors of a mutual
bank or credit union; or
                                             
 (f) Distributions of money or property to or on behalf of
beneficiaries of a trust which is either subject to taxation under
section 641 or described in section 664 of the United States Internal
Revenue Code, provided that, this subparagraph shall apply only to the
extent that such trust limits its activities to personal investment
activities which do not constitute business activities, and those
incidental to or in support of such personal investment activities.
                                             
 VII. "Employee'' means an employee as defined in section 3401(c) of
the United States Internal Revenue Code. Any person from whom an
employer is required to withhold for federal income tax purposes shall
prima facie be deemed an employee.
                                             
 VIII. "Employer'' means an employer as defined in section 3401(d) of
the United States Internal Revenue Code. Any person required to withhold
for federal income tax purposes shall prima facie be deemed an
employer.
                                             
 IX. "Enterprise value tax base'' means the sum of all compensation
paid or accrued, interest paid or accrued, and dividends paid by the
business enterprise, before special adjustments provided in RSA 77-E:3
or apportionment as provided in RSA 77-E:4.
                                             
 X. "Gross business receipts'' means all income for federal income
tax purposes from whatever source derived in the conduct of business
activity, including but not limited to gross proceeds from sales,
compensation for rendering services, gross proceeds realized from
trading in stocks, bonds, or other evidences of indebtedness, gross
proceeds realized from sale of assets used in trade or business,
interest, discount, gross rents, royalties, fees, commissions,
dividends, without any deduction on account of the cost of property
sold, the cost of materials used, labor costs, interest, discount,
delivery costs, taxes, or any other expense paid or accrued and without
any deduction on account of losses. In the case of non-profit
enterprises not required to pay income taxes, the sum of all revenues
derived in the conduct of business activity, including but not limited
to the items included in the preceding sentence. Any receipts that would
otherwise be considered "gross business receipts'' received by an
enterprise that constitutes a qualified trust under section 401, or is
defined in section 501(c)(9), or section 584, of the United States
Internal Revenue Code shall not be included in gross business receipts
for purposes of this chapter.
                                             
 XI. "Interest'' means all amounts paid or accrued for the use or
forbearance of money or property. The term "interest'' shall not include
amounts paid, credited or set aside in connection with reserves by
insurers to fulfill policy and contractual responsibilities to policy
holders or by voluntary employees' beneficiary associations qualified
under section 501(c)(9) of the United States Internal Revenue Code to
fulfill obligations to members.
                                             
 XII. "Prescribed filing date'' means the original statutory due
date, or approved extended due date.
                                             
 XIII. "Prescribed payment date'' means the original statutory due
date.
                                             
 XIV. (a) "Qualified investment company'' means:
                                             
 (1) A regulated investment company as defined in section 851
of the United States Internal Revenue Code as defined in RSA 77-E:1,
XVII;
                                             
 (2) An organization that is an investment company under the
Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended;
                                             
 (3) An organization that would be an investment company under
the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, but for the exception
from investment company status provided by section 3(c)(1) or 3(c)(7) of
said Investment Company Act; or
                                             
 (4) A qualified community development entity as defined in
section 45D of the United States Internal Revenue Code, which entity is
owned, controlled, or managed, directly or indirectly, by the business
finance authority of the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (b) A qualified investment company shall limit its activities to
investment or other activities consistent with its organizational
purpose and those incidental to or in support of such activities
provided that any such exception from investment company status by
reason of section 3(c)(7) is available only to issuers whose securities
are owned by persons or organizations who are deemed under section
3(c)(7) or any order, regulation or interpretation thereunder not to
require protection under the provisions of the Investment Company Act by
reason of their size, nature, status, or sophistication. A business
organization seeking qualified investment company status shall file an
election pursuant to RSA 77-A:5-b.
                                             
 XV. "Taxable enterprise value tax base'' means the enterprise value
tax base adjusted by the special adjustments provided in RSA 77-E:3 and
then adjusted by the method of apportionment provided in RSA 77-E:4.
                                             
 XVI. "Taxable period'' means the calendar or fiscal year, or
fractional part of a year, which the business enterprise uses for
federal income tax purposes. If the business enterprise is not required
to make and file a return for federal income tax purposes, taxable
period means the calendar or fiscal year, or fractional part of a year,
the enterprise has adopted for financial purposes.
                                             
 XVII. "United States Internal Revenue Code'' means the United States
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, without the rules,
regulations, forms, and procedures of the United States Internal Revenue
Service. The rules, regulations, forms and procedures of the United
States Internal Revenue Service may, however, be used by the
commissioner of revenue administration in formulating rules for adoption
under RSA 541-A. This definition shall be operative unless and until a
specific statutory exception to its adoption is provided in this
chapter, or until the application of one of its provisions is held to
violate the New Hampshire constitution.

**Source.** 1993, 350:19; 358:109. 1996, 154:2. 1998, 163:7. 2004,
143:6. 2011, 181:3, eff. June 14, 2011. 2013, 144:124, eff. June 28,
2013.

### Section 77-E:2

 **77-E:2 Imposition of Tax. –**
                                             
 I. For all taxable periods ending before December 31, 2016, A tax is
imposed at the rate of 3/4 of one percent upon the taxable enterprise
value tax base of every business enterprise.
                                             
 II. For all taxable periods ending on or after December 31, 2016, a
tax is imposed at the rate of .72 percent upon the taxable enterprise
value tax base of every business enterprise.
                                             
 III. For all taxable periods ending on or after December 31, 2018, a
tax is imposed at the rate of .675 percent upon the enterprise value tax
base of every business enterprise.
                                             
 IV. By December 31, 2017, the legislative budget assistant shall
report the amount of combined unrestricted general and education trust
fund revenue collected for the biennium ending June 30, 2017, as
reported in the schedule of undesignated/unassigned fund balance for the
general fund and education fund as contained in the audited
comprehensive annual report performed pursuant to RSA 21-I:8, II(a), to
the secretary of state with copies to the governor, speaker of the house
of representatives, the senate president, the fiscal committee of the
general court, the director of the office of legislative services, and
the commissioner of the department of revenue administration. If the
amount of combined unrestricted general and education trust fund revenue
collected for the biennium ending June 30, 2017 is less than

                                             $4,640,000,000, the tax shall continue to be imposed at the rate in
paragraph II.

**Source.** 1993, 350:19. 1999, 17:21; 303:1. 2001, 158:21, eff. July 1,
2001. 2015, 274:24, eff. Jan. 1, 2016.

### Section 77-E:3

 **77-E:3 Special Adjustments. –** The following adjustments shall be
made to the enterprise value tax base in determining taxable enterprise
value tax base:
                                             
 I. In the case of a business enterprise, the enterprise value tax
base of which includes compensation derived from self-employment income
subject to tax under section 1401 of the United States Internal Revenue
Code, a deduction of such amounts of compensation as are retained for
use in the business enterprise, except that no amount of compensation
deducted under RSA 77-A:4, III shall be included in this deduction. The
burden shall be upon the business enterprise to show that any amounts
deducted have actually been retained for use in the business
enterprise.
                                             
 II. In the case of a business enterprise which is a corporation, a
deduction of an amount equal to dividends received from another
corporation which have previously been included in the payor
corporation's taxable enterprise value tax base subject to taxation
under this chapter and which payor corporation is, at the close of the
day on which such dividend is received, a member of the same affiliated
group as the corporation receiving the dividend. For purposes of this
section, the term "affiliated group'' shall have the meaning given such
terms by section 1504(a) of the United States Internal Revenue Code,
except that for such purposes sections 1504(b)(2), 1504(b)(4), and
1504(c) thereof shall not apply.
                                             
 III. In the case of a business enterprise which is not a
corporation, a deduction of an amount equal to dividend distributions
received from another business enterprise which have previously been
included in the payor business enterprise's taxable enterprise value tax
base subject to taxation under this chapter and which payor business
enterprise is, at the close of the day on which such dividend is
received, a member of the same affiliated group as the business
enterprise receiving the dividend distribution. For purposes of this
section, the term "affiliated group'' shall be determined by rules
adopted by the commissioner similar to those applicable to corporations
in paragraph II.

**Source.** 1993, 350:19, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 77-E:3-a


                                             


                                             [RSA 77-E:3-a repealed by 2007, 263:123, III, effective July 1, 2020.
                                             ]

 **77-E:3-a Credit. –**
                                             
 The economic revitalization zone tax credit, as computed in RSA
162-N:6, shall be allowed against the tax due under this chapter.

**Source.** 2003, 301:4. 2007, 263:122, eff. July 1, 2007; 263:123, III,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 77-E:3-b

 **77-E:3-b Credit for Research and Development. –** The unused
portion of any research and development credit awarded by the
commissioner under RSA 77-A:5, XIII shall be available to apply to the
business enterprise tax.

**Source.** 2007, 271:2, eff. July 1, 2007; 271:6, II, eff. July 1,
2015.

### Section 77-E:3-c

 **77-E:3-c Coos County Job Creation Tax Credit. –**
                                             
 I. (a) There shall be a tax credit allowed for each qualified tax
credit employee, for up to 5 consecutive tax periods, as certified by
the commissioner of resources and economic development under RSA
162-Q:1. The amount of the tax credit shall be as follows:
                                             
 (1) 
                                             $750 for each qualified tax credit employee earning wages
which are equal to or greater than 150 percent but less than 200 percent
of the current state minimum wage.
                                             
 (2) 
                                             $1000 for each qualified tax credit employee earning
wages which are equal to or greater than 200 percent of the current
state minimum wage.
                                             
 (b) If the position held by a qualified tax credit employee
ceases to exist at any time during the 5 consecutive tax periods, the
employer may not claim the credit for the tax period in which the
position ceased to exist or for future tax periods within the 5
consecutive tax periods.
                                             
 II. The initial job creation tax credit allowed under this paragraph
shall not apply to any tax period ending prior to the effective date of
this section, or to any tax period ending after December 31, 2018. After
being initially granted, the tax credit shall be renewable for 4
consecutive additional years, provided that no additional tax credit
shall be granted under this chapter for any tax period after December
31, 2022.
                                             
 III. Unused portions of this credit shall be carried forward up to 5
years. Unused, carried forward credit under this section shall be
applied before any other available carry-forward credit.
                                             
 IV. For the purpose of the credit allowed under this section, the
Coos county job creation tax credit shall be considered taxes paid under
RSA 77-E.

**Source.** 2008, 172:3, eff. June 9, 2008. 2013, 73:1, eff. July 1,
2013.

### Section 77-E:3-d

 **77-E:3-d Education Tax Credit. –** The education tax credit as
computed in RSA 77-G:4 shall be allowed against the tax due under this
chapter.

**Source.** 2012, 287:3, eff. June 27, 2012.

### Section 77-E:4

 **77-E:4 Apportionment. –**
                                             
 I. A business entity, the business activities of which are taxable
both within and without this state and which is subject to a business
privilege tax, a net income tax, a franchise tax measured by net income,
a capital stock tax, or a tax of the type imposed by this chapter or is
subject to the jurisdiction of another state to impose a business
privilege tax, a net income tax, a franchise tax measured by net income,
a capital stock tax, or a tax of the type imposed by this chapter shall
apportion its enterprise value tax base so as to allocate to this state
a fair and equitable proportion of such base. Except as provided in this
section, such apportionment shall be made in the following manner:
                                             
 (a) The portion of the base from compensation shall:
                                             
 (1) Include the amount of any deduction taken pursuant to RSA
77-A:4, III, the amount relating to self-employment income and the
amount relating to wages and salaries subject to or specifically exempt
from withholding under section 3401 of the United States Internal
Revenue Code except such payments as are made expressly exempt from
withholding under sections 3401(a)(1), (9), (10), (13), (14), (15),
(16), (18), (19), and (20); and
                                             
 (2) Be apportioned to this state as a percentage of total
compensation paid by the business enterprise to employees everywhere as
is paid by the business enterprise to employees for services rendered
within this state. Such compensation is deemed to be disbursed for
services in this state if the service is performed entirely within this
state, or if the service is performed both within and without this state
and the service performed without this state is incidental to the
service within this state, or some of the service is performed in this
state and (A) the base of operations or, if there is no base of
operations, the place from which the service is directed or controlled
is in this state, or (B) the base of operations or the place from which
the service is directed or controlled is not in any state in which some
part of the service is performed, but the individual performing such
service resides within this state.
                                             
 (b) The portion of the base from interest shall be apportioned by
multiplying the percentage of value of the total real and tangible
personal property owned and employed by the business enterprise
everywhere as is owned and employed by it in business activities in this
state. Property owned by the business enterprise shall be valued at its
original cost.
                                             
 (c) The portion of the base from dividends shall be apportioned
on the basis of the 3 following factors, giving equal weight to each,
and applying the average of the 3 percentages to the dividends:
                                             
 (1) The compensation apportionment factor in subparagraph
(a)(2) of this section;
                                             
 (2) The interest apportionment factor in subparagraph (b) of
this section; and
                                             
 (3) The percentage of the total sales, including charges for
services, made by the business enterprise everywhere as is made by it
within this state. Sales of tangible personal property are made in this
state if the property is delivered or shipped to a purchaser, other than
the United States government, within this state regardless of free on
board point or other conditions of sale, or the property is shipped from
an office, store, warehouse, factory or other place of storage in this
state and (A) the purchaser is the United States government, or (B) the
business enterprise is not taxable in the state of the purchaser. Sales
other than sales of tangible personal property are in this state if the
revenue-producing activity is performed in this state, or the
revenue-producing activity is performed both in and outside this state
and a greater proportion of the revenue-producing activity is performed
in this state than in any other state, based on costs of performance.
                                             
 II. If the method of apportionment in paragraph I does not fairly
represent the business enterprise's business activity in this state, the
business enterprise may petition for, or the commissioner may require,
in respect to all or any part of the business enterprise's business
activity, if reasonable:
                                             
 (a) The exclusion of any one or more of the apportionment
factors;
                                             
 (b) The inclusion of one or more additional apportionment factors
which will fairly represent the business enterprise's business activity
in the state; or
                                             
 (c) The employment of any other method to effect an equitable
apportionment of the business enterprise's enterprise value tax base.

**Source.** 1993, 350:19, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 77-E:5

 **77-E:5 Returns. –**
                                             
 I. Every business enterprise having gross business receipts in
excess of 
                                             $200,000 as defined by RSA 77-E:1, X, during the taxable
period or the enterprise value tax base of which is greater than

                                             $100,000 shall, on or before the fifteenth day of the third month in
the case of enterprises required to file a United States partnership tax
return, and the fifteenth day of the fourth month in the case of all
other business enterprises, following expiration of its taxable period,
make a return to the commissioner. For tax years beginning January 1,
2015, the commissioner shall biennially adjust these threshold amounts
rounding to the nearest 
                                             $1,000 based on the 2-year (24-month)
percentage change in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers,
Northeast Region as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United
States Department of Labor using the amount published for the month of
June in the year prior to the start of the tax year. All returns shall
be signed by the business enterprise or by its authorized
representative, subject to the pains and penalties of perjury and the
penalties provided in RSA 21-J:39.
                                             
 II. Every business enterprise shall in addition file a declaration
of its estimated business enterprise tax for its subsequent taxable
period; provided, however, if the estimated tax is less than 
                                             $260, a
declaration need not be filed; and provided further that a declaration
shall be filed at the end of any quarter thereafter in which estimated
tax exceeds 
                                             $260. The declaration shall be filed when payments are due
under RSA 77-E:6.

**Source.** 1993, 350:19. 1996, 235:2. 2001, 158:22, eff. July 1, 2001.
2012, 279:1, eff. as provided by 279:12, I. 2015, 183:2, eff. Aug. 28,
2015. 2016, 66:2, eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 77-E:5-a

 **77-E:5-a Election of Qualified Investment Company Status. –**
Business organizations that have elected qualified investment company
status pursuant to RSA 77-A:5-b shall be qualified investment companies
for the purposes of this chapter for the tax period or periods
corresponding to the election.

**Source.** 2004, 143:7, eff. May 24, 2004.

### Section 77-E:6

 **77-E:6 Payments Due With Returns. –**
                                             
 I. All business enterprises required under RSA 77-E:5, II to make
payments of estimated tax shall make such payments in installments as
follows: 25 percent is due and payable on the fifteenth day of the
fourth month of the subsequent taxable year; 25 percent is due and
payable on the fifteenth day of the sixth month of the subsequent
taxable year; 25 percent is due and payable on the fifteenth day of the
ninth month of the subsequent taxable year; and 25 percent is due and
payable on the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the subsequent
taxable year.
                                             
 II. If the return required by RSA 77-E:5, I shows an amount to be
due, such amount is due and payable on the prescribed payment date. If
such return shows an overpayment of the tax due, the commissioner shall
refund such overpayment to the business enterprise or shall allow the
enterprise a credit against a subsequent payment or payment due, to the
extent of the overpayment, at the enterprise's option.

**Source.** 1993, 350:19. 1996, 235:3, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 77-E:7

 **77-E:7 Additional Returns. –** When the commissioner has reason to
believe that a business enterprise failed to file a return or to include
any part of its enterprise value tax base in a filed return, the
commissioner may require the enterprise to file a return or a
supplementary return showing such additional information as the
commissioner prescribes. Upon the receipt of the supplementary return,
or if none is received within the time set by the commissioner, the
commissioner may find and assess the amount due upon the information
that is available. The making of such additional return does not relieve
the business enterprise of any penalty for failure to make a correct
original return or relieve it from liability for interest imposed under
RSA 21-J:28 or any other additional charges imposed by the commissioner.

**Source.** 1993, 350:19, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 77-E:8

 **77-E:8 Extension of Time for Returns. –** For good cause, the
commissioner may extend the time within which a business enterprise is
required to file a return, and if such return is filed during the period
of extension no penalty may be imposed for failure to file the return at
the time required by this chapter, but the enterprise shall be liable
for interest and late payment charges as prescribed in RSA 21-J:28 and
RSA 21-J:33. Failure to file the return during the period of the
extension shall void the extension.

**Source.** 1993, 350:19, eff. July 1, 1993. 2016, 66:3, eff. July 4,
2016.

### Section 77-E:9

 **77-E:9 Corrections. –** Each business enterprise shall report to
the commissioner of revenue administration any change in the amount of
its compensation, interest or dividends as finally determined by the
United States Internal Revenue Service with respect to any previous year
for which the business enterprise has made a return under this chapter.
Such a report shall be made not later than 6 months after the business
enterprise has received notice that such change has finally been
determined. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a business
enterprise reporting a correction pursuant to this section shall be
given notice by the department of any adjustment to the tax due with
respect to such correction within 6 months after the filing of the
report.

**Source.** 1993, 350:19, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 77-E:10

 **77-E:10 Taxpayer Records. –** Every business enterprise shall:
                                             
 I. Keep such records as may be necessary to determine the amount of
its liability under this chapter.
                                             
 II. Preserve such records for the period of 5 years or until any
litigation or prosecution under this chapter is finally determined.
                                             
 III. Make such records available for inspection by the commissioner
or authorized agents, upon demand, at reasonable times during regular
business hours. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the penalties imposed under RSA 21-J:39.

**Source.** 1993, 350:19, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 77-E:11

 **77-E:11 Administration. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall collect the taxes, interest, additions to
tax, and penalties imposed under this chapter and RSA 21-J.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of revenue administration shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (a) The form of the return and the data which it must contain for
the correct computation of gross business receipts and taxable
enterprise value tax base attributable to this state and the tax
assessed on it;
                                             
 (b) The administration of the business enterprise tax;
                                             
 (c) The recovery of any tax, interest on tax, additions to tax,
or penalties imposed by RSA 77-E or RSA 21-J; and
                                             
 (d) The implementation, interpretation, or specific application
of any part of this chapter to particular business enterprises.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may institute actions in the name of the state
to recover any tax, interest on tax, additions to tax, or the penalties
imposed by this chapter.
                                             
 IV. In the collection of the tax imposed by this chapter, the
commissioner may use all of the powers granted to tax collectors under
RSA 80 for the collection of taxes, except that the tax imposed by this
chapter shall not take precedence over prior recorded mortgages. The
commissioner shall also have all of the duties imposed upon the tax
collectors by RSA 80 that are applicable. The provisions of RSA 80:26
apply to the sale of land for payment of taxes due under this chapter,
and the state treasurer is authorized to purchase the land for the
state. If the state purchases the land, the state treasurer shall
certify the purchase to the governor, and the governor shall draw a
warrant for the purchase price out of any money in the treasury not
otherwise appropriated.

**Source.** 1993, 350:19. 1996, 154:6, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 77-E:12

 **77-E:12 Certifications for Dissolution, Withdrawal, and Good
Standing. –**
                                             
 I. (a) No corporation organized under any law of this state may
transfer property to its shareholders pursuant to RSA 293-A:14.05(a)
until all taxes and interest imposed upon the corporation under this
chapter have been fully paid and a certificate of dissolution shall have
been obtained from the commissioner of revenue administration that no
returns, tax, additions to tax, interest, or penalties for taxes
administered by the department are due and unpaid.
                                             
 (b) A corporation wishing to transfer property to its shareholder
pursuant to RSA 293-A:14.05(a) shall submit a written request containing
the complete corporate name and identification number and accompanied by
a non-refundable fee of 
                                             $30 to the commissioner of revenue
administration. This fee shall be deposited into the general fund. If,
after reviewing the corporation's records, the commissioner determines
that no returns, tax, additions to tax, interest, or penalties for taxes
administered by the department are due and unpaid, the commissioner
shall prepare a statement in accordance with subparagraph (a).
                                             
 II. A business enterprise wishing to obtain a statement for
withdrawal, in accordance with RSA 293-A:15.20(b)(6) shall submit a
written request containing the complete corporate name and
identification number and accompanied by a non-refundable fee of 
                                             $30 to
the commissioner of revenue administration. This fee shall be deposited
into the general fund. If, after reviewing the business enterprise's
records, the commissioner determines that no returns, tax, additions to
tax, interest, or penalties for taxes administered by the department are
due and unpaid, the commissioner shall prepare a statement for
withdrawal as required under RSA 293-A:15.20(b)(6).
                                             
 III. A business enterprise wishing to obtain a statement that it is
in good standing with the department of revenue administration shall
submit a written request containing the complete corporate name and
identification number and accompanied by a non-refundable fee of 
                                             $30 to
the commissioner of revenue administration. This fee shall be deposited
into the general fund. If, after reviewing the business enterprise's
records, the commissioner determines that no returns, tax, additions to
tax, interest, or penalties for taxes administered by the department are
due and unpaid, the commissioner shall prepare a statement of good
standing.

**Source.** 1993, 350:19, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 77-E:13

 **77-E:13 Application of Credit for Business Enterprise Tax Against
Business Profits Tax. –** If the business enterprise liable for taxes
imposed by this chapter is a member of a unitary business within the
meaning of RSA 77-A:1, XIV, then the entire amount of the taxes due
under this chapter by the individual member of such unitary business
shall be allowed as a credit pursuant to RSA 77-A:5, X, against such
individual member's portion of the total tax liability of the unitary
business under RSA 77-A. In the event that the individual member's
credit exceeds such member's portion of the total tax liability of the
unitary business, the excess of such credit shall be allowed as a credit
against any other individual member's tax liability under RSA 77-A,
provided such other member is also subject to the tax imposed by this
chapter. The tax liability of an individual member of a unitary business
under RSA 77-A shall be determined by the following steps:
                                             
 I. Determine a combined nexus group denominator for the property,
payroll and sales factors by adding the property, payroll and sales
factor numerators of the individual members of the combined group
subject to tax under RSA 77-A.
                                             
 II. Determine an individual apportionment percentage for each member
of the combined group subject to tax under RSA 77-A by dividing such
member's individual New Hampshire property, payroll and sales factor
numerators by the combined nexus group denominators determined in
paragraph I.
                                             
 III. Apply the individual apportionment percentage, determined in
paragraph II, to business profits tax liability of the water's edge
combined group as determined in accordance with the provisions of RSA
77-A.

**Source.** 1993, 350:19, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 77-E:13-a

 **77-E:13-a Employee Leasing Companies. –**
                                             
 I. For the purposes of the provisions of RSA 277-B:9, I(h), an
employee leasing company and client company may elect to make the client
company solely responsible for paying the tax imposed by RSA 77-E, and
include in the client company's compensation portion of the enterprise
value tax base those wages paid to the leased employees.
                                             
 II. If the employee leasing company and the client company make such
an election, the client company shall be eligible for the credit
provided in RSA 77-A:5, X.
                                             
 III. (a) In order to make the election under paragraph I, the client
company and the employee leasing company shall file the forms required
by the department pursuant to rules adopted by the commissioner under
RSA 541-A.
                                             
 (b) For an election to be effective for any given tax year, forms
required to be filed with the commissioner shall be filed prior to the
end of the employee leasing company's tax year.
                                             
 (c) An election under this section shall remain in effect until
the employee leasing company and the client company both notify the
department of the termination of an election described in paragraph I on
forms required by the department pursuant to rules adopted by the
commissioner under RSA 541-A.
                                             
 IV. For purposes of this section, the terms "employee leasing
company'' and "client company'' shall have the same meaning as in RSA
277-B:2.

**Source.** 2015, 216:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 77-E:14

 **77-E:14 Distribution of Funds. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall determine the additional amounts of
revenue produced by an increase of .50 percent in the rate of tax
imposed by RSA 77-E:2 for each fiscal year and shall certify such
amounts to the state treasurer by October 1 of that year for deposit in
the education trust fund established by RSA 198:39.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall make quarterly estimates of the amount of
additional revenues that will be produced by the increase in tax rate
for the next fiscal year and shall certify such amounts to the state
treasurer for deposit in the education trust fund established by RSA
198:39. Such estimates shall be certified on June 1, September 1,
December 1, and March 1 of each year.

**Source.** 1999, 17:22. 2001, 158:23, eff. July 1, 2001.
