---
title: 'CHAPTER 77-G EDUCATION TAX CREDIT'
---

TITLE V
                                             
TAXATION
========

CHAPTER 77-G
                                             
EDUCATION TAX CREDIT
--------------------

### Section 77-G:1

 **77-G:1 Definitions. –** The following definitions shall apply in
this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Adequacy cost'' means the total cost of the opportunity for an
adequate education as defined in RSA 198:40-a.
                                             
 II. "Adequacy grant'' means the grant calculated under RSA 198:41,
or for a chartered public school, the amount calculated under RSA
194-B:11.
                                             
 III. "Business organization'' shall be as defined in RSA 77-A:1, I.
                                             
 IV. "Business enterprise'' shall be as defined in RSA 77-E:1, III.
                                             
 V. "Donation receipt'' means a document submitted by a scholarship
organization that contains at a minimum:
                                             
 (a) The business organization's or business enterprise's name,
address, and federal taxpayer identification number.
                                             
 (b) The scholarship organization's name and address.
                                             
 (c) The donation amount and date received.
                                             
 VI. "Educational expenses'' means the tuition cost of an eligible
student to attend a public or nonpublic school, excluding students who
were placed into a nonpublic school by their school district, and in the
case of a home educated student, the academic expenses not to exceed 25
percent of the average scholarship as defined in RSA 77-G:2, I(b),
incurred in a child's home schooling. Educational expenses shall not
include fees or expenses related to participation in athletic programs,
transportation expenses, or the cost of a parent's time expended in the
home schooling of his or her child.
                                             
 VII. "Education tax credit application'' means a document developed
by the department of revenue administration and submitted by a business
organization or business enterprise that contains at a minimum:
                                             
 (a) The business organization's or business enterprise's name,
address, and federal taxpayer identification number.
                                             
 (b) A contact person's name, title, and phone number.
                                             
 (c) The requested donation amount.
                                             
 (d) A signed statement certifying that the business organization
or business enterprise agrees to make donations in accordance with the
requirements established in this chapter.
                                             
 VIII. "Eligible student'' means a New Hampshire resident who is at
least 5 years of age and no more than 20 years of age, who has not
graduated from high school, and
                                             
 (a)(1) Who is currently attending a New Hampshire public school,
including a chartered public school, and for whom the adequacy grant in
the next school year would be reduced if the student were removed from
the average daily membership calculation; or
                                             
 (2) Who received a scholarship under subparagraph (1) or this
subparagraph in the prior program year; or
                                             
 (3) Who does not qualify under subparagraph (1) or (2); and
                                             
 (b) Whose annual household income is less than or equal to 300
percent of the federal poverty guidelines as updated annually in the
Federal Register by the United States Department of Health and Human
Services under the authority of 42 U.S.C. section 9902(2). The
scholarship organization shall verify eligibility under this
subparagraph.
                                             
 IX. "Nonpublic school'' shall be as defined in RSA 193-A:1.
                                             
 X. "Owner or operator'' means an owner, president, officer, or
director of an eligible nonprofit scholarship organization or a person
with equivalent decision making authority over an eligible nonprofit
scholarship organization.
                                             
 XI. "Parent'' means the natural or adoptive parent or legal guardian
of a child.
                                             
 XII. "Program year'' means the year beginning January 1 and ending
December 31.
                                             
 XIII. "Receipt'' means a document developed by the department of
revenue administration that is issued by the receiving school, or parent
in the case of a home educated student, to the scholarship organization
which makes payment for educational expenses on behalf of an eligible
student and that contains, at a minimum and where applicable:
                                             
 (a) The name and address of the school if a school is attended
or, in the case of a home educated student, the name and address of a
parent.
                                             
 (b) The name and address of the eligible student for whom the
expense has been paid.
                                             
 (c) The name of the payer and the date and amount of the expense
paid.
                                             
 (d) Receipts for all specific, reimbursed educational expenses.
                                             
 XIV. "Receiving school'' means a public or nonpublic school which
the eligible student seeks to attend.
                                             
 XV. "Release of information form'' means a document developed by a
receiving school, signed by the parent or guardian of an eligible
student, and which acknowledges the consent of the parent or guardian to
release of information contained in the receipt.
                                             
 XVI. "Scholarship impact survey'' means a document developed by the
department of education and given to the parents of students who have
exited a public school under the provisions of RSA 77-G:8. The survey
shall solicit the reasons for seeking the scholarship, and any suggested
improvements desired in the public school they are leaving.
                                             
 XVII. "Scholarship organization'' means a charitable organization
incorporated or qualified to do business in this state that:
                                             
 (a) Is exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code;
                                             
 (b) Complies with applicable state and federal antidiscrimination
and privacy laws;
                                             
 (c) Is registered with the director of charitable trusts; and
                                             
 (d) Has been approved by the department of revenue administration
for the purpose of issuing scholarships as provided in this chapter.
                                             
 XVIII. "Scholarship organization application'' means a document
developed by the department of revenue administration and submitted by a
scholarship organization that contains at a minimum:
                                             
 (a) The scholarship organization's name, address, and federal
taxpayer identification number.
                                             
 (b) A contact person's name, title, and phone number.
                                             
 (c) A signed statement that the scholarship organization has met
the eligibility requirements of paragraph XVII, and will comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 XIX. "Scholarship organization report'' means a document developed
by the department of revenue administration and submitted by a
scholarship organization to the department of revenue administration
that shall be a public record, notwithstanding RSA 21-J:14, and contains
at a minimum:
                                             
 (a) The number of scholarships granted under subparagraph
VIII(a)(1), and the percentage of these students who were eligible for
the federal free and reduced-price meal program in the final year they
were in public school.
                                             
 (b) The number of scholarships granted under subparagraph
VIII(a)(2), and the percentage of these students who were eligible for
the federal free and reduced-price meal program in the final year they
were in public school.
                                             
 (c) The number of scholarships granted under subparagraph
VIII(a)(3), and the percentage of these students who were eligible for
the federal free and reduced-price meal program in the prior year.
                                             
 (d) The total dollar amount of all scholarships granted.
                                             
 (e) The total dollar amount of donations spent on administrative
expenses pursuant to RSA 77-G:5, I(f).
                                             
 (f) The total dollar amount to be carried forward pursuant to RSA
77-G:5, I(g).
                                             
 (g) The total dollar amount of donations used and not used for
scholarships.
                                             
 (h) The number of scholarships granted.
                                             
 (i) The number of scholarships distributed by the organization,
per school, and the dollar range of those scholarships. All home
educated students shall be totaled together as a single school.
                                             
 (j) An analysis, broken down by zip code, of the place of
residence for each student receiving a scholarship under this program.
                                             
 (k)(1) The aggregated results from a survey, designed by the
department of revenue administration, and administered by the
scholarship organization, which shall solicit and receive information
from at least 90 percent of the parents or legal guardians of
participating students, broken down by the number of years in the
program. In each case, the respondent shall be asked to gauge their
level of agreement with the statement as follows: "strongly agree,''
"agree,'' "no change,'' "disagree,'' "strongly disagree.'' The following
statements shall be included in the survey:
                                             
 (A) I am satisfied with the school my child is attending as
compared to the school my child attended prior to the availability of
the education tax credit program.
                                             
 (B) My child has seen a measurable improvement in academic
achievement.
                                             
 (C) My child would have been unable to attend the school of
his or her choice without the education tax credit program.
                                             
 (2) The survey shall include the following question to the
parent or legal guardian of a participating student: "Excluding the
education tax credit scholarship, how much did you pay out of pocket for
your child to attend school this year?''
                                             
 (l) The aggregated results from a survey, designed by the
department of education, and administered by the scholarship
organization, which shall solicit and receive information from the
parents or legal guardians of participating students who graduated or
stopped attending 2 years prior. A parent's or legal guardian's response
to the survey shall be optional. Results shall be aggregated by the
scholarship organization and published by the department of education.
The survey shall solicit the following information:
                                             
 (1) Whether the student is attending a private, public,
community, or vocational college, or otherwise employed or unemployed.
                                             
 (2) Whether the student graduated or not.
                                             
 (m) The number of participating students who graduated from high
school in the previous year, and the number that dropped out of school.
                                             
 (n) A signed statement that the scholarship organization
acknowledges compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 (o) An explanation of information omitted from the report because
it would reveal private data about an individual student.
                                             
 (p) The name of any other scholarship organizations who have
agreed to combine their data with the scholarship organization for the
purposes set forth in RSA 77-G:2, II. The agreement shall only be
considered valid if each scholarship organization lists the other
scholarship organizations in the agreement.
                                             
 XX. "Scholarship receipt'' means a document developed by the
department of revenue administration and submitted by a scholarship
organization to the business organization or business enterprise and
that contains at a minimum:
                                             
 (a) The business organization's or business enterprise's name,
address, and federal taxpayer identification number.
                                             
 (b) The amount of the donations used or carried forward and the
amount not used.

**Source.** 2012, 287:4, eff. June 27, 2012. 2016, 8:9, eff. Mar. 16,
2016.

### Section 77-G:2

 **77-G:2 Scholarships. –**
                                             
 I. (a) An eligible student may receive a scholarship to attend (1) a
nonpublic school, except when the student has been placed by the local
school district through the special education process; or (2) a public
school located outside of the school district in which the student
resides and for which the public school is not eligible to receive an
adequate education grant payment for the student in the current fiscal
year, in an amount not to exceed the tuition cost of the public or
nonpublic school. A home education student may also receive a
scholarship to cover educational expenses. A student shall not receive a
scholarship from more than one scholarship organization.
                                             
 (b) The average value of all scholarships awarded by a
scholarship organization, excluding eligible students who received
scholarships for educational expenses related to home education only,
shall not exceed 
                                             $2,500. Beginning in the second year of the program,
the commissioner of the department of revenue administration shall
annually adjust this amount based on the average change in the Consumer
Price Index for All Urban Consumers, Northeast Region, using the
"services less medical care services'' special aggregate index, as
published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of
Labor. The average change shall be calculated using the calendar year
ending 12 months prior to the beginning of program year. In each of the
first and second program years, a scholarship organization shall award a
minimum of 70 percent of all scholarships issued to eligible students as
defined in RSA 77-G:1, VIII(a)(1) and (2) and, notwithstanding RSA
193-E:5, shall notify the department of education of the unique pupil
identifier and date of birth for each of these students granted a
scholarship by July 15. The required minimum percentage of all
scholarships issued by a scholarship organization to eligible students
as defined in RSA 77-G:1, VIII(a)(1) and (2) shall be reduced by 5
percent each program year for years 3 through 15 of the program, and, at
the beginning of the sixteenth program year and every program year
thereafter, there shall be no required minimum percentage of
scholarships.
                                             
 (c) The minimum value of a scholarship granted to a student
receiving special education programs or services pursuant to RSA 186-C
shall be 175 percent of the maximum average scholarship size as defined
in subparagraph (b).
                                             
 (d) At least 40 percent of the scholarships awarded by the
scholarship organization to eligible students as defined in RSA 77-G:1,
VIII(a)(1) and (2) shall be awarded to students who qualified for the
federal free and reduced-price meal program in the final year they were
in public school.
                                             
 (e) A student shall reapply each year for a scholarship.
                                             
 II. Scholarship organizations may meet the percentage requirements
of subparagraphs I(b) and (d) if, pursuant to a mutual agreement, the
organizations aggregate their scholarship data and the aggregated data
shows compliance with the percentage requirements.

**Source.** 2012, 287:4, eff. June 27, 2012.

### Section 77-G:3

 **77-G:3 Contributions to Scholarship Organizations. –** For each
contribution made to a scholarship organization, a business organization
or business enterprise may claim a credit equal to 85 percent of the
contribution against the business profits tax due pursuant to RSA 77-A,
or against the business enterprise tax due pursuant to RSA 77-E, or
apportioned against both provided the total credit granted against both
shall not exceed the maximum education tax credit allowed. Credits
provided under this chapter shall not be deemed taxes paid for the
purposes of RSA 77-A:5, X. The department of revenue administration
shall not grant the credit without a scholarship receipt. No business
organization or business enterprise shall direct, assign, or restrict
any contribution to a scholarship organization for the use of a
particular student or nonpublic school. No business organization or
business enterprise shall receive more than 10 percent of the aggregate
amount of tax credits permitted in RSA 77-G:4.

**Source.** 2012, 287:4, eff. June 27, 2012.

### Section 77-G:4

 **77-G:4 Tax Credits. –**
                                             
 I. The aggregate of tax credits issued by the commissioner of the
department of revenue administration to all taxpayers claiming the
credit shall not exceed 
                                             $3,400,000 for the first program year and

                                             $5,100,000 for the second program year, subject to the provisions of
paragraph III. In subsequent years, the aggregate of tax credits shall
not exceed the amount allowed for the prior year, unless adjusted
pursuant to paragraph II.
                                             
 II. Beginning with the second program year, if the amount of the
total donations used for scholarships exceeds 80 percent of the current
program year's tax credits allowed, the aggregate of tax credits allowed
for the next program year shall increase by 25 percent, subject to the
provisions of paragraph III.
                                             
 III. In each program year, the increase in the aggregate of tax
credits allowed pursuant to paragraphs I and II shall be contingent upon
the board of directors of the community development finance authority
certifying in writing to the commissioner of the department of revenue
administration by the December 1 preceding the program year that the
community development finance authority has received 
                                             $5,000,000 or more
in contributions for the state fiscal year or that the authority has
received contribution offers sufficient to meet its state fiscal year
limit but did not meet its limit for other reasons.

**Source.** 2012, 287:4, eff. June 27, 2012.

### Section 77-G:5

 **77-G:5 Scholarship Organizations. –**
                                             
 I. A scholarship organization shall:
                                             
 (a) Provide scholarships from eligible contributions to eligible
students to defray educational expenses.
                                             
 (b) Not restrict or reserve scholarships for use at a single
nonpublic school and not restrict or reserve a scholarship for a
specific student or a specific person.
                                             
 (c) Verify a student's eligibility to apply for and receive a
scholarship through transcripts and attendance records.
                                             
 (d) Not have an owner or operator who also owns or operates a
nonpublic school that participates in the education tax credit program.
                                             
 (e) Not have an owner or operator who in the last 7 years has
filed for personal bankruptcy or corporate bankruptcy in a business
organization or business enterprise of which he or she owned more than
20 percent.
                                             
 (f) Not use more than 10 percent of eligible contributions used
during the program year in which the contributions are collected, and
for which scholarship receipts were issued for tax credit purposes, for
administrative expenses. Administrative expenses shall be reasonable and
necessary for the organization's management and distribution of eligible
contributions pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 (g) In the first program year, there shall be no carry forward of
unused eligible contributions. In each program year thereafter, not more
than 10 percent of eligible contributions may be carried forward to the
following program year. Any amount carried forward shall be expended for
annual or partial year scholarships in the program year into which the
amount is carried forward.
                                             
 (h) Maintain separate accounts for scholarship funds, non-tax
credit donations, and operating funds.
                                             
 (i)(1) Not award a scholarship to any lineal descendent or
equivalent step-person of any officer, director, or employee of any
scholarship organization; and
                                             
 (2) Not award a scholarship to any lineal descendant or
equivalent step-person of any proprietor, partner, or member of any
business organization or business enterprise making a contribution to a
scholarship organization and claiming a credit against the business
profits tax or business enterprise tax, nor any lineal descendant or
equivalent step-person of any officer, director, or owner of more than a
5 percent interest in any business organization or business enterprise
making a contribution to a scholarship organization and claiming a
credit against the business profits tax or business enterprise tax, nor
any employee who is among the highest-paid 20 percent of paid employees
in any business organization or business enterprise making a
contribution to a scholarship organization and claiming a credit against
the business profits tax or business enterprise tax.
                                             
 (j) Provide to each school district which receives a
stabilization grant pursuant to RSA 77-G:8 a copy of the aggregated
results of the scholarship impact survey, including total number of
students who received scholarships from that school district under RSA
77-G:1, VIII(a)(1).
                                             
 II. (a) An organization seeking approval as a scholarship
organization under this chapter shall submit an application to the
department of revenue administration each program year no later than
June 15. The department of revenue administration shall approve or deny
the application within 30 days of receipt. The department shall deny any
application that fails to meet the statutory requirements and shall
notify the scholarship organization of the reasons for denial.
                                             
 (b) A business organization or business enterprise shall submit
an education tax credit application to the department of revenue
administration no earlier than January 1 and no later than June 15. The
department shall approve these applications within 30 days on a first
come-first served basis, up to the aggregate tax credit amount allowed
under RSA 77-G:4. If multiple education tax credit applications are
received on the same day, they shall be processed at random. No business
organization or business enterprise shall be granted an education tax
credit for more than 10 percent of the aggregate tax credit amount
permitted in RSA 77-G:4. The department of revenue administration may
approve only a portion of a request if required to prevent exceeding the
aggregate tax credit amount allowed under RSA 77-G:4. The approval shall
include the amount allowed and the date of approval.
                                             
 (c) Once an education tax credit application is approved, the
business organization or business enterprise shall donate within 60 days
of the date of approval or the request shall expire. Donations may be
made to multiple scholarship organizations provided the total amount
donated by the business organization or business enterprise does not
exceed the amount approved. Donations shall be made no later than July
15 of the program year.
                                             
 (d) Upon receiving a donation, the scholarship organization shall
send a donation receipt to the department of revenue administration and
to the business organization or business enterprise within 15 days. The
department of revenue administration shall notify the scholarship
organization and the business organization or business enterprise within
15 days if the donations made by a business organization or business
enterprise exceed the amount approved. If a business organization or
business enterprise fails to donate the total amount approved within the
time permitted, the department of revenue administration may grant
credit requests in the order specified in subparagraph (b).
                                             
 (e) Notwithstanding RSA 193-E:5, on or before July 15, a
scholarship organization shall furnish the unique pupil identifier and
date of birth for each student eligible pursuant to RSA 77-G:1,
VIII(a)(1) and (2) who is receiving a scholarship, and the subparagraph
under which he or she was eligible, to the department of education. The
department of education shall notify the scholarship organization within
30 days of any students who are ineligible under RSA 77-G:1, VIII(a)(1).
The scholarship organization shall notify the department of education
within 30 days if any student eligible under RSA 77-G:1, VIII(a)(1) or
(2) is not awarded a scholarship or is awarded a scholarship yet
subsequently returns to public school. The department of education shall
return such student to the calculation of the average daily membership
in residence, as defined in RSA 189:1-d, IV, for the student's school
district of residence, and add the amount calculated under RSA 198:40-a
to the adequate education grant amount to the student's school district
of residence, and include such amount in the next adequate education
grant payment made under RSA 198:42.
                                             
 (f) On or before December 1, the scholarship organization shall
send a scholarship receipt to the business organization or business
enterprise and to the department of revenue administration. The
scholarship receipt shall include the amount of the donation that was
used under this chapter which is eligible for the tax credit, and the
amount that was not used. The scholarship organization shall return any
unused funds to the business organization or business enterprise.
                                             
 (g) On or prior to December 1, the scholarship organization shall
submit a scholarship organization report to the department of revenue
administration. The scholarship organization shall also include a
scholarship organization application if it intends to issue scholarships
under this chapter in the next program year. The department of revenue
administration shall review the scholarship organization report and the
scholarship receipts to ensure that the administrative expenses
requirement set forth in subparagraph I(f) is not exceeded, that the
number of scholarships issued under RSA 77-G:1, VIII(a)(1)and (2) meets
the requirements of this chapter, and the average scholarship size does
not exceed the amount allowed. If any of these requirements are not met,
the department of revenue administration may deny a scholarship
organization application for subsequent program years and shall notify
the scholarship organization of the reasons for denial.
                                             
 (h) A business organization or business enterprise may file for
the tax credit after receiving the scholarship receipt, and may file a
tax credit request for the subsequent program year up to the amount
donated in the current program year.
                                             
 (i) The provisions of this chapter regarding nonpublic schools
and their relation to scholarship organizations shall apply only to
nonpublic schools that choose to accept scholarship students.

**Source.** 2012, 287:4, eff. June 27, 2012. 2016, 8:10, eff. Mar. 16,
2016.

### Section 77-G:6

 **77-G:6 Department of Revenue Administration; Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. The department of revenue administration shall:
                                             
 (a) Develop, and annually verify and update, by February 1, a
list of eligible nonprofit scholarship funding organizations that meet
the requirements of this chapter. The department shall post this list on
the department's Internet website and update the list monthly until July
15. The department shall forward the list and any updates to the
commissioner of the department of education who shall post the list on
the department of education's Internet website.
                                             
 (b) Conduct or require audits in response to any reasonable
complaints made. The cost of an independent audit shall be paid by the
scholarship organization, but this cost shall be excluded from the
administrative expenses requirement set forth in RSA 77-G:5, I(f).
                                             
 (c) Establish a process by which individuals may notify the
department of revenue administration of any violation by a parent,
business organization, business enterprise, scholarship organization, or
nonpublic school of state laws relating to program participation. The
department of revenue administration shall conduct an inquiry of any
written complaint of a violation of this chapter, or make a referral to
the appropriate agency for an investigation, if the complaint is signed
by the complainant and is legally sufficient. A complaint is legally
sufficient if it contains facts demonstrating a violation of this
chapter or any rule adopted pursuant to this chapter. In order to
determine legal sufficiency, the department of revenue administration
may require supporting information or documentation from the
complainant.
                                             
 (d) Create, maintain, and post online the relevant forms and
reports, and submit scholarship organization reports to the members of
the house and senate education committees and to the department of
education.
                                             
 (e) Post to the department's website an up-to-date total of the
amount of credits available.
                                             
 (f) No later than January 1, 2013, adopt rules pursuant to RSA
541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (1) The application procedure for a scholarship organization
applying to accept scholarship donations under this chapter.
                                             
 (2) The application procedure for a business organization or
business enterprise applying for a tax credit under this chapter.
                                             
 (3) Complaint procedures, including the filing of a complaint
and investigations of complaints.
                                             
 (4) The design and content of the forms and applications
required to be filed with, or issued by, the department of revenue
administration under this chapter.

**Source.** 2012, 287:4, eff. June 27, 2012.

### Section 77-G:7

 **77-G:7 Department of Education; Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. The department of education shall determine the number of
students receiving a scholarship under RSA 77-G:1, VIII(a)(1) and (2)
who were counted in the calculation of the average daily membership in
attendance, as defined in RSA 198:38, I, for schools, other than
chartered public schools, for the student's school district of residence
and for each such student, shall deduct the amount calculated under RSA
198:40-a from the total education grant amount disbursed to the
student's school district of residence calculated pursuant to RSA
198:40-a. This adjustment shall be completed prior to September 1 of the
program year in which the scholarships are granted.
                                             
 II. The department of education shall verify a student's eligibility
under RSA 77-G:1, VIII(a)(1) upon request of a scholarship organization.
The department of education shall assist the department of revenue
administration, upon request, in the investigation of student
eligibility complaints.
                                             
 III. The state board of education shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA
541-A, relative to forms necessary for any surveys required and the
procedures for determining and disbursing stabilization grants.

**Source.** 2012, 287:4, eff. June 27, 2012. 2016, 8:11, eff. Mar. 16,
2016.

### Section 77-G:8

 **77-G:8 Scholarship Stabilization Grant. –**
                                             
 I. For each school district, the department of education shall
calculate the combined amount of reductions in adequacy cost pursuant to
RSA 77-G:7 from students receiving scholarships under RSA 77-G:1,
VIII(a)(1) and who were in attendance in that district in the year prior
to receiving the scholarships. If this combined amount is greater than
1/4 of one percent of a school district's total voted appropriations for
the year prior to the scholarship year, the commissioner of the
department of education shall disburse a scholarship stabilization grant
for the current and next 3 fiscal years to each such school district
equal to the amount of the reductions in excess of 1/4 of one percent.
This scholarship stabilization grant shall be included in the September
1 disbursement required pursuant to RSA 198:42.
                                             
 II. The department of education shall order any scholarship
organizations that provided scholarships to students from districts that
were awarded stabilization grants pursuant to paragraph I to conduct a
scholarship impact survey. The organization shall forward the results of
this survey to the department of education and the school board of each
district. The department of education shall post the results of this
survey online.

**Source.** 2012, 287:4, eff. June 27, 2012.

### Section 77-G:9

 **77-G:9 Exceptions. –**
                                             
 I. A receiving nonpublic school or home education program that
accepts students benefiting from scholarships, grants, or tax credits
shall not be considered an agent of the state or federal government as a
result of participating in the program established in this chapter.
                                             
 II. Except as provided in this chapter, or otherwise provided in
law, no state department, agency, or board shall regulate the
educational program of a receiving nonpublic school or home education
program that accepts students pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 III. Donations made by a business organization or business
enterprise to a scholarship organization that are not for the purpose of
obtaining a tax credit under this chapter shall not be subject to the
requirements in this chapter.

**Source.** 2012, 287:4, eff. June 27, 2012.

### Section 77-G:10

 **77-G:10 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared
to be severable.

**Source.** 2012, 287:4, eff. June 27, 2012.
