---
title: CHAPTER 77 TAXATION OF INCOMES
---

TITLE V
                                             
TAXATION
========

CHAPTER 77
                                             
TAXATION OF INCOMES
-------------------

### Section 77:1

 **77:1 Rate. –** The annual tax upon incomes shall be levied at the
rate of 5 percent.

**Source.** 1923, 65:1. PL 65:1. RL 78:1. RSA 77:1. 1955, 309:1. 1977,
561:1, eff. July 1, 1977.

### Section 77:1-a

 **77:1-a Definitions. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, Sp. Sess., 1:53, eff.
July 1, 2010.
                                             ]

### Section 77:2

 **77:2 Conformity to Laws. –** It is the intention of this chapter,
and it shall be construed, anything contained herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, not to impose any tax upon any income in violation of
the Constitution of the United States or in violation of any
constitutional federal laws, or in violation of the constitution of this
state, or in violation of any contractual obligations of exemption from
taxation established prior to May 4, 1923, by the state or any of its
political subdivisions or by the United States, which may not be
impaired lawfully hereby.

**Source.** 1923, 65:6. PL 65:8. RL 78:8.

### Section 77:3

 **77:3 Who Taxable. –**
                                             
 I. Taxable income is that income received from interest and
dividends during the tax year prior to the assessment date by:
                                             
 (a) Individuals who are inhabitants or residents of this state
for any part of the taxable year whose gross interest and dividend
income from all sources, including income from a qualified investment
company pursuant to RSA 77:4, V, exceeds 
                                             $2,400 during that taxable
period.
                                             
 (b) Partnerships, limited liability companies, and associations,
the beneficial interest in which is not represented by transferable
shares, whose gross interest and dividend income from all sources
exceeds 
                                             $2,400 during the taxable year, but not including a qualified
investment company as defined in RSA 77-A:1, XXI, or a trust comprising
a part of an employee benefit plan, as defined in the Employee
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, section 3.
                                             
 (c) Executors deriving their appointment from a court of this
state whose gross interest and dividend income from all sources exceeds

                                             $2,400 during the taxable year.
                                             
 II. No person shall be subject to tax under RSA 77 solely due to its
holding an ownership interest in a qualified investment company as
defined in RSA 77-A:1, XXI.

**Source.** 1923, 65:2. PL 65:2. 1931, 35:1. RL 78:2. RSA 77:3. 1981,
314:1. 1982, 42:65. 1991, 67:7. 1993, 313:2. 1995, 188:2. 2004, 143:1.
2009, 144:276. 2010, Sp. Sess., 1:50, eff. July 1, 2010. 2012, 286:3,
eff. June 27, 2012.

### Section 77:3-a

 **77:3-a Limited Liability Company. –** For purposes of this
chapter, "limited liability company'' means a limited liability company
formed under RSA 304-C or a foreign limited liability company as defined
in RSA 304-C:9.

**Source.** 1993, 313:3, eff. July 1, 1993. 2012, 232:3, eff. Jan. 1,
2013.

### Section 77:4

 **77:4 What Taxable. –** Income of the following described classes
is taxable:
                                             
 I. Interest from bonds, notes, money at interest, and from all debts
due the person to be taxed, except interest from notes or bonds of this
state and notes or bonds of any political subdivision of this state.
                                             
 II. Dividends, other than stock dividends paid in new stock of the
company issuing the same, on shares in all corporations and joint stock
companies organized under the laws of any state, territory, or nation.
                                             
 III. Dividends, other than stock dividends paid in new stock of the
partnership, limited liability company, or association issuing the same,
on shares in partnerships, limited liability companies, or associations
the beneficial interest in which is represented by transferable shares.
                                             
 IV. Dividends, other than that portion of a dividend declared by
corporations to be a return of capital and considered by the federal
internal revenue service to be such, the exemption of which is permitted
by RSA 77:7.
                                             
 V. Amounts reported and taxed federally as dividends or interest to
a holder of an ownership interest in a qualified investment company as
defined in RSA 77-A:1, XXI, a mutual fund, or a unit investment trust.
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1923, 65:2. PL 65:3. 1933, 184:1. RL 78:3. RSA 77:4. 1977,
240:1. 1983, 405:1. 1985, 164:1. 1991, 67:8. 1993, 313:4. 1995, 188:3.
1998, 163:1. 2004, 143:8. 2009, 144:277. 2010, Sp. Sess., 1:51. 2011,
181:4, eff. June 14, 2011. 2012, 286:4, eff. June 27, 2012.

### Section 77:4-a

 **77:4-a Interest From Deposits in Vermont Banks Not Taxable. –**

                                             [Repealed 1995, 188:5, I, eff. June 12, 1995.
                                             ]

### Section 77:4-b

 **77:4-b Interest and Dividend Income of Employee Benefit Plans and
Tax Deferred Investments Not Taxable. –** Notwithstanding any provisions
of RSA 77:4 to the contrary, interest and dividend income received by an
employee benefit plan as defined by the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act of 1974, section 3, or any successor act enacted for the
purpose of regulating employee benefit plans, or an individual
retirement arrangement, Keogh plan or any other arrangement pursuant to
which payment of federal tax on the income thereof and of the plan
sponsors, participants and beneficiaries is deferred, shall at no time
be considered taxable income under RSA 77:4, either to the plan or
arrangement or to its sponsors, participants or beneficiaries,
irrespective of when or whether all or any portion of such income is
accumulated or expended for the benefit of, or distributed in any form
or manner to, such sponsors, participants or beneficiaries.

**Source.** 1981, 314:2. 1982, 42:66, retroactive to Sept. 1, 1981.

### Section 77:4-c

 **77:4-c Sale or Exchange of Transferable Shares Not Taxable. –** No
provision of RSA 77:4 or RSA 77:7 shall be construed to include within
any class of property otherwise taxable as income, any amount received
from the sale, exchange or transfer of either a share of corporate stock
or any other transferable share under this chapter, whether by way of
liquidation, redemption or otherwise, and irrespective of the identity
of the parties to the sale, exchange or transfer.

**Source.** 1988, 232:7, eff. June 29, 1988.

### Section 77:4-d

 **77:4-d Special Rule for Qualified Investment Companies, Mutual
Funds, and Unit Investment Trusts. –** Notwithstanding any other
provision of RSA 77:4, the following income items shall not be treated
as dividends or interest income taxable under this chapter:
                                             
 I. Amounts accruing to the holder of an ownership interest in a
qualified investment company, as defined in RSA 77-A:1, XXI, or a mutual
fund or investment income earned or distributions received by the holder
of an ownership interest in a unit investment trust, which qualified
investment company, mutual fund, or unit investment trust invests solely
in New Hampshire tax-exempt tax anticipation notes, bond anticipation
notes, and other instruments exempt under New Hampshire law.
                                             
 II. Amounts reported and taxed federally as capital gains to the
holder of an ownership interest in a qualified investment company, as
defined in RSA 77-A:1, XXI, a mutual fund, or a unit investment trust.

**Source.** 1991, 297:1. 1992, 13:5. 2011, 181:5, eff. June 14, 2011.

### Section 77:4-e

 **77:4-e Interest and Dividends From Funds Invested in College
Tuition Savings Plan Not Taxable. –** Notwithstanding any provision of
RSA 77:4, income and distributions from any qualified tuition program as
defined in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, shall not be
taxable under this chapter to the plan or to its sponsors, participants,
or beneficiaries to the extent that the same is exempt from federal
income taxation under section 529 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended, as that section was in effect on July 1, 2003.

**Source.** 1997, 304:1. 2003, 64:1, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 77:4-f

 **77:4-f Adjustments for Contributions and Distributions With
Respect to Qualified Investment Capital Companies. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2004,
143:8, II, eff. May 24, 2004.
                                             ]

### Section 77:4-g

 **77:4-g Dividend. –** Excess compensation determined by audit of
the department shall not be considered a dividend under this chapter
unless such determination is accepted by the Internal Revenue Service.

**Source.** 2011, 207:4, eff. June 25, 2011.

### Section 77:4-h


                                             


                                             [RSA 77:4-h repealed by 2016, 9:3, II, effective as provided by 2016,
9:4.
                                             ]

 **77:4-h Interest and Dividends from Funds Invested in Achieving a
Better Life Experience (ABLE) Plan Not Taxable. –**
                                             
 Notwithstanding any provision of RSA 77:4, income and distributions
from any Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) plan as defined in
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, shall not be taxable
under this chapter to the plan or its sponsors, participants, or
beneficiaries to the extent that the same is exempted from federal
income taxation under section 529A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended.

**Source.** 2016, 9:2, eff. Mar. 16, 2016.

### Section 77:5

 **77:5 Exemptions. –** Each taxpayer shall have the following
exemptions:
                                             
 I. Income of 
                                             $2,400.
                                             
 II. An additional 
                                             $1,200 if either or both taxpayers are 65 years
of age or older on the last day of the tax year.
                                             
 III. An additional 
                                             $1,200 if either or both taxpayers are blind.
                                             
 IV. An additional 
                                             $1,200 if either or both taxpayers are disabled,
unable to work, and have not yet reached their sixty-fifth birthday.

**Source.** 1923, 65:2. PL 65:4. RL 78:4. 1951, 222:1. RSA 77:5. 1977,
561:2. 1981, 314:3. 1990, 140:2, X. 1997, 189:2, eff. July 1, 1997.

### Section 77:5-a

 **77:5-a Married Taxpayers; Joint Returns. –** A married taxpayer
may claim the exemptions provided in RSA 77:5 for both self and spouse,
regardless of the ownership of the income from interest or dividends,
provided that both husband and wife file a joint return.

**Source.** 1981, 314:4, eff. Sept. 1, 1981.

### Section 77:6

 **77:6 Income From Pledged Property. –** For the purposes of this
chapter, any securities or property of the classes designated herein
producing taxable income, held in pledge, or on margin, or otherwise as
security for a debt of the owner, whether standing in the name of the
owner or of any other person, shall be deemed the property of the owner,
and the income arising therefrom shall be included in his total taxable
income.

**Source.** 1923, 65:3. PL 65:5. RL 78:5.

### Section 77:7

 **77:7 Capital Distribution. –** No distribution of capital, whether
in liquidation or otherwise, shall be taxable as income, but accumulated
profits shall not be regarded as capital.

**Source.** 1923, 65:4. PL 65:6. RL 78:6.

### Section 77:8

 **77:8 Non-taxable Income. –** No tax shall be levied directly or
indirectly under this chapter upon any income otherwise taxable
hereunder, which is received and used by any educational, religious,
charitable, or temperance organization incorporated or organized in this
state, for the purposes for which it is established; provided, that none
of the income or profits of such organizations is divided among its
stockholders or members or is used for purposes other than those for
which it is established, or which is received by any trustee for the use
of the state or any of its political subdivisions, or for the use of
such organization for such purposes.

**Source.** 1923, 65:5. PL 65:7. RL 78:7.

### Section 77:9

 **77:9 Decedents' Estates. –** The estates of deceased persons who
last dwelt in this state shall be subject to the taxes imposed by this
chapter upon all taxable income received by such persons during their
lifetime, which has not already been taxed. The income received by such
estates during administration shall be taxable to the estate, except
such proportion thereof as equals the proportion of the estate to be
distributed to non-taxable persons or organizations. The commissioner of
revenue administration and executors and administrators of estates may
effect a settlement by compromise of any question of doubt or dispute
arising under this section.

**Source.** 1923, 65:7. PL 65:9. 1929, 9:1. RL 78:9. RSA 77:9. 1973,
544:8, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77:10

 **77:10 Income From Trusts. –** Interest and dividend income
received by estates held by trustees treated as grantor trusts under
section 671 of the United States Internal Revenue Code shall be included
in the return of their grantor, to the extent that the grantor is an
inhabitant or resident of this state. Income reported by, and taxed
federally as interest or dividends to, a trust beneficiary who is an
individual inhabitant or resident of this state with respect to
distributions from a trust that is not treated as a grantor trust under
section 671 of the United States Internal Revenue Code shall be included
as interest or dividends in the return of such beneficiary and subject
to taxation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1923, 65:8. PL 65:10. RL 78:10. RSA 77:10. 1994, 178:2, eff.
May 23, 1994. 2012, 286:5, eff. June 27, 2012.

### Section 77:11

 **77:11 Accumulations. –** Income accumulated in an employee benefit
plan, as defined by the Employment Retirement Income Security Act of
1974, section 3, 29 United States Code § 1002(3), as amended, or in a
trust comprising a part of such a plan, shall not be subject to taxation
under RSA 77:1.

**Source.** 1923, 65:8. PL 65:11. RL 78:11. RSA 77:11. 1981, 314:5.
1982, 42:67. 2010, 324:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 77:12

 **77:12 From Nonresident Trustees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 286:6, eff.
June 27, 2012.
                                             ]

### Section 77:13

 **77:13 Guardians, etc. –** RSA 77:9 through RSA 77:11 shall apply
to guardians, conservators, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and
assignees for the benefit of creditors, so far as apt, to the taxable
income received by them.

**Source.** 1923, 65:9. PL 65:13. RL 78:13. 2012, 286:6, eff. June 27,
2012.

### Section 77:14

 **77:14 Partnerships and Limited Liability Companies. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2009, 144:278, I, eff. July 1, 2009.
                                             ]

### Section 77:14-a

 **77:14-a Partnerships and Limited Liability Companies. –**
Partnerships and limited liability companies having a usual place of
business in this state, any member of which is an inhabitant thereof,
shall be subject to taxes imposed by this chapter. If any of the members
of the partnership or limited liability company are not inhabitants of
this state only so much of the income thereof as is proportionate to the
aggregate interest of the partners or members who are inhabitants of
this state in the profits of the partnership or limited liability
company shall be taxed.

**Source.** 2010, Sp. Sess., 1:52, eff. July 1, 2010.

### Section 77:14-b

 **77:14-b Partners and Members. –** The tax shall be assessed on
such a partnership or limited liability company by the name under which
it does business, and the partners or members shall not be taxed with
respect to the taxable income derived by them from such a partnership or
limited liability company.

**Source.** 2010, Sp. Sess., 1:52, eff. July 1, 2010.

### Section 77:14-c

 **77:14-c Members of Partnership or Limited Liability Company
Outside the State. –** An inhabitant of this state who is a member of a
partnership or limited liability company having no usual place of
business in this state, who receives income from such partnership or
limited liability company derived from such a source that it would be
taxable if received directly from such source by such partner or member,
shall as to such income be subject to the taxes imposed by this chapter.

**Source.** 2010, Sp. Sess., 1:52, eff. July 1, 2010.

### Section 77:14-d

 **77:14-d Application of Sections. –** RSA 77:14-a to 77:14-c shall
apply, so far as apt, to associations, but not to partnerships, limited
liability companies, and associations the beneficial interest in which
is represented by transferable shares.

**Source.** 2010, Sp. Sess., 1:52, eff. July 1, 2010. 2012, 286:7, eff.
June 27, 2012.

### Section 77:15

 **77:15 Partners and Members. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2009, 144:278, II, eff.
July 1, 2009.
                                             ]

### Section 77:16

 **77:16 Members of Partnership or Limited Liability Company Outside
the State. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2009, 144:278, III, eff. July 1, 2009.
                                             ]

### Section 77:17

 **77:17 Application of Sections. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2009, 144:278, IV,
eff. July 1, 2009.
                                             ]

### Section 77:17-a

 **77:17-a Small Business Corporations, Information Reports. –**
Every small business corporation within this state, the stockholders of
which have been elected, or elect, to report their share of the
corporation's taxable income upon their individual federal income tax
returns, pursuant to federal tax laws and regulations, shall annually on
or before May 1, file a list of the names and addresses of all
stockholders during the preceding year together with the amount of
dividends paid to each with the department of revenue administration.
Provided, however, the information report shall not be filed in any year
that no such dividends are paid and provided further that stockholders
not legally residents in the state of New Hampshire shall not be listed.

**Source.** 1961, 70:1. 1973, 544:10. 1987, 109:1, eff. July 5, 1987.

### Section 77:18

 **77:18 Returns and Declarations. –**
                                             
 I. Returns of income shall be made to the commissioner of revenue
administration on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month
following the expiration of the tax year. The commissioner shall adopt
rules pursuant to RSA 541-A relative to the prescribed form for filing
returns under this section and for filing joint returns under RSA
77:5-a. Returns required by this chapter shall be made under the penalty
of perjury.
                                             
 II. At the same time the return is filed, as required by paragraph I
of this section, every taxpayer as defined in RSA 77:3 shall, in
addition, file a declaration of its estimated tax for its subsequent
taxable period; provided, however, that if the estimated tax is less
than 
                                             $500, a declaration need not be filed; and provided further that a
declaration shall be filed at the end of any quarter thereafter in which
the annualized estimated tax exceeds 
                                             $500.
                                             
 III. (a) One quarter of the taxpayer's estimated tax for the
subsequent taxable period is due and payable on the fifteenth day of the
fourth month of the subsequent taxable year; 1/4 is due and payable on
the fifteenth day of the sixth month of the subsequent taxable year; 1/4
is due and payable on the fifteenth day of the ninth month of the
subsequent taxable year; and 1/4 is due and payable on the fifteenth day
of the twelfth month of the subsequent taxable year, unless the taxpayer
is a calendar year taxpayer in which case the final 1/4 is due and
payable on the fifteenth day of the January next following the tax
year.
                                             
 (b) If the return required by RSA 77:18, I shows an additional
amount to be due, such additional amount is due and payable on the
original statutory due date. If such return shows an overpayment of the
tax due, the commissioner shall refund or credit the overpayment to the
taxpayer in accordance with RSA 21-J:28-a.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs I-III, the
following individuals shall not be required to file a return and shall
not be considered to have gross or net taxable income for the purposes
of this chapter:
                                             
 (a) Every individual whose total interest and dividend income is
less than 
                                             $2,400 for a taxable period.
                                             
 (b) For joint filers whose total interest and dividend income is
less than 
                                             $4,800 for a taxable period.

**Source.** 1923, 65:13. PL 65:18. 1927, 16:1. RL 78:18. 1947, 139:1.
1950, 5, part 8:13. RSA 77:18. 1973, 544:8. 1975, 439:32. 1981, 314:6.
1983, 469:93. 1986, 197:1. 1987, 236:1. 1988, 8:1, 23:1. 1991, 163:12.
1995, 160:1; 188:4. 2002, 45:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 77:18-a

 **77:18-a Fiscal Year Taxpayers' Returns. –** Taxpayers who file a
federal income tax return on a fiscal year basis shall file the return
required by RSA 77:18 on the same fiscal year, paying the tax due on the
fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of said fiscal year.
Taxpayers who elect for federal tax purposes to change their tax year
shall have an exemption allowed under RSA 77:5 in the same proportion as
their tax year bears to the calendar year.

**Source.** 1977, 85:1. 1983, 469:94, eff. Dec. 31, 1983.

### Section 77:18-b

 **77:18-b Extension of Time for Returns. –** For good cause, the
commissioner may extend the time within which a taxpayer is required to
file a return, and if such return is filed during the period of
extension no penalty may be imposed for failure to file the return at
the time required by this chapter, but the taxpayer shall be liable for
interest and late payment charges as prescribed in RSA 21-J:28, 32, or
33. Failure to file the return within the period of extension shall void
the extension.

**Source.** 1981, 314:7. 1985, 414:4. 1988, 23:2. 1991, 163:13, eff. May
27, 1991.

### Section 77:19

 **77:19 Inspection. –** Returns shall not be open to the inspection
of any person except the commissioner of revenue administration and his
deputies, assistants and clerks when acting under his authority;
provided, that a properly authorized representative of the federal
internal revenue bureau may inspect such returns if reciprocal
inspection of New Hampshire returns in that bureau is permitted to the
commissioner of revenue administration or his representatives.

**Source.** 1923, 65:13. PL 65:19. RL 78:19. 1950, 5, part 8:9. RSA
77:19. 1973, 544:8, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77:20

 **77:20 Information as to Filing of Returns. –** The commissioner of
revenue administration shall on the request of any inhabitant of the
state, state the fact whether or not any person has filed an income tax
return for the current or any prior year.

**Source.** 1923, 65:13. PL 65:20. RL 78:21. RSA 77:20. 1973, 544:8,
eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77:21

 **77:21 Payment; Interest. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 469:96, eff. Dec.
31, 1983.
                                             ]

### Section 77:21-a

 **77:21-a Overpayments. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1991, 163:43, II, eff. May
27, 1991.
                                             ]

### Section 77:21-b

 **77:21-b Interest. –** Any taxpayer who fails to make payment with
a return when due shall be subject to interest computed as prescribed in
RSA 21-J:28.

**Source.** 1985, 414:5. 1988, 23:3, eff. Mar. 16, 1988.

### Section 77:22

 **77:22 Warrants, Collection. –** The commissioner of revenue
administration may issue a warrant for the collection of any overdue tax
to the tax collector of any town or city, which shall have the same
remedies and the same fees for the collection of such taxes as are
provided by law for his collection of taxes on personal estate.

**Source.** 1923, 65:15. PL 65:23. RL 78:24. RSA 77:22. 1973, 544:8,
eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77:22-a

 **77:22-a Lien for Taxes. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1991, 163:43, III, eff. May
27, 1991.
                                             ]

### Section 77:23

 **77:23 To Whom Payable. –** All taxes assessed hereunder shall be
paid to the commissioner of revenue administration by the taxpayer.

**Source.** 1923, 65:16. PL 65:24. RL 78:25. 1950, 5, part 8:11. RSA
77:23. 1973, 544:8, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77:24

 **77:24 Reassessment by Department of Revenue Administration. –**
The department of revenue administration shall reassess the amount of
the tax in every case in which it appears in the examination of the
returns that the amount paid is either higher or lower than the actual
tax due. The department shall notify the taxpayer of any corrections
made. If the department of revenue administration determines a
deficiency, the amount of said deficiency and interest as prescribed in
RSA 21-J:28 shall be forwarded by the taxpayer to the department of
revenue administration within 15 days from the date of the required
notice. If the reassessment results in a determination of overpayment,
the amount of the excess shall be repaid to the taxpayer in the manner
provided by RSA 21-J:28-a. All assessments made under this section shall
be subject to the same right of appeal as provided in RSA 21-J:28-b, and
nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit the power
of the commissioner of revenue administration to make a later assessment
under RSA 21-J:29 and to seek penalties for fraudulent returns as
provided by RSA 77:30.

**Source.** 1950, 5, part 8:15. RSA 77:24. 1973, 544:11, IV. 1975,
439:24. 1981, 314:9; 465:2. 1982, 42:96. 1983, 441:2. 1985, 204:9. 1991,
163:14, eff. May 27, 1991.

### Section 77:24-a

 **77:24-a Abatement for Overpayment. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1991, 163:43,
IV, eff. May 27, 1991.
                                             ]

### Section 77:24-b

 **77:24-b Corrections. –** Each taxpayer shall report to the
commissioner of revenue administration any change in the amount of the
taxpayer's income as defined by RSA 77:4 as finally determined by the
United States Internal Revenue Service with respect to any beneficial
interest for which the taxpayer has made a return under this chapter.
Such a report shall be made not later than 6 months after the taxpayer
has received notice that such change has been finally determined.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a taxpayer reporting a
correction pursuant to this section shall be given notice by the
department of any adjustment to the tax due with respect to such
correction within 6 months after the filing of the report.

**Source.** 1981, 314:10. 1995, 45:2, eff. July 2, 1995.

### Section 77:25

 **77:25 Appeal of Assessment. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1991, 163:43, V, eff.
May 27, 1991.
                                             ]

### Section 77:25-a

 **77:25-a Uncollectible Taxes. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1975, 439:34, II, eff.
July 1, 1975.
                                             ]

### Section 77:26

 **77:26 Appeal. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 544:19, eff. Sept. 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 77:27

 **77:27 Refunds. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1991, 163:43, VI, eff. May 27,
1991.
                                             ]

### Section 77:27-a

 **77:27-a Minor Over or Under Payments Disregarded. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1991, 163:43, VII, eff. May 27, 1991.
                                             ]

### Section 77:28

 **77:28 Correction of Assessment. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1975, 439:34, III,
eff. July 1, 1975.
                                             ]

### Section 77:29

 **77:29 Penalty for Delay in Filing Return. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1975,
439:34, III-a, eff. July 1, 1975.
                                             ]

### Section 77:30

 **77:30 Penalty; Fraudulent or Incorrect Return. –**
                                             
 I. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. For purposes of the application of RSA 21-J:31 to this chapter,
if a return is not filed when due and the failure to file a return when
due is not a violation of any provision of RSA 21-J:39, then neither the

                                             $10 nor the 
                                             $50 alternate penalties of RSA 21-J:31 shall apply to the
return.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1923, 65:22. PL 65:33. RL 78:34. RSA 77:30. 1973, 528:19;
544:8. 1986, 197:2. 1989, 61:1. 1991, 163:15, 43, VIII, eff. May 27,
1991.

### Section 77:30-a

 **77:30-a Question on Inventory Blank. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1989, 50:16,
I, eff. June 18, 1989.
                                             ]

Administration
--------------

### Section 77:31

 **77:31 Division of Interest and Dividends. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1975,
439:34, IV, eff. July 1, 1975.
                                             ]

### Section 77:32

 **77:32 Administration by Director of Interest and Dividends. –**

                                             [Repealed 1975, 439:34, V, eff. July 1, 1975.
                                             ]

### Section 77:33

 **77:33 Expenses of Administration. –** The expense of
administration of this chapter shall be paid out of said taxes.

**Source.** 1923, 65:29. PL 65:29. RL 78:30.

### Section 77:34

 **77:34 Distribution. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 469:52, I, eff. July 1,
1983.
                                             ]

### Section 77:35

 **77:35 Questions of Law. –** The board of tax and land appeals may,
at any time, reserve, certify and transfer to the supreme court for
decision any question of law which may arise in connection with the
administration of this chapter.

**Source.** 1923, 65:23. PL 65:35. RL 78:35. RSA 77:35. 1973, 544:13,
eff. Sept. 1, 1973.

### Section 77:36

 **77:36 Disposal of Papers. –** The commissioner of revenue
administration may destroy any tax returns on file in the department of
revenue administration for more than 4 years which, in his opinion, are
no longer of any value to the state.

**Source.** 1929, 108:2. RL 78:20.

### Section 77:37

 **77:37 Taxpayer Records. –**
                                             
 I. Every taxpayer shall:
                                             
 (a) Keep such records as may be necessary to determine the amount
of its liability under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Preserve such records for the period of 3 years or until any
litigation or prosecution under this chapter is finally determined.
                                             
 (c) Make such records available for inspection by the
commissioner or authorized agents, upon demand, at reasonable times.
                                             
 II. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be subject
to the penalties imposed under RSA 21-J:39.

**Source.** 2007, 152:1, eff. Aug. 17, 2007.

Taxation of Gambling Winnings
-----------------------------

### Section 77:38-50

 **77:38 to 77:50 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 47:1, II, eff. May
23, 2011.
                                             ]
