---
title: 'CHAPTER 79-B CONSERVATION RESTRICTION'
---

TITLE V
                                             
TAXATION
========

CHAPTER 79-B
                                             
CONSERVATION RESTRICTION
------------------------

### Section 79-B:1

 **79-B:1 Declaration of Intent. –** It is the declared intent of
this chapter to provide for a fair, consistent and equitable method of
municipal assessment of conservation restriction land which provides a
demonstrated public benefit, based upon the conservation uses to which
the land is perpetually limited. In addition, it is the declared intent
of this chapter to further assist in the preservation of open space in
this state in the public interest by promoting the granting and
acquisition of permanent conservation restrictions on such open space
land which provides a demonstrated public benefit.

**Source.** 1990, 13:1. 1991, 62:1, eff. July 5, 1991.

### Section 79-B:2

 **79-B:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Assessing official'' means the assessing authority of any town,
city or unincorporated place.
                                             
 II. "Board'' means the current use board established by RSA 79-A:3.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
revenue administration.
                                             
 IV. "Conservation restriction'' means a permanent restriction of
open space land by deed granted in perpetuity, and further, as defined
by RSA 477:45, I, to a federal, state, county, local or other government
body, or to a charitable, educational, or other nonprofit corporation
established for the purposes of natural resource conservation and as
further defined in RSA 79-B:2, X.
                                             
 V. "Developed land'' means any land, regardless of whether or not it
is subject to a conservation restriction, upon which structures or
improvements have been introduced for residential, commercial, or
industrial purposes or any commercial mining or excavating purposes
inconsistent with its use as open space land.
                                             
 VI. "Inconsistent use penalty'' means that amount paid to the
municipality under RSA 79-B:6, in addition to any civil penalties which
may accrue to the landowner who violates the terms of the conservation
restriction.
                                             
 VII. "Open space land'' means any or all farm land, forest land, or
unproductive land, as defined by RSA 79-A:2 and by rules adopted by the
board.
                                             
 VIII. "Owner'' means the person or entity which is the owner of
record of any land.
                                             
 IX. "Restricted land'' means any undeveloped open space land subject
to a qualifying conservation restriction including, where the
restriction meets the requirements of section 170(h) of the United
States Internal Revenue Code, any portion of the property on which the
owner has reserved a right to develop, but has not yet exercised such
right.
                                             
 X. "Qualifying conservation nonprofit corporation'' means those
charitable, educational, or other nonprofit corporations established for
the purposes of natural resource conservation and which shall have
demonstrated through current bylaws or articles of agreement and action
taken by the corporation that it is in the business of, and capable of,
accepting conservation restrictions as grantee and as further defined by
rules adopted by the commissioner pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 XI. "Qualifying conservation restriction'' means a conservation
restriction held by a qualifying conservation nonprofit corporation and
from which a demonstrated public benefit occurs and as further defined
by rules adopted by the commissioner pursuant to RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1990, 13:1. 1991, 62:2-4; 281:21, 22. 1992, 138:1, 2, eff.
Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 79-B:3

 **79-B:3 Assessment of Open Space Land Subject to Conservation
Restriction. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in this chapter, the selectmen or assessing
officials shall assess restricted land for general property tax purposes
at values based upon permanent restrictions, and in no case greater than
those determined to be the fair market value for open space land
determined by the board. Should RSA 79-A no longer be in effect, the
basis for restricted land assessment shall be upon the permanent
restrictions on the land.
                                             
 II. This section shall not apply to developed land.

**Source.** 1990, 13:1. 1991, 62:5, eff. July 5, 1991.

### Section 79-B:4

 **79-B:4 Procedure for Application. –**
                                             
 I. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the assessment
of restricted land for any tax year unless the owner shall have applied
to the assessing officials to have his lands so classified on or before
April 15 of said year on a form provided by the commissioner. There
shall be no minimum acreage requirement for classification of restricted
land.
                                             
 II. The assessing officials shall notify the applicant on a form
provided by the commissioner no later than July 1 of their decision to
classify or refusal to classify the applicant's land by delivery of such
notification to the applicant in person or by mailing such notification
to his last and usual place of abode.
                                             
 III. The owner of restricted land shall not be required to reapply
for such classification for each succeeding tax year after it has been
determined by the assessing officials that his land qualifies for such
classification. A list of all classified lands and their owners in each
town or city shall be filed by the respective assessing officials each
year. Such a list shall be part of the invoice and subject to inspection
as provided in RSA 76:7.
                                             
 IV. The assessing officials shall file with the register of deeds in
the appropriate county, on or before August 1 in each year, a list of
all parcels of land classified under the provisions of this chapter. If
a parcel of land is classified as restricted land after such date, the
assessing officials shall file notice of said classification with the
register of deeds in the appropriate county within 14 days of the
classification. The list filed pursuant to this paragraph shall be on a
form provided by the commissioner, shall contain the name of each owner,
the date of classification and a short description of each parcel of
real estate, together with such other information as the commissioner
may prescribe; provided, however, the assessing officials shall not file
each year parcels of land classified under this chapter which have been
previously filed, unless there has been some change in the acreage
involved or some other change in the classification. A fee in accordance
with RSA 478:17-g shall be paid by the owner for each parcel which is
classified as restricted land to the local assessing officials, to be
paid over to the register of deeds for recording the classification
notice.
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, for
forms and procedures as are needed to implement this chapter, to assure
a fair opportunity for owners to qualify under this chapter, to assure
compliance of land uses on classified lands and to assure that special
property tax assessment under this chapter is granted to only those
conservation restriction lands which provide for a demonstrated public
benefit and for which restrictions are held by qualifying conservation
nonprofit corporations.
                                             
 VI. A permanent conservation restriction on open space land shall be
considered to provide a demonstrated public benefit if it protects, in
perpetuity, at least one of the following values:
                                             
 (a) The preservation of land for outdoor recreation by, or the
education of, the general public, whereby:
                                             
 (1) The general public must have the regular opportunity for
access to and use of the land for pedestrian purposes; and
                                             
 (2) The land has conservation and recreational values which
make it attractive for public use.
                                             
 (b) A relatively natural habitat for fish, wildlife, or plants,
or similar ecosystem, whereby:
                                             
 (1) The property must be in a relatively natural state; and
                                             
 (2) Rare or endangered or threatened species must be present;
or the property must contribute to the ecological viability of a park or
other conservation area; or it must otherwise represent a high quality
native terrestrial or aquatic ecosystem.
                                             
 (c) The preservation of open space land, whereby:
                                             
 (1) There is scenic enjoyment by the general public from a
public way or from public waters; or
                                             
 (2) The open space protection is pursuant to a clearly
delineated federal, state, or local government conservation policy.
                                             
 (d) The preservation of a historically important land area,
whereby:
                                             
 (1) The property is either independently significant due to
recorded local, regional or state history, or is within a historic
district; or
                                             
 (2) The property is immediately adjacent to a historic
district; or
                                             
 (3) The land's physical or environmental features contribute
to the historic or cultural integrity of a property listed on the
National Register of Historic Places.

**Source.** 1990, 13:1. 1991, 62:6, 7, eff. July 5, 1991.

### Section 79-B:5

 **79-B:5 Appeal to Board of Tax and Land Appeals or Superior Court.
–** If the assessing officials deny in whole or in part any application
for classification as restricted land or impose the penalty as provided
in RSA 79-B:6 of this chapter, the applicant may appeal either to the
board of tax and land appeals or the superior court in the same manner
as provided for appeals of current use classification pursuant to RSA
79-A:9 or RSA 79-A:11.

**Source.** 1990, 13:1, eff. May 12, 1990.

### Section 79-B:6

 **79-B:6 Inconsistent Use Penalty. –** In addition to any civil
penalties assessed against the landowner, open space land which has been
classified as restricted land pursuant to this chapter but which has
been developed or put to a use either exercising any reserved rights to
develop or violating its restricted classification shall be subjected to
a penalty in addition to the annual real estate tax imposed upon such
property of 10 percent of the full and true value of the portion of said
land on which an inconsistent use has occurred as prescribed by RSA 75:1
without regard to the restriction. The penalty shall become due and
payable to the municipality as of the date of the inconsistent use. Such
developed land shall no longer qualify for assessment as restricted land
under this chapter.

**Source.** 1990, 13:1. 1992, 138:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1993.

### Section 79-B:7

 **79-B:7 Valuation for Bonding Limit Purposes. –** In computing the
total value of all land in a city or town, any land which is appraised
at restricted land value under the provisions of this chapter shall, for
all purposes, including, but not limited to, the purposes of RSA 33:4-b,
be inventoried by the town or city at its restricted land value.

**Source.** 1990, 13:1, eff. May 12, 1990.

### Section 79-B:8

 **79-B:8 Valuation for Computing Equalized Value. –** In computing
the equalized value of a city or town, the department of revenue
administration shall use the restricted land value for any land which is
so appraised under this chapter.

**Source.** 1990, 13:1, eff. May 12, 1990.

### Section 79-B:9

 **79-B:9 Lien for Unpaid Taxes. –** The real estate of every person
shall be subject to a lien for the penalties and taxes levied pursuant
to RSA 79-B:6.

**Source.** 1990, 13:1, eff. May 12, 1990.

### Section 79-B:10

 **79-B:10 Enforcement. –** All penalties and taxes levied pursuant
to RSA 79-B:6 which are not paid when due shall be collected in the same
manner as provided in RSA 80. This collection, however, shall not
disqualify the remaining portion of such restricted land from future
assessment under this chapter.

**Source.** 1990, 13:1, eff. May 12, 1990.

### Section 79-B:11

 **79-B:11 False Statement. –** Any person who shall make, or cause
to be made, any false or fraudulent application, return or statement
with the intent to defraud the towns or cities of any real property
taxes which would be levied but for the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1990, 13:1, eff. May 12, 1990.
