---
title: 'CHAPTER 79-C DISCRETIONARY EASEMENTS'
---

TITLE V
                                             
TAXATION
========

CHAPTER 79-C
                                             
DISCRETIONARY EASEMENTS
-----------------------

### Section 79-C:1

 **79-C:1 Declaration of Public Interest. –** It is hereby declared
to be in the public interest to encourage the preservation of open space
which is potentially subject to development, thus providing a healthful
and attractive outdoor environment for work and recreation of the
state's citizens, maintaining the character of the state's landscape,
and conserving the land, water, forest, agricultural, recreational, and
wildlife resources. It is further declared to be in the public interest
to prevent the loss of open space due to property taxation at values
incompatible with open space usage. The means for encouraging
preservation of open space authorized by this chapter is the acquisition
of discretionary easements of development rights by town or city
governments on such open space land which provides a demonstrated public
benefit.

**Source.** 1996, 176:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 79-C:2

 **79-C:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Discretionary easement'' means a restriction of open space land
granted to a city or town for a term of 10 or more years.
                                             
 II. "Public benefit'' shall have the meaning described in RSA
79-C:3.
                                             
 III. "Golf course land'' means a parcel of 10 acres or more of land
used in the playing of the game of golf including greens, fairways,
tees, traps, and roughs, and such other areas which are located within
the established playing area.

**Source.** 1996, 176:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 79-C:3

 **79-C:3 Qualifying Land. –**
                                             
 I. Any owner of land which does not meet the criteria for open space
land as defined in RSA 79-A but meets the tests of demonstrated public
benefit in paragraph II of this section and who wishes to keep the land
in a use consistent with the purposes of this chapter may apply to the
governing body of the municipality in which the land is located to
convey a discretionary easement to the municipality.
                                             
 II. A discretionary easement on open space land shall be considered
to provide a demonstrated public benefit if it provides at least one of
the following public benefits:
                                             
 (a) The preservation of land for outdoor recreation by, or for
the education of, the general public where:
                                             
 (1) The general public has the regular opportunity for access
to and use of the land for pedestrian purposes; and
                                             
 (2) The land has conservation and recreational values which
make it attractive for public use.
                                             
 (b) A relatively natural habitat for fish, wildlife, or plants,
or similar ecosystem, where:
                                             
 (1) The property is in a relatively natural state; and
                                             
 (2) Rare or endangered or threatened species are present; or
the property contributes to the ecological viability of a park or other
conservation area; or otherwise represents a high quality native
terrestrial or aquatic ecosystem.
                                             
 (c) The preservation of open space land, where:
                                             
 (1) There is scenic enjoyment by the general public from a
public way or from public waters; or
                                             
 (2) The open space protection is pursuant to a clearly
delineated federal, state, or local conservation policy.
                                             
 (d) The preservation of an historically important land area,
where:
                                             
 (1) The property is either independently significant due to
recorded local, regional, or state history, or is within a historic
district; or
                                             
 (2) The property is immediately adjacent to an historic
district; or
                                             
 (3) The land's physical or environmental features contribute
to the historic or cultural integrity of a property listed on the
National Register of Historic Places.
                                             
 (e) The preservation of an airport, as defined in RSA 422,
excluding the value of any buildings, runways, or other structures,
where:
                                             
 (1) The airport serves, or contributes to satisfying, the air
transportation needs of the municipality or of its region; or
                                             
 (2) The continuation of the airport serves to preserve natural
habitat or open space as set forth in subparagraphs (b) or (c), which
might otherwise be potentially affected by development.
                                             
 (f) The preservation of a golf course which meets any of the
above tests of public benefit and is open to the general public.

**Source.** 1996, 176:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 79-C:4

 **79-C:4 Application Procedure. –**
                                             
 I. Any owner of land which meets the tests of public benefit in RSA
79-C:3, II may apply to the governing body to grant a discretionary
easement to the municipality not to subdivide, develop, or otherwise
change the use of such land to a more intensive use inconsistent with
the purposes of this chapter.
                                             
 II. No owner of land shall be entitled to have a particular parcel
of land classified for any tax year under the provisions of this chapter
unless the owner has applied to the governing body on or before April 15
of the tax year on a form provided by the commissioner of the department
of revenue administration. Such application shall include a map of the
land to be subject to the discretionary easement, a description of how
the property meets the tests of public benefit in RSA 79-C:3, and an
appraisal of the value of the easement to be conveyed.

**Source.** 1996, 176:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 79-C:5

 **79-C:5 Approval, Denial. –**
                                             
 I. If the governing body finds that the proposed use of such land is
consistent with the purposes of this chapter, it may take steps to
acquire discretionary easements as provided in this chapter. In
exercising its discretion, the local governing body may weigh the public
benefit to be obtained versus the tax revenue to be lost if such an
easement is granted. The governing body shall have no more than 60 days
to act upon the application.
                                             
 II. If the governing body denies the application to grant a
discretionary easement to the municipality, such denial shall be
accompanied by a written explanation. The local governing body's
decision may be appealed using the procedures of either RSA 79-A:9 or
79-A:11, provided, however, that such denial shall be deemed
discretionary and shall not be set aside by the board of tax and land
appeals or the superior court except for bad faith, discrimination, or
the application of criteria other than those set forth in RSA 79-C:3 and
paragraph I of this section.
                                             
 III. The easement shall be a burden upon the land and shall bind all
transferees and assignees of such land. An easement granted pursuant to
this subdivision shall not be assigned, transferred, or released by the
municipality without the consent of the owner, except as provided in RSA
79-C:8.

**Source.** 1996, 176:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 79-C:6

 **79-C:6 Terms; Recording. –** Any easement acquired by the
municipality pursuant to this chapter shall be for a minimum of 10
years. The easement terms shall include the method of assessment
pursuant to RSA 79-C:7, the terms of expiration pursuant to RSA 79-C:8,
II, and the terms of renewal pursuant to RSA 79-C:8, III. The local
governing body shall provide for the recording of such easements with
the register of deeds. Any costs of recording shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.

**Source.** 1996, 176:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 79-C:7

 **79-C:7 Assessment of Land Subject to Discretionary Easement. –**
The method of assessment of discretionary easement land, excluding any
buildings, their curtilage, appurtenances, or other improvements, shall
be included as a term of the agreement in any discretionary easement
acquired by a municipality, and shall fall within a range of values
determined as follows:
                                             
 I. One end of the range shall consist of the value such land would
have been assigned under the current use values established pursuant to
RSA 79-A, if the land had met the criteria for open space land under
that chapter.
                                             
 II. The other end of the range shall be determined by multiplying 75
percent of the land's fair market value by the current equalization
rate.
                                             
 III. The local governing body shall have the discretion to set the
value of the discretionary easement at a level within this range which
it believes reflects the public benefit conferred by the property, under
the criteria set forth in RSA 79-C:3 and RSA 79-C:5, I.

**Source.** 1996, 176:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 79-C:8

 **79-C:8 Release of Easement, Expiration, Renewal, Consideration.
–**
                                             
 I. Any landowner who has granted a discretionary easement to a
municipality pursuant to the terms of this chapter, after the effective
date of this chapter, may apply to the local governing body of the
municipality in which the property subject to a discretionary easement
is located for a release from such easement upon a demonstration of
extreme personal hardship. Upon release from such easement, a landowner
shall pay the following consideration to the tax collector of the
municipality:
                                             
 (a) For a release within the first half of the duration of the
easement, 20 percent of the RSA 75:1 full value assessment of such
land.
                                             
 (b) For a release within the second half of the duration of the
easement, 15 percent of the RSA 75:1 full value assessment of such
land.
                                             
 II. The terms of agreement may include specification of an amount,
if any, up to 10 percent of fair market value, to be paid upon final
expiration of the terms of the discretionary easement or renewed
discretionary easement.
                                             
 III. Upon the expiration of the terms of the discretionary easement,
the owner may apply for a renewal, and the owner and local governing
body shall have the same rights and duties with respect to the renewal
application as they did with respect to the original application;
provided, however, that at the time of the original granting of the
discretionary easement, the parties may include, as a term of the
agreement, a provision for automatic renewal for the same term as the
original. Such a provision may include the specification of the manner
in which the tax assessment on the property for the next term is to be
determined at the time of renewal.
                                             
 IV. The tax collector shall issue a receipt to the owner of such
land and a copy to the local governing body for the sums paid. The local
governing body shall, upon receiving a copy of the above-mentioned
consideration, execute a release or renewal of the easement to the owner
who shall record such a release or renewal. A copy of such release or
renewal shall also be sent to the local assessing officials if they are
not the same parties executing the release.

**Source.** 1996, 176:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 79-C:9

 **79-C:9 Payment; Collection. –**
                                             
 I. If a consideration is due under RSA 79-C:8, I or II, the assessed
value shall be determined as of the actual date of the release or
expiration. Any consideration is in addition to the annual real estate
tax imposed upon the property, and shall be due and payable upon the
release or expiration.
                                             
 II. Any consideration shall be due and payable by the owner at the
time of release or expiration to the municipality in which the property
is located. If the property is located in an unincorporated town or
unorganized place, the tax shall be due and payable by the owner at the
time of release or expiration to the county in which the property is
located. Moneys paid to a county under this chapter shall be used to pay
for the cost of services provided in RSA 28:7-a and RSA 28:7-b. Any
consideration shall be due and payable according to the following
procedure:
                                             
 (a) The commissioner shall prescribe and issue forms to the local
assessing officials for the consideration due, which shall provide a
description of the property, the discretionary easement, the RSA 75:1
full value assessment, and the amount payable.
                                             
 (b) The prescribed form shall be prepared in quadruplicate. The
original, duplicate, and triplicate copy of the form shall be given to
the collector of taxes for collection of the consideration along with a
special tax warrant authorizing the collector to collect the
consideration under the warrant. The quadruplicate copy of the form
shall be retained by the local assessing officials for their records.
                                             
 (c) Upon receipt of the special tax warrant and prescribed forms,
the tax collector shall mail the duplicate copy of the tax bill to the
owner responsible for the tax as the notice of tax. Such bill shall be
mailed within 12 months of the release or expiration.
                                             
 (d) Payment of the consideration shall be due not later than 30
days after the mailing of the bill. Interest at the rate of 18 percent
per annum shall be due thereafter on any consideration not paid within
the 30-day period.

**Source.** 1996, 176:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 79-C:10

 **79-C:10 Exemption for Eminent Domain. –** If any of the land which
is subject to a discretionary easement is condemned by any governmental
agency or is acquired through eminent domain proceedings, the local
governing body shall execute a release of the easement to the owner.
None of the liquidated consideration provisions of RSA 79-C:8, I and II
shall be applicable to releases granted pursuant to this section.

**Source.** 1996, 176:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 79-C:11

 **79-C:11 Local Easement Programs. –** This chapter shall not be
construed to limit the development of any other state, county, town, or
city easement program for conservation, recreation, or other purposes.

**Source.** 1996, 176:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 79-C:12

 **79-C:12 Lien for Unpaid Taxes. –** The real estate of every person
shall be held for the taxes levied pursuant to RSA 79-C:8.

**Source.** 1996, 176:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 79-C:13

 **79-C:13 Enforcement. –** All taxes levied pursuant to RSA 79-C:8
which are not paid when due shall be collected in the same manner as
provided in RSA 80.

**Source.** 1996, 176:1. 2007, 42:1, eff. July 20, 2007.

### Section 79-C:14

 **79-C:14 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of the department of
revenue administration shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 I. The application procedures under RSA 79-C:4.
                                             
 II. The payment and collection procedures under RSA 79-C:9.

**Source.** 1996, 176:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1996.

### Section 79-C:15

 **79-C:15 Applicability of Chapter. –** All discretionary easement
applications which were granted by a municipal governing body on or
before August 2, 1996 shall continue to be governed for the remainder of
their term of years by RSA 79-A, including those provisions amended or
repealed by 1996, 176. This chapter shall apply only to applications for
discretionary easements granted after August 2, 1996. The intent of the
legislature is to honor the statutory terms upon which the parties
relied and under which discretionary easements were granted before the
effective date of this chapter. When those easements granted on or
before August 2, 1996 expire, they shall be subject to renewal under
this chapter.

**Source.** 1997, 47:1, eff. May 19, 1997.
