---
title: 'CHAPTER 79-H TAXATION OF CERTAIN CHARTERED PUBLIC SCHOOL FACILITIES'
---

TITLE V
                                             
TAXATION
========

CHAPTER 79-H
                                             
TAXATION OF CERTAIN CHARTERED PUBLIC SCHOOL FACILITIES
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 79-H:1

 **79-H:1 Declaration of Public Interest. –** The general court
hereby finds it to be in the public interest to authorize municipalities
to allow a chartered public school to be able to rent or lease its
building or facilities from a property owner which is not exempt from
property taxes, and not have the property taxes attributable to the
chartered public school facilities be taxed to the owner at the full
market value of the facilities.

**Source.** 2015, 266:1, eff. July 20, 2015.

### Section 79-H:2

 **79-H:2 Adoption of this Chapter. –** A town or city may adopt the
provisions of this chapter by vote of its legislative body using the
following procedures:
                                             
 I. In a town, other than a town that has adopted a charter pursuant
to RSA 49-D, the question shall be placed on the warrant of the annual
town meeting by the governing body or by petition under RSA 39:3.
                                             
 II. In a city or town that has adopted a charter under RSA 49-C or
RSA 49-D, the legislative body may consider and act upon the question in
accordance with its normal procedures for passage of resolutions,
ordinances, and other legislation.
                                             
 III. If a majority of those voting on the question vote "yes,'' the
provisions of this chapter shall take effect within the town or city on
the date set by the legislative body, or in the tax year beginning April
1 following its adoption, whichever shall occur first.
                                             
 IV. A town or city may rescind the provisions of this chapter in the
manner described in paragraphs I-III.

**Source.** 2015, 266:1, eff. July 20, 2015.

### Section 79-H:3

 **79-H:3 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Assessing official'' means the assessing authority of any town,
city, or place.
                                             
 II. "Board of tax and land appeals'' means the board of tax and land
appeals established pursuant to the provisions of RSA 71-B:1.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
revenue administration.
                                             
 IV. "Qualifying chartered public school facility'' means the
building, or portion thereof, and the land appurtenant thereto, which,
pursuant to a rental or lease agreement, is used exclusively as a
chartered public school, established and operating under RSA 194-B, and
which is rented or leased from an owner who is not exempt from property
taxation under RSA 72.

**Source.** 2015, 266:1, eff. July 20, 2015.

### Section 79-H:4

 **79-H:4 Appraisal of Qualifying Chartered Public School Facilities.
–**
                                             
 I. The assessing officials in any municipality adopting the
provisions of this chapter shall appraise qualifying chartered public
school facility property at no more than 10 percent of its market
value.
                                             
 II. No owner of land and buildings renting or leasing to a
qualifying chartered public school facility shall be entitled to have
the property appraised for any tax year under the provisions of this
chapter unless the owner applies to the assessing officials on or before
April 15 of said year, on a form approved and provided by the
commissioner, to have the property so appraised. Such application shall
include a verified copy of the rental or lease agreement containing
terms and provisions identifying the specific real property exclusively
used by the chartered public school for the purposes of RSA 194-B and
payment terms under the rental or lease agreement which assign the tax
exemption under this chapter to the benefit of the chartered public
school. If any owner satisfies the assessing officials that it was
prevented by accident, mistake, or misfortune from filing such
application on or before April 15, the assessing officials may receive
the application at a later date and appraise the property under this
chapter; but no such application shall be received after the local tax
rate has been approved by the commissioner for that year.
                                             
 III. The assessing officials shall notify the applicant on a form
provided by the commissioner no later than July 1, or within 15 days if
the application is filed after July 1, of their decision to classify or
refuse to classify the property under the provisions of this chapter by
delivery of such notification to the owner in person or by mailing such
notification to the owner's last and usual place of abode.
                                             
 IV. A list of all qualifying chartered public school facilities
assessed under this chapter and their owners in each town or city shall
be filed by the respective assessing officials each year. Such list
shall be part of the record and subject to inspection as provided in RSA
76:7.
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall include on the inventory blank, required
under RSA 74:4, a question concerning whether any changes have been made
in the use of a qualifying chartered public school facility. The
question shall be written to enable the assessing officials to locate
qualifying facilities which may require a change in assessment and to
fit the context of the blank.

**Source.** 2015, 266:1, eff. July 20, 2015.

### Section 79-H:5

 **79-H:5 Appeal to Board of Tax and Land Appeals. –**
                                             
 I. If the assessing officials deny in whole or in part any
application for assessment of certain property as a qualifying chartered
public school facility, the applicant, having complied with the
requirements of RSA 79-H:4, II may, on or before 6 months after any such
action by the assessing officials, in writing and upon a payment of a

                                             $65 filing fee, apply to such board for a review of the action of the
assessing officials.
                                             
 II. The board of tax and land appeals shall investigate the matter
and shall hold a hearing if requested as provided in this section. The
board shall make such order thereon as justice requires, and such order
shall be enforceable as provided hereafter.
                                             
 III. Upon receipt of an application under the provisions of
paragraph I, the board of tax and land appeals shall give notice in
writing to the affected town or city of the receipt of the application
by mailing such notice to the town or city clerk thereof by certified
mail. Such town or city may request in writing a hearing on such
application within 30 days after the mailing of such notice. If a
hearing is requested by a town or city, the board shall, not less than
30 days prior to the date of hearing upon such application, give notice
of the time and place of such hearing to the applicant and the town or
city in writing. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit
the rights of taxpayers to a hearing before the board of tax and land
appeals.
                                             
 IV. The applicant and the town or city shall be entitled to appear
by counsel, may present evidence to the board of tax and land appeals,
and may subpoena witnesses. Either party may request that a stenographic
record be kept of the hearing. Any investigative report filed by the
staff of the board shall be made a part of such record.
                                             
 V. In such hearing, the board of tax and land appeals shall not be
bound by the technical rules of evidence.
                                             
 VI. Either party aggrieved by the decision of the board of tax and
land appeals may appeal pursuant to the provisions of RSA 71-B:12. For
the purposes of such appeal, the findings of fact by said board shall be
final. Any such appeal shall be limited to questions of law. An election
by an applicant to appeal in accordance with this paragraph shall be
deemed a waiver of any right to petition the superior court in
accordance with RSA 79-H:6.
                                             
 VII. A copy of an order by the board of tax and land appeals,
attested as such by the chairman of the board, if no appeal is taken
hereunder, may be filed in the superior court for the county or in the
Merrimack county superior court at the option of said board; and,
thereafter, such order may be enforced as a final judgment of the
superior court.

**Source.** 2015, 266:1, eff. July 20, 2015.

### Section 79-H:6

 **79-H:6 Appeal to Superior Court. –** If the assessing officials
deny in whole or in part any application for assessment of the property
or portion thereof as a qualifying chartered public school facility, the
applicant, having complied with the requirements of RSA 79-H:4, II may,
within 6 months after notice of denial, apply by petition to the
superior court of the county, which shall make such order thereon as
justice requires. Any appeal to the superior court under this section
shall be in lieu of an appeal to the board of tax and land appeals
pursuant to RSA 79-H:5.

**Source.** 2015, 266:1, eff. July 20, 2015.

### Section 79-H:7

 **79-H:7 Enforcement. –** All taxes levied pursuant to assessments
under this chapter which are not paid when due shall be collected in the
same manner as provided in RSA 80.

**Source.** 2015, 266:1, eff. July 20, 2015.

### Section 79-H:8

 **79-H:8 Disposition of Revenues. –** All money received by the tax
collector pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be for the
use of the town or city.

**Source.** 2015, 266:1, eff. July 20, 2015.
