---
title: 'CHAPTER 83-F UTILITY PROPERTY TAX'
---

TITLE V
                                             
TAXATION
========

CHAPTER 83-F
                                             
UTILITY PROPERTY TAX
--------------------

### Section 83-F:1

 **83-F:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
revenue administration.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of revenue administration.
                                             
 III. "Taxable period'' means the period beginning April 1, and
ending March 31 of the following year.
                                             
 IV. "Utility'' means any person, partnership, limited liability
company, association, corporation, or other entity, their trustees or
receivers appointed by any court, owning or possessing utility property,
engaged in the generation, production, supply, distribution,
transmission, or transportation of electric power or natural gas, crude
petroleum and refined petroleum products or combinations thereof, water,
or sewage.
                                             
 V. "Utility property'' means all real estate, buildings and
structures, machinery, dynamos, apparatus, poles, wires, fixtures of all
kinds and descriptions, and pipe lines located within New Hampshire
employed in the generation, production, supply, distribution,
transmission, or transportation of electric power or natural gas, crude
petroleum and refined petroleum products or combinations thereof, water,
or sewage subject to tax under RSA 72:6, 72:7 and 72:8, but not exempt
under RSA 72:23; provided that no electric power fixtures which would
otherwise be taxed under this chapter shall be taxed under this chapter
if they are employed solely as an emergency source of electric power.
"Utility property'' shall not include:
                                             
 (a) Water and air pollution control facilities exempt from local
property taxation under RSA 72:12-a;
                                             
 (b) Water and sewer companies exempt from regulation as public
utilities by the public utilities commission under RSA 362:4;
                                             
 (c) Any other property which is not subject to local property
taxation;
                                             
 (d) The electrical generation, production, and supply equipment
of an "eligible customer-generator'' as defined in RSA 362-A:1-a, II-b;
                                             
 (e) Property used for the retail distribution of fuel for
personal, non-commercial use, use as a fuel in a motorized vehicle, home
cooking, or heating; and
                                             
 (f) That portion of a manufacturing establishment's generation,
production, supply, distribution, transmission, or transportation of
electric power or natural gas, crude petroleum and refined petroleum
products or combinations thereof, water, or sewage subject to tax under
RSA 72:6, 72:7, and 72:8, but not exempt under RSA 72:23, that is
expended, used, or consumed on-site primarily for the operation of the
manufacturing establishment and that does not otherwise enter the stream
of commerce.

**Source.** 1999, 17:35; 303:3. 2011, 59:1, eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 83-F:2

 **83-F:2 Tax Imposed. –** For taxable periods beginning April 1,
1999, a tax is imposed upon the value of utility property at the rate of

                                             $6.60 on each 
                                             $1000 of such value, to be assessed annually as of April
1, and every year thereafter, and paid in accordance with this chapter.

**Source.** 1999, 17:35, eff. April 29, 1999.

### Section 83-F:3

 **83-F:3 Determination of Value. –** On or before December 1 of the
tax year, the commissioner shall determine the market value of utility
property for the purposes of this chapter by utilizing generally
accepted appraisal methods and techniques. Market value means the
property's full and true value as defined under RSA 75:1. In the case of
regulated public utilities as defined in RSA 362:2, the commissioner
shall hold a single public hearing annually prior to performing
assessments, in order to receive public input on assessments under this
chapter. Notice of such determination shall be given to the taxpayer
within 15 days of the commissioner's determination.

**Source.** 1999, 17:35. 2010, 219:2, eff. Aug. 27, 2010.

### Section 83-F:4

 **83-F:4 Persons Liable. –** The tax imposed by this chapter shall
be assessed upon each utility owning or possessing utility property. If
an owner of utility property has filed an election pursuant to RSA
83-F:5, II, the tax imposed by this chapter shall be assessed upon each
person with an ownership interest in utility property, in the proportion
that such person's ownership interest bears to the entirety of the
ownership in the property.

**Source.** 1999, 17:35; 303:4, eff. July 16, 1999.

### Section 83-F:5

 **83-F:5 Payment Forms. –**
                                             
 I. On or before January 15 each year, each utility or person liable
for the tax shall file with the commissioner of revenue administration,
on a form prescribed by the commissioner, a payment form based on the
valuation for April 1 of the prior year. The payment form shall be
accompanied by the payment of such amount as has not been prepaid in
accordance with paragraph III of this section. If the payment form shows
an additional amount to be due, such additional amount is due and
payable at the time the payment form is filed. If such payment form
shows an overpayment of the tax due, a credit against a subsequent
payment or payments due, to the extent of the overpayment, shall be
allowed.
                                             
 II. On or before April 15 of each year, a person with an ownership
interest in the utility property, may elect to have the tax assessed in
the proportion that such person's ownership interest bears to the
entirety of the ownership in the property. If such an election is made,
on or before April 15 of each year, each utility property owner liable
to pay the tax imposed by this chapter shall file with the department,
on a form prescribed by the commissioner, a statement setting forth the
amount of such person's ownership interest as of April 1. The statement
shall include such additional information as the commissioner shall
require and shall be signed by an authorized representative, subject to
the pains and penalties of perjury.
                                             
 III. For taxable periods ending before April 1, 2000, each utility
or property owner liable to pay the tax shall, in addition, file a
declaration on or before July 1, 1999 of the estimated tax to be
assessed as of April 1 in the current taxable period, based on the
equalized value of utility property used in the department's
equalization report for April 1, 1998 accompanied by payment of 1/3 of
the estimated tax due. Additional payments of 1/3 of the estimated tax
shall be made on September 15, 1999 and December 15, 1999.
                                             
 IV. For taxable periods ending after March 31, 2000, at the time the
statement required by paragraph II is filed, each person or utility
liable for the tax shall, in addition, file a declaration of the
estimated tax to be assessed as of April 1 in the current taxable
period, based on the tax assessed for the preceding taxable year,
accompanied by payment of 1/4 of the estimated tax due. Additional
payments of 1/4 of the estimated tax shall be made on June 15, September
15, and December 15.
                                             
 V. (a) As of May 1 of each year the utility shall file a form,
designated by the commissioner, that details the utility's actual
financial operating performance, including utility income and all
expenses, original cost, and depreciated value of all the utility's
assets, since the prior April 1 of the preceding year. This statement
shall include such additional information as the commissioner shall
require and shall be signed by an authorized representative, subject to
the pains and penalties of perjury.
                                             
 (b) If by May 1 the taxpayer is unable to file the form as
required under subparagraph (a), the taxpayer shall request an extension
from the department. Such extension shall be valid only upon written
confirmation from the department, and shall not exceed 30 days per
request. No more than 2 extensions shall be granted in a given tax
year.
                                             
 VI. Taxes and estimated taxes not paid when due shall be subject to
appropriate penalties and interest under RSA 21-J.
                                             
 VII. Any person who fails to file a completed form as required under
paragraph V on or before May 1, or by the date granted by an extension,
if applicable, shall pay a penalty of one percent of the property tax
for which the person is liable. In no case, however, shall the penalty
be less than 
                                             $250 or more than 
                                             $2,500. This penalty shall be treated
as incident to the tax and shall be in addition to any other penalty
applicable pursuant to paragraph VI.
                                             
 VIII. No later than 30 days subsequent to the sale or transfer of a
utility's property or assets, the taxpayer acquiring such property or
assets shall notify the department in writing. Such notice shall include
the name and address of the grantee, the date of the transfer, and all
the terms of transaction.

**Source.** 1999, 17:35; 303:5. 2007, 216:1, 2. 2010, 219:3, eff. Aug.
27, 2010. 2016, 85:5, eff. July 18, 2016.

### Section 83-F:6

 **83-F:6 Records. –**
                                             
 I. Every person or utility liable for tax under RSA 83-F:4 shall:
                                             
 (a) Keep such records as may be necessary to determine the amount
of such person's liability under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Preserve such records for the period of at least 3 years or
until any litigation or prosecution under this chapter is finally
determined.
                                             
 (c) Make such records available for inspection by the
commissioner or authorized agents, upon demand, at reasonable times
during regular business hours.
                                             
 II. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the penalties imposed under RSA 21-J:39.

**Source.** 1999, 17:35; 303:6, eff. July 16, 1999.

### Section 83-F:7

 **83-F:7 Administration. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall collect the taxes, interest, additions to
tax and penalties imposed under this chapter and shall pay over to the
state treasurer for deposit in the education trust fund established by
RSA 198:39 the amount of the funds collected.
                                             
 II. The commissioner is authorized to contract for the services of
utility appraisers as needed for the proper administration of this
chapter. Such contract expenses shall be deemed an expense of
administration.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 (a) The administration of the tax imposed under RSA 83-F:2;
                                             
 (b) The valuation of utility property required under RSA 83-F:3;
and
                                             
 (c) The recovery of any tax, interest on tax, or penalties
imposed by this chapter.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner may institute actions in the name of the state
to recover any tax, interest on tax, additions to tax or the penalties
imposed by this chapter.
                                             
 V. In the collection of the tax imposed by this chapter, the
commissioner may use all of the powers granted to tax collectors under
RSA 80 for the collection of taxes. The commissioner shall also have all
of the duties imposed upon the tax collectors by RSA 80 that are
applicable to the commissioner. The provisions of RSA 80:26 shall apply
to the sale of land for the payment of taxes due under this chapter, and
the state treasurer is authorized to purchase the land for the state. If
the state purchases the land, the state treasurer shall certify the
purchase to the governor, and the governor shall draw a warrant for the
purchase price out of any money in the treasury not otherwise
appropriated.

**Source.** 1999, 17:35; 303:7, eff. July 16, 1999.

### Section 83-F:8

 **83-F:8 Appeals. –** Utility property taxpayers aggrieved by the
determination by the commissioner of the value of utility property
pursuant to RSA 83-F:3 and the assessment of the tax imposed under this
chapter may appeal such valuations and assessments according to the
procedure and subject to the time limits provided for other taxes
administered by the department under RSA 21-J.

**Source.** 1999, 17:35. 2005, 87:1, eff. April 1, 2005.

### Section 83-F:9

 **83-F:9 Exemption From Education Tax. –** Persons and property
subject to taxation under this chapter shall not be subject to tax under
RSA 76:3; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to exempt such persons or property from local school,
municipal, district, or county taxation under RSA 76.

**Source.** 1999, 17:35; 303:8. 2005, 257:3. 2008, 173:15, eff. July 1,
2009.
