---
title: 'CHAPTER 84-A MEDICAID ENHANCEMENT TAX'
---

TITLE V
                                             
TAXATION
========

CHAPTER 84-A
                                             
MEDICAID ENHANCEMENT TAX
------------------------

### Section 84-A:1

 **84-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of revenue
administration.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. "Hospital'' means general hospitals required to be licensed
under RSA 151 that provide inpatient and outpatient hospital services,
but not including government facilities.
                                             
 III-a. "Inpatient hospital services'' means those services that are
classified as inpatient hospital services for purposes of section
1903(w) of the Social Security Act, and are defined in 42 C.F.R. section
440.10, regardless of the patient receiving the service or the payor for
that service.
                                             
 IV. "Medicaid enhancement tax'' means the tax imposed upon net
patient services revenue pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 IV-a. "Net patient services revenue'' means the gross charges of the
hospital for inpatient and outpatient hospital services less any
deducted amounts for bad debts, charity care, and payor discounts. "Net
patient services revenue'' shall include revenues received from the
state's uncompensated care account and revenues received from all payers
of inpatient and outpatient hospital services.
                                             
 IV-b. "Outpatient hospital services'' means those services that are
classified as outpatient hospital services for purposes of section
1903(w) of the Social Security Act, and are defined in 42 C.F.R. section
440.20, regardless of the patient receiving the service or the payor for
that service.
                                             
 V. "Taxable period'' means a 12-month period beginning July 1 and
ending June 30.
                                             
 VI. "Uncompensated care and Medicaid fund'' means the fund
established in RSA 167:64 to reimburse hospitals for costs associated
with uncompensated care and shortfalls in publicly funded programs.

**Source.** 1991, 299:2. 1993, 4:4. 2004, 260:3, 4, 10. 2011, 224:38,
39, eff. July 1, 2011. 2014, 158:1, eff. July 1, 2014; 158:2-4, 11, eff.
June 30, 2014.

### Section 84-A:2

 **84-A:2 Imposition of Tax. –**
                                             
 I. For the taxable period ending June 30, 2014, a tax is imposed at
a rate of 5.5 percent upon the net patient services revenue of every
hospital for the hospital's fiscal year ending during the first full
calendar year preceding the taxable period.
                                             
 II. For the taxable period ending June 30, 2015, a tax is imposed at
a rate of 5.5 percent upon the net patient services revenue of every
hospital for the hospital's fiscal year ending during the calendar year
in which the taxable period begins.
                                             
 III. For the taxable period ending June 30, 2016, a tax is imposed
at a rate of 5.45 percent upon the net patient services revenue of every
hospital for the hospital's fiscal year ending during the calendar year
in which the taxable period begins.
                                             
 IV. For the taxable period ending June 30, 2017, a tax is imposed at
a rate of 5.4 percent upon the net patient services revenue of every
hospital for the hospital's fiscal year ending during the calendar year
in which the taxable period begins.
                                             
 V. For the taxable period ending June 30, 2018, and for every
taxable period thereafter, a tax is imposed at a rate of 5.4 percent
upon the net patient services revenue of every hospital for the
hospital's fiscal year ending during the calendar year in which the
taxable period begins unless the total aggregate uncompensated care for
hospitals with both a critical and a noncritical access hospital
designation falls below 
                                             $375 million, at which point the tax rate shall
be 5.25 percent.

**Source.** 1991, 299:2. 1993, 4:5. 1998, 352:1. 2003, 319:36. 2004,
260:2. 2007, 263:50, eff. Jan. 1, 2008. 2014, 158:5, eff. June 30, 2014.

### Section 84-A:3

 **84-A:3 Tax Due; Offset for Past Due Payments. –**
                                             
 I. For the taxable period beginning July 1, 2014, and for every
taxable period thereafter, each hospital shall pay 100 percent of its
Medicaid enhancement tax due and payable for the taxable period no later
than the fifteenth day of April.
                                             
 II. Payments due under this section which are past due from any
hospital by more than 60 days may be collected from such hospital by
means of offset against any amounts due and payable to such hospital by
any program operated by the department of health and human services
including, but not limited to, programs of medical assistance authorized
under the Title XIX or XXI of the Social Security Act and operated by
the department of health and human services, or any other state program
under which the state purchases services from such a hospital. The
department of revenue administration shall establish a plan for
reporting the necessary information to the department of health and
human services or other appropriate state department to collect offsets
under this section.

**Source.** 1991, 299:2; 390:3. 1993, 4:6, 7. 2010, Sp. Sess., 1:12,
eff. July 1, 2010. 2014, 158:6, eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 84-A:4

 **84-A:4 Returns. –** Every hospital shall on or before the
fifteenth day of April in the taxable period make a return to the
commissioner. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to the form of such return and the data which it must contain
for the correct computation of net patient services revenue and the tax
assessed upon such amount. All returns shall be signed by the taxpayer
or by its authorized representative, subject to the pains and penalties
of perjury. If such return shows an overpayment of the tax due, the
commissioner shall refund or credit the overpayment to the hospital in
accordance with RSA 21-J:28-a. Every hospital shall on or before January
15 in the taxable period make a nonbinding estimate of its projected tax
payment.

**Source.** 1991, 299:2. 2004, 260:5, eff. July 1, 2005. 2014, 158:7,
eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 84-A:5

 **84-A:5 Method of Payment and Deposit of Tax. –**
                                             
 I. The payments required by RSA 84-A:3 shall be made by electronic
transfer of moneys to the state treasurer and deposited to the
uncompensated care and Medicaid fund established by RSA 167:64.
                                             
 II. The state treasurer is authorized to establish an account or
accounts and to take all steps necessary to facilitate the electronic
transfer of moneys required in paragraph I. The state treasurer shall
provide the commissioner a record of any moneys so transferred and
deposited.

**Source.** 1991, 299:2. 1993, 4:8, eff. July 1, 1993. 2014, 158:8, eff.
July 1, 2014.

### Section 84-A:6

 **84-A:6 Additional Returns. –** When the commissioner has reason to
believe that a hospital has failed to file a return or to include any
part of its net patient services revenue in a filed return, the
commissioner may require the hospital to file a return or a
supplementary return showing such additional information as the
commissioner prescribes. Upon the receipt of the supplementary return,
or if none is received within the time set by the commissioner, the
commissioner may find and assess the amount due upon the information
that is available. The making of such additional return does not relieve
the hospital of any penalty for failure to make a correct original
return or relieve it from liability for interest imposed under RSA
21-J:28 or any other additional charges imposed by the commissioner.
This section shall not be construed to modify the statute of limitations
provided in RSA 21-J:29.

**Source.** 1991, 299:2. 2004, 260:6, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 84-A:7

 **84-A:7 Extension of Time for Returns. –** For good cause, the
commissioner may extend the time within which a hospital is required to
file a return, and if such return is filed during the period of
extension no penalty or late filing charge may be imposed for failure to
file the return at the time required by this chapter, but the hospital
shall be liable for interest and late payment charges as prescribed in
RSA 21-J:28 or 33. Failure to file the return during the period of the
extension shall void the extension.

**Source.** 1991, 299:2, eff. June 20, 1991.

### Section 84-A:8

 **84-A:8 Taxpayer Records. –**
                                             
 I. Every hospital shall:
                                             
 (a) Keep such records as may be necessary to determine the amount
of its liability under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Preserve such records for the period of 3 years or until any
litigation or prosecution hereunder is finally determined.
                                             
 (c) Make such records available for inspection by the
commissioner or his authorized agents, upon demand, at reasonable times
during regular business hours.
                                             
 II. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be subject
to the penalties imposed under RSA 21-J:39.

**Source.** 1991, 299:2, eff. June 20, 1991.

### Section 84-A:9

 **84-A:9 Administration. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 (a) The administration of the medicaid enhancement tax; and
                                             
 (b) The recovery of any tax, interest on tax, or penalties
imposed by this chapter or by RSA 21-J.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may institute actions in the name of the state
to recover any tax, interest on tax, additions to tax or penalties
imposed by this chapter or by RSA 21-J.
                                             
 III. In the collection of any overdue tax, penalties or interest
imposed by this chapter or by RSA 21-J, the commissioner may use all of
the powers granted to tax collectors under RSA 21-J and RSA 80 for the
collection of taxes.

**Source.** 1991, 299:2, eff. June 20, 1991.

### Section 84-A:10

 **84-A:10 Confidentiality of Records. –** Notwithstanding the
provisions of RSA 21-J:14, the commissioner shall not be prohibited from
providing tax information to the commissioner of health and human
services with respect to the tax imposed by this chapter, provided that
the commissioner of health and human services and his agents and
employees shall be subject to the provisions of RSA 21-J:14 with respect
to any tax information provided by the commissioner.

**Source.** 1991, 299:2, eff. June 20, 1991.

### Section 84-A:11

 **84-A:11 Protection of Tax Exemption. –** Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to limit or impair the availability of tax exemptions
currently provided under RSA 72:23.

**Source.** 1991, 299:2, eff. June 20, 1991.

### Section 84-A:12

 **84-A:12 Automatic Rescission Provision. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1993, 4:16,
I, eff. July 1, 1993.
                                             ]

### Section 84-A:13

 **84-A:13 Medicaid Enhancement Tax Study Commission. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2013, 144:54, eff. Nov. 2, 2013.
                                             ]

### Section 84-A:14

 **84-A:14 Declaration of Intent. –** It is the declared intent of
this chapter to provide for the consistent, equitable, and rational
taxation of revenue received from inpatient hospital services and
outpatient hospital services, which are 2 separate and distinct classes
of property and are permissible classes of health care-related services
which may be taxed in accordance with federal law to ensure access to
Federal Financial Participation. In addition, it is the declared intent
of this chapter to enact a health care-related tax, as permitted under
section 1903(w) of the Social Security Act, upon the revenue derived
from inpatient and outpatient hospital services, which are distinct from
other classes of health care services, are subject to a different
reimbursement methodology for public payors, are subject to different
licensing and certification requirements, are potentially eligible for
uncompensated care payments under the disproportionate share hospital
program, and which provide a necessary, rational, and demonstrated
public health benefit.

**Source.** 2014, 158:9, eff. June 30, 2014.

### Section 84-A:15

 **84-A:15 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or
applications, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable. This severability clause shall apply to the application of
this chapter to revenue from inpatient hospital services and outpatient
hospital services, such that the invalidity of either shall not affect
the application of the statute to the other.

**Source.** 2014, 158:9, eff. June 30, 2014.
