---
title: 'CHAPTER 84-C NURSING FACILITY QUALITY ASSESSMENT'
---

TITLE V
                                             
TAXATION
========

CHAPTER 84-C
                                             
NURSING FACILITY QUALITY ASSESSMENT
-----------------------------------

### Section 84-C:1

 **84-C:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Assessment'' means the nursing facility quality assessment
imposed pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 II. "Assessment period'' means a 3-month period beginning July 1,
October 1, January 1, and April 1, of each year.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
revenue administration.
                                             
 IV. "Net patient services revenues'' means revenues earned on an
accrual basis of accounting, net of deducted amounts for bad debts,
charity care, and payer discounts, by a nursing facility for services
provided to residents as provided for in 42 CFR 433.68(d)(1)(iii).
                                             
 V. "Nursing facility'' means:
                                             
 (a) A nursing facility as defined in RSA 151-E:2, V.
                                             
 (b) A facility licensed as a specialty hospital and certified to
receive federal reimbursement as a nursing facility.

**Source.** 2003, 223:9. 2004, 260:11. 2008, 253:2, eff. June 26, 2008.

### Section 84-C:2

 **84-C:2 Imposition of Fee. –** An assessment of 5.5 percent of net
patient services revenues is hereby imposed on all nursing facilities on
the basis of patient days in each nursing facility. The fee shall be
implemented in accordance with the provisions of 42 C.F.R. part 433.

**Source.** 2003, 223:9. 2004, 260:12. 2007, 263:51, eff. Jan. 1, 2008.

### Section 84-C:3

 **84-C:3 Assessment Due. –**
                                             
 I. Each nursing facility shall pay 100 percent of its nursing
facility quality assessment due and payable for the assessment period no
later than the fifteenth day of the month following the assessment
period. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no penalty
or interest shall be imposed for failure to make payment of the
assessment when due if such payment is made by electronic funds transfer
on or before the last day of the month in which such payment is due.
                                             
 II. If the return required by RSA 84-C:4 shows an additional amount
of assessment to be due, such additional amount is due and payable at
the time the return is due.

**Source.** 2003, 223:9. 2010, 152:5, eff. Aug. 13, 2010.

### Section 84-C:4

 **84-C:4 Returns. –** Every nursing facility shall on or before the
tenth day of the month following the expiration of the assessment period
make a return to the commissioner and to the commissioner of the
department of health and human services. The commissioner shall adopt
rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the form of such return and
the date which it must contain for the correct computation of facility
net patient services revenues and the assessment upon such amount. All
returns shall be signed by the authorized representative of the nursing
facility, subject to the pains and penalties of perjury. If such return
shows an overpayment of the assessment due, the commissioner shall
refund or credit the overpayment to the nursing facility.

**Source.** 2003, 223:9. 2004, 260:13, eff. June 16, 2004.

### Section 84-C:5

 **84-C:5 Collection and Deposit of Assessment. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in RSA 84-C:5-a and rules adopted pursuant to
RSA 84-C:9, I-a, the payments required by RSA 84-C:3 shall be made by
electronic transfer of moneys to the state treasurer and deposited to
the nursing facility trust fund established by RSA 151-E:14.
                                             
 II. The state treasurer is authorized to establish an account or
accounts and to take all steps necessary to facilitate the transfer of
moneys required in paragraph I.

**Source.** 2003, 223:9. 2008, 253:3, eff. June 26, 2008. 2016, 85:6,
eff. July 18, 2016.

### Section 84-C:5-a

 **84-C:5-a Collection and Deposit of Assessment. –** Notwithstanding
the provisions of RSA 84-C:5, the payments required by RSA 84-C:3 for a
nursing facility as defined in RSA 84-C:1, V(b) shall be deposited to
the state general fund.

**Source.** 2008, 253:4, eff. June 26, 2008.

### Section 84-C:6

 **84-C:6 Additional Returns. –** When the commissioner has reason to
believe that a nursing facility has failed to file a return or to
include any part of its net patient services revenue in a filed return,
the commissioner may require the nursing facility to file a return or a
supplementary return showing such additional information as the
commissioner prescribes. Upon the receipt of the supplementary return,
or if none is received within the time set by the commissioner, the
commissioner may find and assess the amount due upon the information
that is available. The making of such additional return does not relieve
the nursing facility of any penalty for failure to make a correct
original return or relieve it from liability for interest imposed under
RSA 21-J:28 or any other additional charges imposed by the commissioner.
This section shall not be construed to modify the statute of limitations
provided in RSA 21-J:29.

**Source.** 2003, 223:9. 2004, 260:14, eff. June 16, 2004.

### Section 84-C:7

 **84-C:7 Extension of Time for Returns. –** For good cause, the
commissioner may extend the time within which a nursing facility is
required to file a return, and if such return is filed during the period
of extension no penalty or late filing charge may be imposed for failure
to file the return at the time required by this chapter, but the nursing
facility shall be liable for interest and late payment charges as
prescribed in RSA 21-J:28 or RSA 21-J:33. Failure to file the return
during the period of the extension shall void the extension.

**Source.** 2003, 223:9, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 84-C:8

 **84-C:8 Records. –**
                                             
 I. Every nursing facility shall:
                                             
 (a) Keep such records as may be necessary to determine the amount
of its liability under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Preserve such records for the period of 3 years or until any
litigation or prosecution hereunder is finally determined.
                                             
 (c) Make such records available for inspection by the
commissioner or his authorized agents, upon demand, at reasonable times
during regular business hours.
                                             
 II. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be subject
to the penalties imposed under RSA 21-J:39.

**Source.** 2003, 223:9, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 84-C:9

 **84-C:9 Administration. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 (a) The administration of the nursing facility quality
assessment; and
                                             
 (b) The recovery of any assessment, interest on assessment, or
penalties imposed by this chapter or by RSA 21-J.
                                             
 I-a. The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to exceptions to the requirement of RSA 84-C:5, I that payment
be made by electronic transfer in instances when a nursing facility is
unable to remit payment to the state treasurer by electronic transfer.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may institute actions in the name of the state
to recover any assessment, interest on assessment, additions to
assessment, or penalties imposed by this chapter or by RSA 21-J.
                                             
 III. In the collection of any overdue tax, penalties or interest
imposed by this chapter or by RSA 21-J, the commissioner may use all of
the powers granted to tax collectors under RSA 21-J and RSA 80 for the
collection of taxes.

**Source.** 2003, 223:9, eff. July 1, 2003. 2016, 85:7, eff. July 18,
2016.

### Section 84-C:10

 **84-C:10 Confidentiality of Records. –** Notwithstanding the
provisions of RSA 21-J:14, the commissioner shall not be prohibited from
providing information to the commissioner of health and human services
with respect to the assessment imposed by this chapter, provided that
the commissioner of health and human services and his agents and
employees shall be subject to the provisions of RSA 21-J:14 with respect
to any information provided by the commissioner.

**Source.** 2003, 223:9, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 84-C:11

 **84-C:11 Contingencies. –**
                                             
 I. The nursing facility quality assessment imposed by this chapter
shall not be assessed, and no return shall be required to be made, upon
the occurrence of any of the following events:
                                             
 (a) Aggregate medicaid reimbursement for nursing facilities
through accounting unit 05-01-10-04-01 class 90 is reduced below the
level in effect as of February 1, 2003, increased by the funds expended
from the nursing facility trust fund established under RSA 151-E:14 and
matched by corresponding federal funds.
                                             
 (b) Federal approval of the nursing facility quality assessment
established under this chapter, or of any related state plan amendments
or waivers is withdrawn.
                                             
 (c) Collection of the assessment is rendered invalid by the
decision of any court or administrative agency.
                                             
 (d) Any proceeds collected from nursing facilities as defined in
RSA 84-C:1, V(a), from the nursing facility quality assessment
established in this chapter are expended by the state or any state
agency for any purpose other than funding nursing facility expenditures
through the nursing facility trust fund under RSA 151-E:14.
                                             
 (e) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. The commissioner of health and human services shall notify the
commissioner of revenue administration of the occurrence of any of the
contingencies in paragraph I.
                                             
 III. The nursing facility quality assessment under this chapter
shall not be assessed or collected and payments from the nursing
facility trust fund authorized by RSA 151-E:14 shall not be made until
after the commissioner of health and human services certifies to the
commissioner that the department of health and human services has
obtained all necessary federal approvals. Payments under RSA 151-E:15
shall be effective for the period beginning May 1, 2003.

**Source.** 2003, 223:9. 2004, 260:15-17, 21, I. 2008, 253:5, eff. June
26, 2008. 2012, 247:3, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.
