---
title: 'CHAPTER 84-D ICF QUALITY ASSESSMENT'
---

TITLE V
                                             
TAXATION
========

CHAPTER 84-D
                                             
ICF QUALITY ASSESSMENT
----------------------

### Section 84-D:1

 **84-D:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Assessment'' means the ICF quality assessment imposed pursuant
to this chapter.
                                             
 II. "Assessment period'' means a 3-month period beginning July 1,
October 1, January 1, and April 1, of each year.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
revenue administration.
                                             
 IV. "Net patient services revenues'' means revenues earned on an
accrual basis of accounting, net of deducted amounts for bad debts,
charity care, and payer discounts, by an ICF for services provided to
residents as provided for in 42 C.F.R. 433.68(d)(1)(iii).
                                             
 V. "ICF'' means an intermediate care facility for the intellectually
disabled.

**Source.** 2008, 253:8, eff. July 1, 2008; 253:12, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 84-D:2

 **84-D:2 Imposition of Fee. –** An assessment of 5.5 percent of net
patient services revenues is hereby imposed on all ICFs on the basis of
patient days in each ICF. The fee shall be implemented in accordance
with the provisions of 42 C.F.R. part 433.

**Source.** 2008, 253:8, eff. July 1, 2008; 253:12, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 84-D:3

 **84-D:3 Assessment Due. –**
                                             
 I. Each ICF shall pay 100 percent of its ICF quality assessment due
and payable for the assessment period no later than the 15th day of the
month following the assessment period. Notwithstanding any provision of
law to the contrary, no penalty or interest shall be imposed for failure
to make payment of the assessment when due if such payment is made on or
before the last day of the month in which such payment is due.
                                             
 II. If the return required by RSA 84-D:4 shows an additional amount
of assessment to be due, such additional amount is due and payable at
the time the return is due.

**Source.** 2008, 253:8, eff. July 1, 2008; 253:12, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 84-D:4

 **84-D:4 Returns. –** Every ICF shall on or before the 10th day of
the month following the expiration of the assessment period make a
return to the commissioner and to the commissioner of the department of
health and human services. The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to
RSA 541-A, relative to the form of such return and the date which it
must contain for the correct computation of facility net patient
services revenues and the assessment upon such amount. All returns shall
be signed by the authorized representative of the ICF, subject to the
pains and penalties of perjury. If such return shows an overpayment of
the assessment due, the commissioner shall refund or credit the
overpayment to the ICF.

**Source.** 2008, 253:8, eff. July 1, 2008; 253:12, eff. July 11, 2008.
2016, 85:8, eff. July 18, 2016.

### Section 84-D:5

 **84-D:5 Collection and Deposit of Assessment. –** There is hereby
established a nonlapsing ICF separate account in the office of the state
treasurer. All funds collected under this chapter and any federal
financial participation received by the state as a result of
expenditures funded by the ICF quality assessments, and the interest
thereon, shall be deposited in this account. Moneys from the account
shall not be expended by the state or any state agency for any purpose
other than funding ICF expenditures as provided in RSA 151-E:15-a.

**Source.** 2008, 253:8, eff. July 1, 2008; 253:12, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 84-D:6

 **84-D:6 Additional Returns. –** When the commissioner has reason to
believe that an ICF has failed to file a return or to include any part
of its net patient services revenue in a filed return, the commissioner
may require the ICF to file a return or a supplementary return showing
such additional information as the commissioner prescribes. Upon the
receipt of the supplementary return, or if none is received within the
time set by the commissioner, the commissioner may find and assess the
amount due upon the information that is available. The making of such
additional return does not relieve the ICF of any penalty for failure to
make a correct original return or relieve it from liability for interest
imposed under RSA 21-J:28 or any other additional charges imposed by the
commissioner. This section shall not be construed to modify the statute
of limitations provided in RSA 21-J:29.

**Source.** 2008, 253:8, eff. July 1, 2008; 253:12, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 84-D:7

 **84-D:7 Extension of Time for Returns. –** For good cause, the
commissioner may extend the time within which an ICF is required to file
a return, and if such return is filed during the period of extension no
penalty or late filing charge may be imposed for failure to file the
return at the time required by this chapter, but the ICF shall be liable
for interest and late payment charges as prescribed in RSA 21-J:28 or
RSA 21-J:33. Failure to file the return during the period of the
extension shall void the extension.

**Source.** 2008, 253:8, eff. July 1, 2008; 253:12, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 84-D:8

 **84-D:8 Records. –**
                                             
 I. Every ICF shall:
                                             
 (a) Keep such records as may be necessary to determine the amount
of its liability under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Preserve such records for the period of 3 years or until any
litigation or prosecution hereunder is finally determined.
                                             
 (c) Make such records available for inspection by the
commissioner or his or her authorized agents, upon demand, at reasonable
times during regular business hours.
                                             
 II. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be subject
to the penalties imposed under RSA 21-J:39.

**Source.** 2008, 253:8, eff. July 1, 2008; 253:12, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 84-D:9

 **84-D:9 Administration. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 (a) The administration of the ICF quality assessment; and
                                             
 (b) The recovery of any assessment, interest on assessment, or
penalties imposed by this chapter or by RSA 21-J.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may institute actions in the name of the state
to recover any assessment, interest on assessment, additions to
assessment, or penalties imposed by this chapter or by RSA 21-J.
                                             
 III. In the collection of any overdue tax, penalties, or interest
imposed by this chapter or by RSA 21-J, the commissioner may use all of
the powers granted to tax collectors under RSA 21-J and RSA 80 for the
collection of taxes.

**Source.** 2008, 253:8, eff. July 1, 2008; 253:12, eff. July 11, 2008.

### Section 84-D:10

 **84-D:10 Confidentiality of Records. –** Notwithstanding the
provisions of RSA 21-J:14, the commissioner shall not be prohibited from
providing information to the commissioner of health and human services
with respect to the assessment imposed by this chapter, provided that
the commissioner of health and human services and his or her agents and
employees shall be subject to the provisions of RSA 21-J:14 with respect
to any information provided by the commissioner.

**Source.** 2008, 253:8, eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 84-D:11

 **84-D:11 Contingencies. –**
                                             
 I. The ICF quality assessment imposed by this chapter shall not be
assessed, and no return shall be required to be made, upon the
occurrence of any of the following events:
                                             
 (a) Federal approval of the ICF quality assessment established
under this chapter or of any related state plan amendments or waivers is
withdrawn.
                                             
 (b) Collection of the assessment is rendered invalid by the
decision of any court or administrative agency.
                                             
 (c) Any proceeds from the ICF quality assessment established in
this chapter are expended by the state or any state agency for any
purpose other than funding ICF expenditures.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of health and human services shall notify the
commissioner of revenue administration of the occurrence of any of the
contingencies in paragraph I.
                                             
 III. The ICF quality assessment under this chapter shall not be
assessed or collected and payments authorized shall not be made until
after the commissioner of health and human services certifies to the
commissioner that the department of health and human services has
obtained all necessary federal approvals.

**Source.** 2008, 253:8, eff. July 1, 2008; 253:12, eff. July 11, 2008.
