---
title: 'CHAPTER 88-A UNIFORM ESTATE TAX APPORTIONMENT ACT'
---

TITLE V
                                             
TAXATION
========

CHAPTER 88-A
                                             
UNIFORM ESTATE TAX APPORTIONMENT ACT
------------------------------------

### Section 88-A:1

 **88-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Estate'' means the gross estate of a decedent as determined for
the purpose of federal estate tax and the estate tax payable to this
state as provided in RSA 87 and any amendments thereof.
                                             
 II. "Person'' means any individual, partnership, association, joint
stock company, corporation, government, political subdivision,
governmental agency, or local governmental agency.
                                             
 III. "Person interested in the estate'' means any person entitled to
receive, or who has received, from a decedent or by reason of the death
of a decedent any property or interest therein included in the
decedent's estate. It includes a personal representative, guardian, and
trustee.
                                             
 IV. "State'' means any state, territory, or possession of the United
States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
                                             
 V. "Tax'' means the federal estate tax and interest payable to this
state as provided in RSA 87 and any amendments thereof and penalties
imposed in addition to the taxes.
                                             
 VI. "Fiduciary'' means executor, administrator of any description,
and trustee.

**Source.** 1959, 158:1, eff. Oct. 1, 1959.

### Section 88-A:2

 **88-A:2 Apportionment. –** Unless the will otherwise provides, the
tax shall be apportioned among all persons interested in the estate. The
apportionment shall be made in the proportion that the value of the
interest of each person interested in the estate bears to the total
value of the interests of all persons interested in the estate. The
values used in determining the tax shall be used for that purpose.

**Source.** 1959, 158:1, eff. Oct. 1, 1959.

### Section 88-A:3

 **88-A:3 Procedure for Determining Apportionment. –**
                                             
 I. The probate court having jurisdiction over the administration of
the estate of a decedent shall determine the apportionment of the tax.
If there are no probate proceedings, the probate court of the county
wherein the decedent was domiciled at death upon the application of the
person required to pay the tax shall determine the apportionment of the
tax.
                                             
 II. If the probate court finds that it is inequitable to apportion
interest and penalties in the manner provided in RSA 88-A:2, because of
special circumstances, it may direct apportionment thereof in the manner
it finds equitable.
                                             
 III. The expenses reasonably incurred by any fiduciary and by
persons interested in the estate in connection with the determination of
the amount and apportionment of the tax shall be apportioned as provided
in RSA 88-A:2 and charged and collected as a part of the tax
apportioned. If the probate court finds it is inequitable to apportion
the expenses as provided in RSA 88-A:2, it may direct apportionment
thereof equitably.
                                             
 IV. If the probate court finds that the assessment of penalties and
interest assessed in relation to the tax is due to delay caused by the
negligence of the fiduciary, the court may charge the fiduciary with the
amount of the assessed penalties and interest.
                                             
 V. In any suit or judicial proceeding to recover from any person
interested in the estate the amount of the tax apportioned to the person
in accordance with this chapter, the determination of the probate court
in respect thereto shall be prima facie correct.

**Source.** 1959, 158:1. 1996, 83:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 88-A:4

 **88-A:4 Method of Proration. –**
                                             
 I. The fiduciary or other person in possession of the property of
the decedent required to pay the tax may withhold from any property
distributable to any person interested in the estate, upon its
distribution to him, the amount of tax attributable to his interest. If
the property in possession of the fiduciary or other person required to
pay the tax and distributable to any person interested in the estate is
insufficient to satisfy the proportionate amount of the tax determined
to be due from the person, the fiduciary or other person required to pay
the tax may recover the deficiency from the person interested in the
estate. If the property is not in the possession of the fiduciary or
other person required to pay the tax, the fiduciary or other person
required to pay the tax may recover from any person interested in the
estate the amount of the tax apportioned to the person in accordance
with this chapter.
                                             
 II. If property held by the fiduciary is distributed prior to final
apportionment of the tax, the distributee shall provide a bond or other
security for the apportionment liability in the form and amount
prescribed by the fiduciary, with the approval of the probate court
having jurisdiction of the administration of the estate.

**Source.** 1959, 158:1, eff. Oct. 1, 1959.

### Section 88-A:5

 **88-A:5 Allowance for Exemptions, Deductions and Credits. –**
                                             
 I. In making an apportionment, allowances shall he made for any
exemptions granted, and for any deductions and credits allowed by the
law imposing the tax.
                                             
 II. Any exemption or deduction allowed by reason of the relationship
of any person to the decedent or by reason of the purposes of the gift
shall inure to the benefit of the person bearing such relationship or
receiving the gift; except that when an interest is subject to a prior
present interest which is not allowable as a deduction, the tax
apportionable against the present interest shall be paid from
principal.
                                             
 III. Any deduction for property previously taxed and any credit for
gift taxes or death taxes of a foreign country paid by the decedent or
his estate shall inure to the proportionate benefit of all persons
liable to apportionment.
                                             
 IV. Any credit for inheritance, succession or estate taxes or taxes
in the nature thereof in respect to property or interests includable in
the estate shall inure to the benefit of the persons or interests
chargeable with the payment thereof to the extent that, or in proportion
as the credit reduces the tax.
                                             
 V. To the extent that property passing to or in trust for a
surviving spouse or any charitable, public, or similar gift or bequest
does not constitute an allowable deduction for purposes of the tax
solely by reason of an inheritance tax or other death tax imposed upon
and deductible from the property, the property shall not be included in
the computation provided for in RSA 88-A:2, and to that extent no
apportionment shall be made against the property. The sentence
immediately preceding shall not apply to any case where the result will
be to deprive the estate of a deduction otherwise allowable under
Section 2053(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 of the United
States or amendments thereof, relating to deduction for state death
taxes on transfers for public, charitable or religious uses.

**Source.** 1959, 158:1, eff. Oct. 1, 1959.

### Section 88-A:6

 **88-A:6 No Apportionment Between Temporary and Remainder Interests.
–** No interest in income and no estate for years or for life or other
temporary interest in any property or fund shall be subject to
apportionment as between the temporary interest and the remainder. The
tax on the temporary interest and the tax, if any, on the remainder
shall be chargeable against the corpus of the property or funds subject
to the temporary interest and remainder.

**Source.** 1959, 158:1, eff. Oct. 1, 1959.

### Section 88-A:7

 **88-A:7 Exoneration of Fiduciary. –** Neither the fiduciary nor
other person required to pay the tax shall be under any duty to
institute any suit or proceeding to recover from any person interested
in the estate the amount of the tax apportioned to the person until the
expiration of the 3 months next following final determination of the
tax. A fiduciary or other person required to pay the tax who institutes
the suit or proceeding within a reasonable time after the 3 months'
period shall not be subject to any liability or surcharge because any
portion of tax apportioned to any person interested in the estate was
collectable at a time following the death of the decedent but thereafter
became uncollectible. If the fiduciary or other person required to pay
the tax cannot collect from any person interested in the estate the
amount of the tax apportioned to the person, the amount not recoverable
shall be paid from the residuary estate. To the extent that the
residuary estate is not adequate, the balance shall be equitably
apportioned among the other persons interested in the estate who are
subject to apportionment.

**Source.** 1959, 158:1. 1996, 83:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 88-A:8

 **88-A:8 Action by Non-Resident, Reciprocity. –** Subject to this
section a fiduciary acting in another state or a person required to pay
the tax domiciled in another state may institute an action in the courts
of this state and may recover a proportionate amount of the federal
estate tax or an estate tax payable to another state or of a death duty
due by a decedent's estate to another state from a person interested in
the estate who is either domiciled in this state or who owns property in
this state subject to attachment or execution. For the purposes of the
action the determination of apportionment by the court having
jurisdiction of the administration of the decedent's estate in the other
state shall be prima facie correct. The provisions of this section apply
only if the state in which the determination of apportionment was made
affords a substantially similar remedy.

**Source.** 1959, 158:1. 1996, 83:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 88-A:9

 **88-A:9 Coordination With Federal Law. –** If the liabilities of
persons interested in the estate as prescribed by this chapter differ
from those which result under the federal estate tax law, the
liabilities imposed by the federal law will control and the balance of
this chapter shall apply as if the resulting liabilities had been
prescribed in this chapter.

**Source.** 1959, 158:1. 1996, 83:4, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 88-A:9-a

 **88-A:9-a Uniformity of Interpretation. –** This chapter shall be
so construed as to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform the
law of those states which enact it.

**Source.** 1996, 83:5, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 88-A:10

 **88-A:10 Short Title. –** This chapter may be cited as the Uniform
Estate Tax Apportionment Act.

**Source.** 1959, 158:1, eff. Oct. 1, 1959.

### Section 88-A:11

 **88-A:11 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.

**Source.** 1959, 158:1, eff. Oct. 1, 1959.

### Section 88-A:12

 **88-A:12 Exception. –** This chapter shall not apply to taxes due
on account of the death of decedents dying prior to October 1, 1959.

**Source.** 1959, 158:3, eff. Oct. 1, 1959.
