---
title: CHAPTER 289 CEMETERIES
---

TITLE XXVI
                                             
CEMETERIES; BURIALS; DEAD BODIES
================================

CHAPTER 289
                                             
CEMETERIES
------------

### Section 289:1

 **289:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter, unless the context clearly
requires otherwise:
                                             
 I. "Burial ground'' means a private family or religious
institution's cemetery, mausoleum, or columbarium on private property
and not available for use by the public. For purposes of this paragraph,
the term "family'' shall mean members of the immediate family and any
individuals related by blood or marriage or civil union to members of
the immediate family.
                                             
 II. "Burial space'' means a lot in any cemetery, mausoleum, or
columbarium as designed and intended for the interment of a human body,
bodies, or remains, but presently not used for such purpose.
                                             
 III. "Cemetery'' means any cemetery owned, managed, or controlled by
any municipality within this state or owned and managed by any nonprofit
cemetery corporation chartered by the state. Mausoleums and columbariums
shall be included within the term "cemetery.''
                                             
 IV. "Cemetery association'' means a nonprofit cemetery corporation,
the voting members of which are the owners of burial spaces in the
cemetery owned and operated by the association.
                                             
 V. "Cemetery corporation'' means a nonprofit corporation organized
for the purpose of operating a cemetery.
                                             
 VI. "Cemetery trustees'' means town cemetery trustees elected
pursuant to the provisions contained in this chapter.
                                             
 VII. "Corporate officer'' means the elected or appointed managing
officer of a nonprofit corporation established to operate a cemetery for
public interment.
                                             
 VIII. "Owner'' means any person or persons owning or possessing the
privilege, license, or right of interment in any burial space, as
determined under RSA 290:24.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2. 2000, 95:1. 2008, 319:1, eff. Aug. 31, 2008.

### Section 289:2

 **289:2 Municipality to Provide. –** Every municipality shall
provide, or may enter into agreements with adjacent municipalities or
nonprofit entities to provide, one or more suitable cemeteries for the
interment of deceased persons, which shall be subject to such
regulations as the municipality may establish. In the absence of
regulations established by vote of the legislative body, the cemetery
trustees may establish such regulations pursuant to RSA 289:7, I(a). The
operation and maintenance of all cemeteries owned and maintained by the
municipality shall be in the charge of the cemetery trustees.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994. 2016, 64:1, eff. July 4,
2016.

### Section 289:2-a

 **289:2-a Funds Received From Sale of Cemetery Lots. –** Upon the
sale of cemetery lots, the legislative body may, at any annual or
special meeting, vote to determine whether funds received from such sale
shall be deposited in the general fund of the town as a sale of town
property or deposited with the trustees of trust fund for the
maintenance of cemeteries under RSA 31:19-a.

**Source.** 2014, 71:1, eff. May 27, 2014.

### Section 289:3

 **289:3 Location. –** All cemeteries and burial grounds shall be
laid out in accordance with the following requirements:
                                             
 I. No cemetery shall be laid out within 100 feet of any dwelling
house, schoolhouse or school lot, store or other place of business
without the consent of the owner of the same, nor within 50 feet of a
known source of water or the right of way of any classification of state
highway. Existing cemeteries which are not in compliance with the above
set-back requirements may be enlarged, provided that no portion of the
enlargement is located any closer to the above-listed buildings, water
sources or highways than the existing cemetery, and provided further
that no such enlargement shall be located within 50 feet of any
classification of state highway.
                                             
 II. Burials on private property, not in an established burial
ground, shall comply with local zoning regulations. In the absence of
such regulations, such burial sites shall comply with the requirements
in paragraph I. The location of the burial site shall be recorded in the
deed to the property upon transfer of the property to another person.
                                             
 III. New construction, excavation, or building in the area of a
known burial site or within the boundaries of an established burial
ground or cemetery shall comply with local zoning regulations concerning
burial sites, burial grounds or cemeteries, whether or not such burial
site or burial ground was properly recorded in the deed to the property.
In the absence of such regulations, no new construction, excavation, or
building shall be conducted within 25 feet of a known burial site or
within 25 feet of the boundaries of an established burial ground or
cemetery, whether or not such burial site or burial ground was properly
recorded in the deed to the property, except when such construction,
excavation, or building is necessary for the construction of an
essential service, as approved by the governing body of a municipality
in concurrence with the cemetery trustees, or in the case of a state
highway, by the commissioner of the department of transportation in
concurrence with the cemetery trustees.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this section shall be construed to conflict with RSA
290, local ordinances, or cemetery rules concerning burials and
disinterments of human remains.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

### Section 289:4

 **289:4 Maintenance. –** Every municipality shall raise and
appropriate sufficient funds, by taxation or otherwise, to provide for
the suitable care and maintenance of the municipal public cemeteries
within its boundaries which are not otherwise provided for by an
alternative funding source. Every municipality may raise and appropriate
annually a sufficient sum to provide for the suitable care and
maintenance of deserted burial grounds and cemeteries which have been
declared abandoned in accordance with RSA 289:19-21.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2. 2012, 4:1, eff. May 11, 2012.

### Section 289:5

 **289:5 Cemetery Records. –** The corporate officer or designee of a
cemetery corporation or town cemetery trustees charged with the
responsibility of operation and administration of any cemetery under
their control shall keep a record of every burial showing the date of
burial and name of the person buried, when these particulars can be
obtained, and the lot, plot, or part of such plot or lot, in which the
burial was made. Such records shall also be kept of every private burial
site within a municipality by the owner of the land containing the
burial site, and a copy of the information shall be supplied to the
cemetery trustees who will maintain the municipal records of such sites.
A copy of such record, duly certified, shall be furnished to any person
on demand and payment of a fee established in compliance with RSA
91-A:4. The location of each cemetery and private burial site may be
annotated on the municipal tax map.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

Cemetery Trustees
-----------------

### Section 289:6

 **289:6 Cemetery Trustees. –**
                                             
 I. Every municipality shall elect a board of cemetery trustees
consisting of 3 members, unless a town at an annual or special town
meeting votes that the board shall consist of 5 members. In the initial
election of cemetery trustees, they shall be elected by ballot at an
annual town meeting. One shall be elected for a one-year term, one for a
2-year term and one for a 3-year term. In towns with a board of 5
trustees the 2 additional trustees shall be appointed by the selectmen,
one for one year and one for 2 years. Subsequent trustees shall be
elected by ballot at the annual town meeting to replace those whose
terms expire. The term of each trustee shall be 3 years. Vacancies shall
be filled by the selectmen for the remainder of the term. The board may
recommend to the appointing authority the names of no more than 2
persons who may serve as alternate members on the board. The alternate
members shall be appointed to one-year terms. In cities the trustees
shall be chosen and hold their office for such term as shall be provided
by city ordinance. Trustees shall organize by electing one of their
number chairperson and another bookkeeper, who shall keep the records
and books of the trustees, and shall issue vouchers as necessary for
funds to be expended. The chairperson and the bookkeeper may be the same
member.
                                             
 II. Any town that has the town manager form of government may vote
to not have cemetery trustees by delegating all of the duties and
responsibilities of cemetery trustees to the town manager, as specified
in RSA 289. This option may be adopted by a vote of the town meeting.
The warrant article question to be voted shall be: "Shall we discontinue
the board of cemetery trustees by delegating their duties and
responsibilities to the town manager?'' If the majority votes in the
affirmative, then the discontinuance shall take effect 90 days after
adoption.
                                             
 II-a. (a) Any town, with a traditional town meeting form of
government, may adopt by a vote of the town meeting to have the board of
selectmen serve for the term of elected office as the cemetery trustees.
The warrant article to be voted shall be:
                                             
 "Shall we delegate the duties and responsibilities of the
cemetery trustees to the board of selectmen?''
                                             
 (b) If the majority vote in the affirmative then the delegation
shall take effect 90 days after adoption and shall continue until
rescinded by vote of the town meeting.
                                             
 III. At any subsequent town meeting, the town may vote to reinstate
the board of cemetery trustees. A new board of cemetery trustees shall
be elected at the town meeting next following the vote to reinstate the
board of cemetery trustees.
                                             
 IV. Any town that has a municipal charter form of government may
specify in its charter the procedure to be utilized for the election or
appointment of cemetery trustees. Such procedure shall be adopted under
the provisions of RSA 49-B.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2. 1995, 62:1, 2, eff. July 8, 1995. 2016, 60:1,
eff. July 4, 2016.

### Section 289:7

 **289:7 Powers and Duties. –**
                                             
 I. Except in those municipalities in which other provisions have
been made by a general or special act of the legislature, all cemetery
trustees in the state shall:
                                             
 (a) Adopt bylaws and regulations for their transaction of
business and for the establishment and management of all municipal
cemeteries within their responsibility.
                                             
 (b) Prepare an annual budget indicating what support and
maintenance of the municipal public cemeteries will be required out of
public funds for submission to the appropriate agency of the
municipality. A separate budget request shall be submitted for planning
and establishment of a new public cemetery and for capital improvements
or expansion of an existing public cemetery.
                                             
 (c) Expend all moneys raised and appropriated by the municipality
for cemetery purposes. Such funds shall be maintained in the general
fund and paid in the same manner that funds of other municipal
departments are paid.
                                             
 (d) Expend income from all trust funds for cemetery purposes in
accordance with the conditions of each donation or bequest accepted by
the municipality. Such trust funds shall be held in the custody and
under the management of the trustees of trust funds. The trust income
shall be transferred to the cemetery trustees by the trustees of trust
funds in response to vouchers executed by the cemetery trustees, if the
requested funds are available. Such trust fund income shall not be
commingled with the moneys raised and appropriated by the municipality.
                                             
 (e) Prepare deeds of cemetery lots for the governing body to
sign.
                                             
 II. Cemetery trustees may appoint a cemetery custodian or sexton who
shall not be a trustee and who shall be responsible to the cemetery
trustees for supervising work done in the cemeteries.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2. 1995, 62:3, eff. July 8, 1995.

### Section 289:8

 **289:8 Enforcement. –** Any person designated as a cemetery trustee
failing to comply with the provisions of RSA 289:7 shall be guilty of a
violation. Any other person who violates this chapter or any regulation
established under the authority of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

### Section 289:9

 **289:9 Use of Trust Funds. –** Cemetery corporations and the trust
fund trustees of municipalities may take and hold funds in trust, and
may apply the income of the trust to the improvement, watering, or
embellishment of the cemetery, or to the care, preservation, or
embellishment of any lot or its appurtenances.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

### Section 289:10

 **289:10 Investments. –** Cemetery corporations holding funds in
trust as provided in RSA 289:9 may establish, maintain, and operate
common trust funds as provided in RSA 31:27-30.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

### Section 289:11

 **289:11 Accounting. –** Whenever any cemetery corporation shall
take and hold trust funds according to the provisions of RSA 289:9, such
corporation shall keep in its books an account of all funds received and
held by it in the same manner as required of municipalities, and the
account of any such fund shall be open to inspection by any person
having an interest in the proper administration of the trust.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

### Section 289:12

 **289:12 Reports. –** A copy of the annual financial report of such
corporations shall be filed with the attorney general, unless otherwise
required by law to file such a report with any town, city, county, or
state agency.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

### Section 289:13

 **289:13 Cemetery Association Termination. –** Any cemetery laid out
by an individual or corporation and located within the municipality, in
which all lots have been sold and for the care of which trust funds are
held by the municipality, may be deeded to the municipality with no
implied financial liability to the municipality for the maintenance of
the cemetery over and above the trust fund income, provided the
municipality votes to accept such cemetery transfer. Municipalities may
raise and appropriate additional funds for the care of such cemeteries.
Upon the transfer of the title to the cemetery, the municipal cemetery
trustees shall have the sole management responsibility for the cemetery.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

### Section 289:14

 **289:14 Right of Way to Private Burial Ground. –** Any person
wishing to have a temporary right of entry over private land in order to
enter a private burial ground enclosure to which there is no public
right of way may apply in writing to the selectmen of a town or the
mayor of a city stating the reason for such request, which may include
the maintenance, repair, and preservation of the burial ground, and the
period of time for which such right is to be exercised. The applicant
shall also notify in writing the owner or occupier of the land over
which the right of way is desired and obtain the written permission of
the owner. The selectmen or mayor, in the exercise of discretion and in
consultation with the cemetery trustees, may issue a permit for such
temporary right of entry designating the particular place where the land
may be crossed. The owner or occupier of the land may recommend the
place of crossing which, if reasonable, shall be the place designated by
the selectmen or mayor. The person exercising the right of entry shall
complete the work on the cemetery and restore the right of way to its
original condition, if it is disturbed.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2. 2011, 97:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 289:14-a

 **289:14-a Maintenance, Repair, and Preservation of Burial Grounds.
–**
                                             
 I. Any person or organization interested in caring for a burial
ground which has not been maintained and the owner of which is unknown,
or whose present address in unknown, may petition the selectmen, town
council, mayor, or cemetery trustees for permission to clean, maintain,
restore, and preserve that burial ground at the person's or
organization's own expense. Upon approval of this petition on any
conditions deemed appropriate, including the permission of the owner of
the surrounding property, the selectmen, town council, mayor, or
cemetery trustees shall require the person or organization to place an
advertisement in a local newspaper providing notice that the burial
ground is to be entered and that work is to be done, and notifying
persons with a property interest in this burial ground who have
objections to come forward by a date certain.
                                             
 II. A petition under paragraph I may be granted notwithstanding the
fact that the burial ground has not been declared abandoned pursuant to
the procedure in RSA 289:20.
                                             
 III. Any city, town, or public body shall be immune from civil
liability in any action brought on the basis of any act or omission by
any person who voluntarily and without compensation undertakes to
maintain or to repair any burying ground.
                                             
 IV. No private landowner permitting access over his or her property
to a burial ground for the purpose of voluntary maintenance or repair of
the burial ground shall be held civilly liable for any breach of duty
resulting in injury to the person or damage to the property of those
seeking to repair or maintain the cemetery.
                                             
 V. After approval and notice required under RSA 635:6, II, any
marker, gate, or other material removed for repair shall be stored and
kept safely in a manner determined by the selectmen, town council,
mayor, or cemetery trustees. Upon approval of the selectmen, town
council, mayor, or cemetery trustees, a marker, gate, or other material
deemed to be at risk of irreparable damage or loss may be placed
permanently in a safe facility and the fact of its removal or
replacement made visible in the cemetery or in public records.

**Source.** 2011, 97:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 289:15

 **289:15 Discontinuance. –** Whenever there is a public necessity
for the discontinuance of any municipal cemetery and the removal of the
remains of persons buried in such cemetery, the cemetery may be
discontinued by a 3/4 vote of the legal voters present and voting at any
town meeting held for the purpose, or by 3/4 of each board of the city
councils present and voting.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

### Section 289:16

 **289:16 Reinterment. –** The governing body may, at the expense of
the municipality, disinter all the remains of persons buried in such
cemetery and reinter the same in the unoccupied part of another cemetery
within the municipality, such reinterment to be in the place designated
by the nearest surviving relatives of the deceased persons or, in the
absence of such surviving relative, by the cemetery trustees. Such
removal and reinterment shall be done prudently and with proper care and
attention.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

### Section 289:17

 **289:17 Removal of Monuments. –** The monuments, gravestones, and
other appurtenances attached to the graves shall be carefully removed
and properly set up at the place of reinterment with as little injury as
the nature of the case will admit. In case of injury to any monument,
gravestone, or appurtenance, the damages shall be assessed by the
governing body in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as
in the case of alteration of the grade of highways.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

Abandoned Burial Spaces
-----------------------

### Section 289:18

 **289:18 Forfeiture Procedures. –**
                                             
 I. Whenever a burial space or spaces in any cemetery subject to the
provisions of this subdivision have remained unused for a period of 50
years, and the owner has not improved such space or spaces by causing a
monument, gravestone, or other permanent appurtenance to be placed on
the burial space, the person, corporate manager, or cemetery trustees
having jurisdiction over such cemetery may institute proceedings for the
termination and forfeiture of the rights and interests of such owner.
All purchase contracts for burial spaces executed after August 7, 1994,
shall include a notice that this procedure may be invoked in the
future.
                                             
 II. Whenever such person, corporate manager, or board of trustees
determines that the conditions stated in paragraph I have been met, then
they may send to the owner a notice of the intent to terminate and
forfeit the owner's rights, served on the owner personally by a
competent person or sent by certified mail with return receipt requested
to the owner's last known address.
                                             
 III. When the owner receives the forfeiture notice, the owner may
notify the cemetery management of continued intent to use the space, in
which case this procedure shall be cancelled, or the owner may return
the space to the cemetery and receive in compensation the same amount
the owner paid for the space, less any portion of the original purchase
price that was specified for inclusion in a perpetual care trust fund.
                                             
 IV. If no response is received from the owner for 60 days, the
cemetery management may advertise in a paper of local distribution for
information regarding the present whereabouts of the owner. If
information is forth-coming, the notification process shall be repeated
using the new address information. If no information is received, the
original purchase contract may be voided and the space sold to a new
owner. Any owner contacting the cemetery management after the space has
been resold shall be reimbursed the amount he originally paid, including
the portion set aside for perpetual care.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

Abandoned Burial Grounds
------------------------

### Section 289:19

 **289:19 Neglected Burial Ground. –** Whenever a burial ground
within the boundaries of the town has been neglected for a period of 20
years or more, the municipality may declare it abandoned for purposes of
preservation, maintenance or restoration.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

### Section 289:20

 **289:20 Procedure. –** To declare a burial ground abandoned:
                                             
 I. The municipality shall place an advertisement in at least one
newspaper having general distribution in the municipality and
surrounding area. The advertisement shall state the intent of the
municipality, identifying the burial ground by name, if known, and by
names and dates of the oldest stones in the burial ground, with a
request for any direct descendent to contact the town selectmen's
office, the town manager, or mayor, as applicable. If the burial ground
contains no stones with legible inscriptions, the site may be identified
by a detailed description of its location.
                                             
 II. Not less than 60 days nor more than 90 days after the notice of
the intent has been published, the notice shall be read at a regularly
scheduled selectmen's meeting or in the case of a city, a city council
meeting.
                                             
 III. If any descendants were located and grant permission, or if no
descendants were located, then, after a public hearing, the municipality
may declare the burial ground abandoned by a majority vote of the
selectmen or city councilmen present and voting.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

### Section 289:21

 **289:21 Rights and Responsibilities. –** Any burial ground declared
abandoned under these provisions shall become a municipal cemetery for
management purposes and shall be managed by the cemetery trustees, who
shall assume all the authorization and rights of natural lineal
descendants.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

Prohibited Conduct
------------------

### Section 289:22

 **289:22 Stone Rubbings. –** No person shall make gravestone
rubbings in any municipal cemetery or burial ground without first
obtaining the written permission of the town selectmen or the mayor of a
city or designee. Before granting such permission, the selectmen or
mayor will ascertain to the best of their ability that the person making
the request knows the proper precautions to be taken and the proper
materials to be used for this activity. The town selectmen or city mayor
or their designee shall notify the cemetery trustees of the request and
its disposition. Any person who violates the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.

### Section 289:23

 **289:23 Other Unauthorized Acts. –** All other unauthorized conduct
under RSA 635:6 and 635:7 regarding the abuse of cemeteries shall be
penalized as provided in RSA 635:8.

**Source.** 1994, 318:2, eff. Aug. 7, 1994.
