---
title: CHAPTER 291 BODIES FOR SCIENTIFIC STUDY
---

TITLE XXVI
                                             
CEMETERIES; BURIALS; DEAD BODIES
================================

CHAPTER 291
                                             
BODIES FOR SCIENTIFIC STUDY
---------------------------

### Section 291:1

 **291:1 Request for Body. –** It shall be the duty of the county
commissioners of any county, the mayor and aldermen of any city, the
overseers of the poor of any town, the warden of the state prison and
the keeper of any jail in the state, upon previous request in writing by
any physician or surgeon of this state (preference being given to
instructors in medical schools established by law), to notify such
physician or surgeon whenever the body of any person dying in their
county, city, town, or in the state prison or a jail, required to be
buried at the public expense, comes into their possession, charge or
control, and to give permission to such physician or surgeon to take
such body to be by him used within the state for the advancement of
anatomical and medical science.

**Source.** 1869, 40:1. GL 134:1. PS 136:1. 1897, 28:1. PL 212:1. RL
258:1.

### Section 291:2

 **291:2 Bond. –** Every person before receiving any such body shall
give to the officers surrendering it a sufficient bond that it shall be
used only in the state for the promotion of science, and in such manner
as not to outrage or annoy the public; and that after the use allowed by
law the remains shall be decently buried.

**Source.** 1869, 40:2. GL 134:2. PS 136:2. PL 212:2. RL 258:2.

### Section 291:3

 **291:3 Not Surrendered, When. –** No such notice need be given, nor
shall any such body be surrendered, if any person or persons shall claim
it within 36 hours after death, and take it away and bury it without
expense to the town or county otherwise liable for the same; nor shall
such notice be given or the body be delivered if such deceased person
was a stranger or traveler who died suddenly, in which case the body
shall be buried, unless it shall clearly appear that said stranger or
traveler was a professional tramp going from place to place subsisting
upon charity, in which case said body shall be disposed of in accordance
with RSA 291:1; nor shall such notice be given or the body be delivered
if such deceased person has served in the army or navy of the United
States, and has been actually called into service in time of war and
honorably discharged from said service.

**Source.** 1869, 40:3. GL 134:3. PS 136:3. 1897, 28:1. 1899, 10:1. PL
212:3. RL 258:3.

### Section 291:4

 **291:4 Penalty. –** Any person, upon whom duties are imposed by the
provisions of this chapter, who shall neglect, refuse or omit to perform
the same as hereby required shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a
natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** PS 136:4. 1897, 28:1. PL 212:4. RL 258:4. RSA 291:4. 1973,
529:60, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.
