---
title: CHAPTER 477 CONVEYANCES OF REALTY AND INTERESTS THEREIN
---

TITLE XLVIII
                                             
CONVEYANCES AND MORTGAGES OF REALTY
===================================

CHAPTER 477
                                             
CONVEYANCES OF REALTY AND INTERESTS THEREIN
-------------------------------------------

### Section 477:1

 **477:1 By Deed. –** Real estate may be conveyed by deed executed by
any person or by his attorney, acknowledged and recorded as directed in
this chapter, without any other act or ceremony whatever. Any conveyance
not executed under seal shall be as effectual as though sealed.

**Source.** RS 130:1. CS 136:1. GS 121:1. GL 135:1. PS 137:1. PL 213:1.
RL 259:1. RSA 477:1. 1977, 366:2, eff. Aug. 30, 1977.

### Section 477:2

 **477:2 By Corporation. –** Any public or private corporation
authorized to hold real estate may convey the same by an agent appointed
by vote for that purpose.

**Source.** RS 130:2. CS 136:2. GS 121:2. GL 135:2. PS 137:2. PL 213:2.
RL 259:2.

### Section 477:3

 **477:3 Execution. –** Every deed or other conveyance of real estate
shall be signed by the party granting the same and acknowledged by the
grantor before a justice, notary public or commissioner and shall show
the mailing address of the grantee.

**Source.** RS 130:3. CS 136:3. GS 121:3. GL 135:3. PS 137:3. 1915,
74:1. PL 213:3. RL 259:3. RSA 477:3. 1965, 125:1. 1971, 76:1. 1975,
428:2. 1977, 366:3. 1981, 303:1, eff. Aug. 15, 1981.

### Section 477:3-a

 **477:3-a Recording. –** Every deed or other conveyance of real
estate and every court order or other instrument which affects title to
any interest in real estate, except probate records and tax liens which
are by law exempt from recording, shall be recorded at length in the
registry of deeds for the county or counties in which the real estate
lies and such deed, conveyance, court order or instrument shall not be
effective as against bona fide purchasers for value until so recorded.

**Source.** 1975, 428:3, eff. Aug. 17, 1975.

### Section 477:3-b

 **477:3-b Limitations on Possibilities of Reverter, Rights of
Re-entry, and Executory Interests. –**
                                             
 I. This section applies only to legal future interests in real
property created by deed, will, or power of appointment and not to any
beneficial interests created by or through trusts. This section shall
not apply to rights of forfeiture or re-entry held by lessors or
mortgagees, nor to conveyances of standing trees governed by RSA
477:35-a or RSA 477:35-b, nor to options to purchase real estate,
whatever their form.
                                             
 II. (a) After December 31, 2008, no legal possibility of reverter,
right of re-entry, or executory interest in real property may be
retained or created unless either the grantor or the grantee is a public
or charitable organization. Any language purporting to retain or create
such a future interest shall be void. Language which also creates a
covenant may be enforced as such by an action at law or equity but
without forfeiture.
                                             
 (b) For purposes of this section, an organization is public or
charitable if it is:
                                             
 (1) The state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (2) A political subdivision or municipal corporation of the
state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (3) A corporation organized under RSA 292, a religious
organization, or a not-for-profit corporation chartered by act of the
New Hampshire general court or United States Congress.
                                             
 (4) A nonprofit organization qualified under section 501(c) of
the Internal Revenue Code of the United States, as amended.
                                             
 (5) A trustee as defined in RSA 7:21, VIII.
                                             
 III. Renewal declarations shall be required in certain cases.
                                             
 (a) Unless the original grantor or grantee of the interest was,
or the present owner of the interest is, a public or charitable
organization, any existing possibility of reverter, right of re-entry,
or executory interest in real property shall become void unless renewal
declarations are filed in the appropriate registry of deeds as
hereinafter provided. Covenants as such are not subject to renewal and
remain enforceable by an action at law or equity but without
forfeiture.
                                             
 (b) Times of filing future interests under this section shall be
as follows:
                                             
 (1) A declaration of renewal of an existing possibility of
reverter, right of re-entry, or executory interest in real property that
was retained by or granted to a natural person need not be recorded
while owned by that person. Any subsequent heir, devisee, grantee,
creditor, or other successor to such interest shall record a declaration
within 3 years after acquiring it or the interest shall become void.
                                             
 (2) A declaration of renewal of an existing possibility of
reverter, right of re-entry, or executory interest in real property
other than those retained by or granted to a natural person shall be
filed on or before January 2, 2011, and if such declaration is not filed
within such time, the interest shall become void.
                                             
 (3) A declaration shall be recorded once in every 25 years
after the initial declaration is filed, and any interest for which such
a declaration is not filed shall become void 25 years after the filing
of the last renewal declaration.
                                             
 (c) A declaration shall be signed and acknowledged by the
declarant in the same manner as a deed and contain:
                                             
 (1) A statement that the declarant owns all or part of a
future interest reserved or created by a specified instrument and the
declarant's current mailing address.
                                             
 (2) The date of that instrument and the book and page, probate
file, or other specific place where the instrument is recorded.
                                             
 (3) The names of the owner or owners of the property rights
subject to the future interest as of the time the declaration is filed.
                                             
 (d) Each declaration shall be indexed in the grantor index under
the name or names of the persons stated therein to be the owners of the
property right subject to the future interest at the time of filing.
                                             
 (e) The original declaration shall be returned to the declarant
after recording in the same manner as a deed.
                                             
 (f) A declaration which is actually recorded and correctly
indexed shall be effective despite failure to name all present owners of
the property subject to the future interest so long as at least one
owner was correctly identified.
                                             
 (g) The fee for filing a declaration shall be the same as for a
deed.
                                             
 IV. Unclaimed future interests of defunct public or charitable
organizations shall be treated in the following manner: Whenever it
shall appear that a public or charitable organization holding a
possibility of reverter, right of re-entry, or executory interest has
been defunct for more than 3 years with no successor to the future
interest provided for or action commenced to determine a successor, the
director of charitable trusts shall either commence such an action or,
if it appears to be in the public interest, release the future interest
to the owners of the underlying estate, with or without conditions.

**Source.** 2008, 228:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 477:4

 **477:4 Acknowledgments. –** Acknowledgments may be taken outside
the United States before an ambassador, minister, envoy or charge
d'affaires of the United States in the country to which he is
accredited, or before any consular officer of the United States, a
notary public, or a commissioner or other agent of this state having an
official seal and power to take acknowledgments at such place.

**Source.** 1917, 53:1. PL 213:4. RL 259:4.

### Section 477:4-a

 **477:4-a Notification Required; Radon, Arsenic, and Lead Paint.
–**
                                             
 I. Prior to the execution of any contract for the purchase and sale
of any interest in real property which includes a building, the seller,
or seller's agent, shall provide the following notification to the
buyer. The buyer shall acknowledge receipt of this notification by
signing a copy of such notification:
                                             
 "Radon: Radon, the product of decay of radioactive materials in
rock, may be found in some areas of New Hampshire. Radon gas may pass
into a structure through the ground or through water from a deep well.
Testing of the air by a professional certified in radon testing and
testing of the water by an accredited laboratory can establish radon's
presence and equipment is available to remove it from the air or
water.''
                                             
 "Arsenic: Arsenic is a common groundwater contaminant in New
Hampshire that occurs at unhealthy levels in well water in many areas of
the state. Tests are available to determine whether arsenic is present
at unsafe levels, and equipment is available to remove it from water.
The buyer is encouraged to consult the New Hampshire department of
environmental services private well testing recommendations
(www.des.nh.gov) to ensure a safe water supply if the subject property
is served by a private well.''
                                             
 "Lead Paint: Before 1977, paint containing lead may have been used
in structures. The presence of flaking lead paint can present a serious
health hazard, especially to young children and pregnant women. Tests
are available to determine whether lead is present.''
                                             
 II. Nothing in this section shall be construed to have any impact on
the legal validity of title transferred pursuant to a purchase and sale
contract in paragraph I, or to create or place any liability with the
seller or seller's agent for failure to provide the notification
described in paragraph I.

**Source.** 1990, 276:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1991. 2015, 171:1, eff. Jan. 1,
2016.

### Section 477:4-b

 **477:4-b Notification Required; Subsurface Disposal Systems. –**
Any person seeking to obtain approval for a subsurface sewage disposal
system shall meet the requirements set forth in RSA 485-A:29 and 30.

**Source.** 1991, 379:1, eff. Aug. 31, 1991.

### Section 477:4-c

 **477:4-c Disclosure Required; Water Supply; Sewage Disposal. –**
                                             
 I. Prior to the execution of any contract for the purchase and sale
of any interest in real property which includes a building, the seller
shall disclose the following information to the buyer. The buyer shall
acknowledge receipt of this disclosure by signing a copy of such
disclosure:
                                             
 (a) Information relative to the type of private water supply
system, its location, malfunctions, date of installation, date of the
most recent water test and whether or not the seller has experienced a
problem such as an unsatisfactory water test or a water test with
notations.
                                             
 (b) Information relative to the sewage disposal system including
the size of the tank, type of system, its location, malfunctions, the
age of the system, the date it was most recently serviced, and the name
of the contractor who services the system.
                                             
 II. If the information required under this section is unknown by the
seller that fact shall be stated in writing.

**Source.** 1992, 278:1. 1994, 105:1, eff. July 10, 1994.

### Section 477:4-d

 **477:4-d Notification Required. –**
                                             
 I. Prior to or during the preparation of an offer for the purchase
and sale of any interest in real property to be used or proposed to be
used for a one to 4 family dwelling, the seller shall disclose, in
writing, the following information to the buyer. The buyer shall
acknowledge receipt of the disclosure by signing a copy of the
disclosure:
                                             
 (a) Information relative to the type of private water supply
system, its location, malfunctions, date of installation, date of most
recent water test and whether or not the seller has experienced a
problem such as an unsatisfactory water test or a water test with
notations.
                                             
 (b) Information relative to the private sewage disposal system
including its location, malfunctions, the date it was most recently
serviced and the name of the contractor who services the system.
                                             
 (c) Information relative to the insulation, including type and
location.
                                             
 II. The fact that the information requiring disclosure regarding the
private water supply system, private sewage disposal system, and
insulation is not available shall also be conveyed, in writing, when
such is the case.

**Source.** 1994, 105:2, eff. July 10, 1994.

### Section 477:4-e

 **477:4-e History of Property. –**
                                             
 I. (a) The owner of real property, or any agent of such owner, shall
not be required to disclose information to a buyer regarding that such
real property was a site of a homicide, other felony, or a suicide,
unless the buyer requests such information of the owner or agent and the
owner or agent has knowledge that the property was the site of a
homicide, other felony, or suicide.
                                             
 (b) No cause of action shall arise against an owner of real
property or any agent of such owner if such owner or agent discloses
information at the request of the buyer pursuant to subparagraph (a).
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding paragraph I, the seller and buyer of real
property shall be free to negotiate contractual rights of disclosure
concerning the matter in RSA 477:4-e, I.

**Source.** 1994, 365:1, eff. Aug. 8, 1994.

### Section 477:4-f

 **477:4-f Notification Required Prior to Condominium Sale. –** Prior
to or during the preparation of an offer for the purchase and sale of
any condominium unit, the seller shall provide written notice to the
buyer that the buyer has the right to obtain the information in RSA
356-B:58, I from the condominium unit owners' association. Such
information shall include a copy of the condominium declaration,
by-laws, any formal rules of the association, a statement of the amount
of monthly and annual fees, and any special assessments made within the
last 3 years. The buyer shall acknowledge receipt of the notice required
under this section by signing a copy thereof.

**Source.** 2004, 73:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2005.

### Section 477:4-g

 **477:4-g Notification Prior to Sale, Transfer, Lease, or Rental of
Real Property on Which Methamphetamine Has Been Produced. –**
                                             
 I. In any purchase and sale agreement, lease agreement, or rental
agreement before signing an agreement to sell, transfer, lease, or rent
real property for the time period after any conduct prohibited under RSA
318-D has occurred on such property and prior to the determination by
the department of environmental services, pursuant to paragraph II, that
the property meets remediation cleanup standards:
                                             
 (a) The seller, transferor, lessor, or owner shall disclose in
writing to the buyer, transferee, lessee, or occupant if, to the
seller's, transferor's, lessor's or owner's knowledge, methamphetamine
production has occurred on the property.
                                             
 (b) If methamphetamine production has occurred on the property,
the disclosure shall include a statement to the buyer, transferee,
lessee, or occupant informing the buyer, transferee, lessee, or
occupant.
                                             
 II. The department of environmental services or any licensed
environmental or hazardous substances removal specialist shall be
responsible for determining that any property on which methamphetamine
production has occurred, meets remediation cleanup standards established
pursuant to rules adopted by the department under RSA 541-A. Prior to
the establishment of rules, the determination shall be based on the best
scientific methods available. The determination that the property meets
remediation cleanup standards shall be public information available upon
request from the department.

**Source.** 2006, 241:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 477:4-h

 **477:4-h Notification Required Prior to Sale, Transfer, Lease, or
Rental of Real Property Subject to a Public Utility Tariff Pursuant to
RSA 374:61 for the Financing or Amortization of Energy Efficiency or
Renewable Energy Improvements. –**
                                             
 I. Prior to or during the preparation of an offer for the purchase
and sale of any interest in real property and in conjunction with an
offer to lease or rent real property and before signing an agreement to
sell, transfer, lease, or rent real property the seller, transferor,
lessor, or owner shall disclose in writing to the buyer, transferee,
lessee, or occupant if, to the seller's, transferor's, lessor's or
owner's knowledge, any metered public utility services at the premises
that the buyer, transferee, lessee, or occupant may be responsible for
paying as a condition of such utility service is provided under a tariff
with unamortized or ongoing charges for energy efficiency or renewable
energy improvements pursuant to RSA 374:61. Such disclosure should
include, if known, the remaining term and amount of such charges and any
estimates or documentation of gross or net energy or fuel savings
resulting from such financed or amortized improvements and investments.
The buyer shall acknowledge receipt of the disclosure by signing a copy
of the disclosure.
                                             
 II. In the case of a sale or transfer of real property, the fact
that information regarding such required disclosure is not available
shall also be conveyed, in writing, when such is the case.

**Source.** 2010, 229:2, eff. Aug. 27, 2010.

### Section 477:5

 **477:5 Certificate of Acknowledgment. –** A certificate of an
acknowledgment taken outside the United States before any authorized
officer shall be valid if in the form required by law for an
acknowledgment taken within the state.

**Source.** 1917, 53:3. PL 213:5. RL 259:5.

### Section 477:6

 **477:6 Fee for Certificate. –** The fee for taking and certifying
the acknowledgment of a deed or other instrument by one or more persons
at one time shall be 
                                             $.17.

**Source.** RS 229:1. CS 245:1. GS 272:1. GL 290:1. PL 287:3. PL 213:6.
RL 259:6.

### Section 477:7

 **477:7 Validity. –** No deed of bargain and sale, mortgage nor
other conveyance of real estate, nor any lease for more than 7 years
from the making thereof, shall be valid to hold the same against any
person but the grantor and his heirs only, unless such deed or lease be
acknowledged and recorded, according to the provisions of this chapter.
All deeds which have been acknowledged and recorded according to the
provisions of this chapter since August 15, 1981, but which were not
attested to, shall be considered valid under this section.

**Source.** RS 130:4. CS 136:4. GS 121:4. GL 135:4. PS 137:4. PL 213:7.
RL 259:7. RSA 477:7. 1988, 85:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1989.

### Section 477:7-a

 **477:7-a Notice of Lease. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 477:7, a notice of lease
consisting of an instrument in writing executed and acknowledged by all
persons who are parties to the lease, and containing the following
information with reference to such lease shall be sufficient compliance
with the provisions of this chapter:
                                             
 (a) The names and addresses of each party to the lease;
                                             
 (b) The date of execution of the lease;
                                             
 (c) A description of the demised premises as it appears in the
lease;
                                             
 (d) The term of such lease; and
                                             
 (e) The date of commencement of such term and all rights of
extension or renewal.
                                             
 II. All notices of lease which have been acknowledged and recorded
according to the provisions of this section since August 15, 1981, but
which were not witnessed, shall be considered valid under this section.

**Source.** 1971, 76:2. 1977, 366:4. 1999, 77:1, eff. July 27, 1999.

### Section 477:7-b

 **477:7-b Execution and Delivery of Lease Required. –**
                                             
 I. Within 30 days after the execution by all parties of a written
lease, the lessor shall deliver a copy of the lease to the lessee.
                                             
 II. Any person who fails to comply with this section shall be guilty
of a violation.

**Source.** 1975, 306:1, eff. Aug. 6, 1975.

### Section 477:8

 **477:8 Additional Record. –** A person interested in a deed or
lease recorded in one county may cause the same, with the certificate of
record, to be recorded in the registry of any other county, and an
attested copy of such record shall be of the same validity as a copy
from the original registry.

**Source.** RS 130:5. CS 136:5. GS 121:5. GL 135:5. PS 137:5. PL 213:8.
RL 259:8.

### Section 477:9

 **477:9 Power of Attorney. –** Every power of attorney to convey
real estate must be signed and acknowledged, and may be recorded as
required for a deed, and a copy of the record may be used in evidence
whenever a copy of the deed so made is admissible.

**Source.** RS 130:6. CS 136:6. GS 121:6. GL 135:6. PS 137:6. PL 213:9.
RL 259:9. RSA 477:9. 1977, 366:5. 1985, 214:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 477:10

 **477:10 Unacknowledged Deed. –** A deed not acknowledged by the
grantor, but in other respects duly executed, may be recorded, and for
60 days thereafter it shall be as effectual as if duly acknowledged.

**Source.** RS 130:7. CS 136:7. GS 121:7. GL 135:7. PS 137:7. PL 213:10.
RL 259:10.

### Section 477:11

 **477:11 Proof by Witness. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 303:10, eff. Aug.
15, 1981.
                                             ]

### Section 477:12

 **477:12 Proof by Handwriting. –** If any grantor or lessor shall
die, become insane, or go out of the state before the acknowledgment of
a deed or lease, proof of due execution of such deed or lease may be
made by the oath of 2 witnesses acquainted with the handwriting of the
grantor or lessor that the deed or lease was signed by said grantor or
lessor.

**Source.** RS 130:9. CS 136:9. GS 121:9. GL 135:9. PS 137:9. PL 213:12.
RL 259:12. RSA 477:12. 1981, 303:9, eff. Aug. 15, 1981.

### Section 477:13

 **477:13 Refusal to Acknowledge. –** If the grantor or lessor shall
refuse to acknowledge a deed or lease, proof of its due execution may be
made in the manner provided in RSA 477:12, but, if the grantor or lessor
is a resident of this state, notice of the time and place of proving the
same, signed by a justice, shall be delivered to him or left at his
abode 14 days prior to such time. Every unacknowledged deed proved
agreeably to this section or RSA 477:12 shall be as effectual as if duly
acknowledged.

**Source.** RS 130:10. CS 136:10. GS 121:10. GL 135:10. PS 137:10. PL
213:13. RL 259:13. RSA 477:13. 1981, 303:2, eff. Aug. 15, 1981.

### Section 477:14

 **477:14 Neglect to Record. –** If a person having an unrecorded
deed or other evidence of title of real estate in his possession
neglects to record the same, or refuses to allow the same to be
recorded, for the space of 30 days after being thereto requested in
writing by a person having an interest in such estate, any justice, upon
complaint thereof, may issue his warrant and cause such person to be
brought before him for examination, and, if sufficient cause for such
neglect or refusal is not shown, may order such deed or evidence of
title to be recorded, and commit the person to jail until such order is
performed and payment of costs is made.

**Source.** RS 130:11. CS 136:11. GS 121:11. GL 135:11. PS 137:11. PL
213:14. RL 259:14.

### Section 477:15

 **477:15 Oral Conveyance. –** Every estate or interest in lands
created or conveyed without an instrument in writing signed by the
grantor or his attorney shall be deemed an estate at will only, and no
estate or interest in lands shall be assigned, granted or surrendered
except by writing signed as aforesaid or by operation of law.

**Source.** RS 130:12. CS 136:12. GS 121:12. GL 135:12. PS 137:12. PL
213:15. RL 259:15.

### Section 477:16

 **477:16 Deeds Lacking Statement of Consideration or Acknowledgments
Validated. –** When any instrument of writing shall have been on record
in the office of the register of deeds in the proper county for the
period of 10 years, and there is a defect in such instrument because it
omitted to state any consideration therefor, because it was not
acknowledged, because it was not validly acknowledged, because it was
not witnessed, or because it was not sealed, such instrument shall, from
and after the expiration of 10 years from the filing thereof for record,
be valid as though such instrument had in the first instance stated the
consideration therefor or had been acknowledged, witnessed, or sealed in
full compliance with the requirements of law. Such instrument shall,
after the expiration of 10 years from the filing of the same for record,
impart to subsequent purchasers, incumbrancers, and all other persons
whomsoever, notice of such instrument of writing so far as and to the
same extent that such instrument then is recorded, copied, or noted in
such books of record, notwithstanding such defect. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to affect any rights acquired by grantees,
assignees, or incumbrancers after the filing of such instrument for
record and before the expiration of 10 years from the filing of such
instrument for record.

**Source.** 1949, 191:1. RSA 477:16. 1963, 65:1. 1967, 20:1. 1977,
366:6. 1981, 303:3. 1985, 91:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1986.

### Section 477:17

 **477:17 Trusts. –** No trust concerning lands, excepting such as
may arise or result by implication of law, shall be created or declared
unless by an instrument signed by the party creating the same or by his
attorney.

**Source.** RS 130:13. CS 136:13. GS 121:13. GL 135:13. PS 137:13. PL
213:16. RL 259:16.

### Section 477:18

 **477:18 Tenants in Common. –** Every conveyance or devise of real
estate made to 2 or more persons shall be construed to create an estate
in common and not in joint tenancy, unless it shall be expressed therein
that the estate is to be holden by the grantees or devisees as joint
tenants, or to them and the survivor of them, or unless other words are
used clearly expressing an intention to create a joint tenancy. The
addition, following the names of the grantees in the granting clause of
a deed or devise, of the words "as joint tenants with rights of
survivorship'' or "as tenants by the entirety'' shall constitute a clear
expression of intention to create a joint tenancy.

**Source.** RS 129:2. CS 135:2. GS 121:14. PS 137:14. PL 213:17. RL
259:17. 1951, 178:11. RSA 477:18. 1959, 264:2, eff. Nov. 13, 1959.

### Section 477:19

 **477:19 Joint Heirs. –** Joint heirs shall be deemed tenants in
common.

**Source.** RS 129:3. CS 135:3. GS 121:15. GL 135:15. PS 137:15. PL
213:18. RL 259:18.

### Section 477:20

 **477:20 Alien Residents. –** An alien resident in this state may
take, purchase, hold, convey or devise real estate, and it may descend
in the same manner as if he were a citizen.

**Source.** RS 129:4. CS 135:4. GS 121:16. GL 135:16. PS 137:16. PL
213:19. RL 259:19.

### Section 477:21

 **477:21 Escheat. –** Any right or claim of the state, by escheat or
otherwise, to the estate of any resident alien is hereby discharged.

**Source.** RS 129:5. CS 135:5. GS 121:17. GL 135:17. PS 137:17. PL
213:20. RL 259:20.

### Section 477:22

 **477:22 Limited Interest. –** A conveyance made by a person having
a limited interest in an estate, purporting to convey a greater interest
than he possessed or could lawfully convey, shall not work a forfeiture
thereof, but shall pass to the grantee all the estate which he could
lawfully convey.

**Source.** RS 129:6. CS 135:6. GS 121:18. GL 135:18. PS 137:18. PL
213:21. RL 259:21.

### Section 477:22-a

 **477:22-a Enforceability of Publicly-Owned Land Restrictions. –**
Any recorded restriction, order, covenant, or other interest in land
held by the state, or any political subdivision of the state, shall be
enforceable against any owner of the affected land or structure,
including subsequent purchasers, heirs, or assignees, notwithstanding
lack of privity of estate or contract, or lack of benefit to particular
land, or the benefit being assignable or being assigned.

**Source.** 2009, 295:1, eff. Sept. 29, 2009.

Forms of Deeds and Mortgages
----------------------------

### Section 477:23

 **477:23 Purpose. –** For the purpose of avoiding the unnecessary
use of words in deeds of real estate, or interests therein, the
statutory forms provided in this subdivision are authorized. Nothing in
this subdivision shall be understood as preventing the use of other
forms appropriate for the conveyance of real estate or any interest
therein.

**Source.** 1951, 178:1, eff. Aug. 1, 1951.

### Section 477:24

 **477:24 Unnecessary Words; Construction of Certain Words. –** The
word "grant'' in a conveyance of real estate or any interest therein
shall be a sufficient word of conveyance without the use of the words
"give, bargain, sell, alien, enfeoff, convey and confirm'' or the words
"remise, release and forever quitclaim.'' No covenant shall be implied
from the use of the word "grant.'' In a conveyance or reservation of
real estate, the term "heirs,'' "assigns'' or other technical words of
inheritance or succession shall not be necessary to convey or reserve an
estate in fee. A deed or reservation of real estate shall be construed
to convey or reserve an interest in fee simple unless a different
intention clearly appears in the deed.

**Source.** 1951, 178:2, eff. Aug. 1, 1951.

### Section 477:25

 **477:25 Statute of Uses Not to Effect Trusts. –** When a conveyance
or devise of real estate is made to a grantee or devisee in trust or as
trustee under a declaration of trust, such conveyance or devise shall
vest in the grantee or devisee, as trustee, legal title with full power
to convey the real estate in accordance with the trust.

**Source.** 1951, 178:3. RSA 477:25. 1986, 10:1, eff. May 26, 1986.

### Section 477:25-a

 **477:25-a Conveyances To or From Trusts Without Naming Trustees.
–**
                                             
 I. In any conveyance of real property or any interest in real
property in this state, if the grantee or one or more of the grantees is
named as a trust, whether the trust is created under the laws of this
state or of any other jurisdiction, and no trustee of that trust is
named as a grantee in his or her or its capacity as trustee, then the
conveyance is deemed to have been made to all of the trustees of the
trust who have accepted the office of trustee in their capacity as
trustees of the trust, as though they had been named as grantees.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a trustee who would be deemed by this
paragraph to have accepted title to real property but who has not either
expressly accepted title or participated in any transaction involving
the property other than as allowed by RSA 564-B:7-701(c) may, to the
extent not prohibited by the terms of the trust or otherwise, decline to
accept such real property by recording an affidavit reciting such
nonacceptance and nonparticipation and lack of prohibition and declining
to accept title, in the registry in which the conveyance subject to this
paragraph was recorded; and upon the recording of such an affidavit,
such trustee shall be deemed never to have accepted or held title to the
real property that is the subject of such conveyance; but such
declination of title by one or more but not all of the trustees shall
not prevent the vesting of title to the entire interest conveyed in the
remaining trustees. Notwithstanding this right of trustees to decline
title, the title of any bona fide purchaser whose title is derived by
instrument recorded subsequent to the date of recording of the
conveyance subject to this section shall not be adversely affected by
the recording of a trustee's affidavit declining title.
                                             
 II. In any conveyance of real property or any interest in real
property in this state, the conveyance is deemed to have been made by
all of the persons who signed the instrument of conveyance in the
expressly denoted capacity of trustees of the trust, as though they had
been named as such in the granting clause as grantors instead of the
trust, if:
                                             
 (a) The granting clause designates or includes as grantor a
trust, whether the trust is created under the laws of this state or of
any other jurisdiction, and the granting clause does not include as
grantors one or more persons expressly described as trustees of the
trust;
                                             
 (b) The signature block designates the trust as a signatory
entity, followed by the signatures of one or more persons expressly
described as trustees; or
                                             
 (c) Both subparagraphs (a) and (b) apply.
                                             
 III. Any person who claims title to any real property or any
interest in real property in this state by virtue of the failure of an
instrument of conveyance delivered before the effective date of this
section to name as grantor or as grantee any trustee of a trust may
preserve that claim by recording a notice, within 2 years from the
effective date of this section, in the registry of deeds where the
instrument of conveyance is recorded. In order for the notice to be
effective, it shall contain the name and mailing address of the
claimant, the names of the parties to the instrument of conveyance that
is claimed to be defective, the names of the current owners of record,
the book and page numbers where the instrument of conveyance is
recorded, and a statement of the purported defect on which the claim is
based. The notice described in this paragraph may be presented for
recording by the claimant or by any other person acting on behalf of a
claimant who is under a disability or is unable to assert a claim on the
claimant's own behalf, but a disability or lack of knowledge of any kind
shall not suspend or extend the period for the recording of the notice.
                                             
 IV. This section shall not apply to any trust that, as determined by
the laws of its situs, is an entity capable of holding and conveying
title in its own name.
                                             
 V. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to recognize
trusts created under the laws of this state as entities capable of
holding or conveying title to real property in their own names. This
section applies to conveyances made before, on, or after the effective
date of this section, but nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to suggest or require that any instrument delivered before the
effective date of this section is invalid. Nothing contained in this
section shall be construed to extend the period for the commencement of
an action or for the performance of any other required act under any
statute of limitations.
                                             
 VI. Other than as expressly stated, this section shall not be read
to mean that a conveyance falling within the terms of paragraph I or II
is any more or less valid or has any different effect with regard to the
trustees or the trust than if the trustees had been expressly named as
such in the granting clause.

**Source.** 2009, 180:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2009.

### Section 477:26

 **477:26 Easements, Appurtenances, Etc. –** In a conveyance of real
estate or any interest therein, all rights, easements, privileges and
appurtenances belonging to the granted estate or interest shall be
deemed to be included in the conveyance, unless the contrary shall be
stated in the deed, and it shall be unnecessary in order for their
inclusion to enumerate or mention them either generally or specifically.

**Source.** 1951, 178:4, eff. Aug. 1, 1951.

### Section 477:27

 **477:27 Statutory Form of Warranty Deed. –** A deed in substance
following the form appended to this section shall, when duly executed
and delivered, have the force and effect of a deed in fee simple to the
grantee, heirs, successors and assigns, to their own use, with covenant
on the part of the grantor, for himself or herself, heirs, executors and
administrators, that, at the time of the delivery of such deed, the
grantor was lawfully seized in fee simple of the granted premises, that
the said premises were free from all incumbrances, except as stated,
that the grantor had good right to sell and convey the same to the
grantee, heirs, successors and assigns, and that the grantor will, and
the heirs, executors, and administrators shall, warrant and defend the
same to the grantee and heirs, successors and assigns, against the
lawful claims and demands of all persons.

(Form for warranty deed)


                                             

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, for consideration paid, grant to

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, (complete mailing address) 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,
of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ Street, Town (City) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, with
warranty covenants, the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (Description of land or
interest being conveyed: incumbrances, exceptions, reservations, if any)

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, (wife) (husband) of said grantor, release to said
grantee all rights of homestead and other interests therein.

(Here add acknowledgment)

**Source.** 1951, 178:5. RSA 477:27. 1965, 125:2. 1971, 179:6. 1977,
366:7. 1981, 303:4. 2006, 7:1, eff. April 11, 2006.

### Section 477:28

 **477:28 Statutory Form of Quitclaim Deed. –** A deed in substance
following the form appended to this section shall, when duly executed
and delivered, have the force and effect of a deed in fee simple to the
grantee, heirs, successors and assigns, to their own use, with covenants
on the part of the grantor, for himself, or herself, heirs, executors
and administrators with the grantee, heirs, successors and assigns, that
at the time of the delivery of such deed the premises were free from all
incumbrances made by the grantor, except as stated, and that the grantor
will, and the heirs, executors and administrators shall, warrant and
defend the same to the grantee and heirs, successors and assigns forever
against the lawful claims and demands of all persons claiming, by,
through or under the grantor, but against none other.

(Form for quitclaim deed)


                                             

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, for consideration paid, grant to

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, (complete mailing address) 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,
of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ Street, Town (City) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
County, State of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, with quitclaim covenants, the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (Description of land or interest therein being
conveyed: incumbrances, exceptions, reservations, if any)

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, (wife) (husband) of said grantor, release to said
grantee all rights of homestead and other interests therein.

(Here add acknowledgment)

**Source.** 1951, 178:6. RSA 477:28. 1965, 125:3. 1971, 179:7. 1981,
303:5. 2006, 7:1, eff. April 11, 2006.

### Section 477:29

 **477:29 Statutory Form of Power of Sale Mortgage. –** A deed in
substance following the form appended to this section, when duly
executed and delivered, shall have the force and effect of a mortgage
deed to the use of the mortgagee and his heirs, successors and assigns
with the mortgage covenants and upon the statutory conditions and with
the statutory power of sale as defined in the following paragraphs:
                                             
 I. In a conveyance of real estate, the words "mortgage covenants''
shall include in their meaning the same meaning as given to "warranty
covenants'' in RSA 477:27.
                                             
 II. The words "statutory conditions,'' except as otherwise
specifically stated in the mortgage, shall mean: "Provided,
nevertheless, that if the mortgagor, his heirs, executors and
administrators, successors and assigns shall pay unto the mortgagee or
his executors, administrators, successors or assigns the principal and
interest secured by the mortgage, shall perform any and each obligation
provided in the note or other instrument secured by the mortgage, until
such payment and performance shall pay when due and payable all taxes,
charges and assessments for which the property mortgaged may become
liable, shall keep the buildings on said premises insured against perils
insured in the New Hampshire standard fire policy in a sum equal to that
portion of the amount secured by the mortgage allocable to said
buildings, or as otherwise provided therein, for the benefit of the
mortgagee and his executors, administrators, successors and assigns in
such form as he or they shall approve, deliver the policies therefor to
him or them, and shall not commit or suffer any strip or waste of the
mortgaged premises, or any breach of any covenant in said mortgage, then
this mortgage deed shall be void.''
                                             
 III. The words "statutory power of sale'' shall be understood as
giving the mortgagee and executors, administrators, successors and
assigns the right, upon any default of the performance of the statutory
condition as defined in paragraph II, or any other condition contained
in the mortgage, to foreclose by sale under the provisions of RSA
479:25-27-a inclusive.

(Form for mortgage deed, with power of sale)


                                             

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, for consideration paid, grant to

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, (complete mailing address) 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,
of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ Street, Town (City) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ with mortgage
covenants, to secure the payments of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, with 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ percent
interest payable semiannually and also perform all the agreements and
conditions as provided in note 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ of even date, the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (Description of land or interest therein being
conveyed: incumbrances, reservations, exceptions, if any)

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _. This mortgage is upon the statutory conditions,
for any breach of which the mortgagee shall have the statutory power of
sale. 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (Wife) (husband) of said mortgagor, release
all rights of homestead and other interests in the mortgage premises.

(Here add acknowledgment)

**Source.** 1951, 178:7. RSA 477:29. 1965, 125:4. 1971, 179:8. 1977,
366:8. 1981, 117:1; 303:6. 2006, 7:2, eff. April 11, 2006.

### Section 477:30

 **477:30 Statutory Form of Fiduciary Deed. –** A deed in substance
following the form appended to this section shall, when duly executed
and delivered, have the force and effect of a deed in fee simple to the
grantee, heirs, successors and assigns, to their own use, with covenants
on the part of the grantor, for himself or herself, that, at the time of
the delivery of such deed, the grantor was duly authorized to make the
sale of the premises; that in all of the grantor's proceedings in the
sale thereof, the grantor has complied with the requirements of the
statute in such case provided; and that the grantor will warrant and
defend the same to the grantee, heirs, successors and assigns, against
the lawful claims of all persons claiming by, from or under him or her
in the capacity aforesaid.

(Form for fiduciary deed)


                                             

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, executor under the will (administrator of the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ estate) (trustee under the will) (guardian)
(conservator) (receiver of the estate) (commissioner) of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, by the power conferred by

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ and every other power, for 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ dollars paid,
grant to 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, (complete mailing address)

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ Street, Town (City) of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (Insert description of
land or interest therein being conveyed: incumbrances, reservations,
exceptions.)

(Here add acknowledgment)

**Source.** 1951, 178:8. RSA 477:30. 1965, 125:5. 1977, 366:9. 1981,
303:7. 2006, 7:3, eff. April 11, 2006.

### Section 477:31

 **477:31 Statutory Form for Foreclosure Deed Under Power of Sale.
–** Where a mortgage is foreclosed under a statutory power of sale, the
mortgagee may give a deed to the purchaser, whether the purchaser be a
stranger or the mortgagee, in the following form:
                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ State of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, holder of a mortgage
from 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ to 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ dated

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, recorded in 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ Registry of
Deeds, Vol. 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, page 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, by the power conferred by said mortgage
and every other power, for 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ dollars paid, grant to

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, (complete mailing address) 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,
of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ Street, Town (City) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, the premises
conveyed by said mortgage.

(Here add acknowledgment)


                                             
 A deed in substance in that form shall, when duly executed and
delivered, have the force and effect of a deed in fee simple to the
grantee, heirs, successors and assigns, to their own use, with covenants
on the part of the grantor, for himself or herself, that, at the time of
the delivery of such deed, the grantor was duly authorized to make sale
of the premises; that in all of the grantor's proceedings in the sale
thereof, the grantor has complied with the requirements of the statute
in such case provided; and that the grantor will warrant and defend the
same to the grantee, heirs, successors and assigns, against the lawful
claims of all persons claiming by, from or under him or her.

**Source.** 1951, 178:9. RSA 477:31. 1965, 125:6. 1977, 366:10. 1981,
303:8. 2006, 7:3, eff. April 11, 2006.

### Section 477:32

 **477:32 Affidavit of Sale Under Power of Sale in Mortgage. –** The
affidavit required by RSA 479:26 may be in the following form:
                                             

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, grantor in the foregoing deed, on my oath say 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ that the
principal and interest (the obligation to 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _) secured
by the mortgage referred to in the foregoing deed was not paid or
tendered or performed when due, and that I caused to be published on the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, and 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, 20 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, in 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, a newspaper
published in 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ in said County of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, a notice of which the
following is a true copy:

(Insert copy of advertisement)


                                             
And I further on oath say that I sent a copy of said notice on the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, 20 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, by registered mail to 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ at

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, his last known address. And I further on oath say
that pursuant to said notice, at the time and place therein appointed, I
sold the mortgaged premises at public auction to 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,
above named, for 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ dollars bid by him, being the highest 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ bid
made therefor at said auction.

  ----------------------------------
  (Signature) 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
  ----------------------------------

(Here add jurat)

**Source.** 1951, 178:10, eff. Aug. 1, 1951.

### Section 477:32-a

 **477:32-a Error in or Omission of Mailing Address. –** Any error in
or omission of the mailing address of the grantee or mortgagee in the
deed, mortgage or other conveyance required by any provision of this
chapter shall not affect in any way the validity or effectiveness of
such deed, mortgage or other conveyance of real estate.

**Source.** 1965, 125:7, eff. Jan. 1, 1966.

No Prescription Against the Public
----------------------------------

### Section 477:33

 **477:33 Waters. –** No owner or occupier of a milldam or other
water power shall acquire by prescription any right against the state or
the public to impede or in any way injure navigation, the passage of
fish or any other public easement in any of the waters of the state.

**Source.** GS 121:19. GL 135:19. PS 137:19. PL 213:22. RL 259:22.

### Section 477:34

 **477:34 Property. –** No person shall acquire by prescription a
right to any part of a town house, schoolhouse or church lot, or of any
public ground by fencing or otherwise inclosing the same or in any way
occupying it adversely for any length of time.

**Source.** 1862, 2622:2. GS 70:9. GL 76:9. PS 137:20. PL 213:23. RL
259:23.

Conveyance of Standing Trees
----------------------------

### Section 477:35

 **477:35 Effect. –** The conveyance of standing trees apart from the
land on which they stand shall not cause the same to become personal
property, but such trees shall remain real estate until actually severed
from the land.

**Source.** 1907, 27:1. PL 213:24. RL 259:24.

### Section 477:35-a

 **477:35-a Conditional Deed. –**
                                             
 I. After August 29, 1969, any conveyance of standing trees which
includes therein a stipulation requiring that the trees be removed
within a certain time or by a certain date shall render the deed
conditional, and failure by the purchaser to remove said trees within
the stipulated time shall result in the forfeiture of the purchaser's
rights in the trees unless the deed specifically provides otherwise.
                                             
 II. After the effective date of this paragraph, any conveyance of
standing trees which does not include therein a stipulation requiring
that such trees be removed within a certain time or by a certain date
shall render the deed conditional, and failure by the purchaser to so
remove said trees within 7 years from the date of conveyance shall
result in the forfeiture of the purchaser's rights in the trees unless
the deed specifically provides otherwise.

**Source.** 1969, 325:1. 2003, 138:7, eff. Aug. 16, 2003.

### Section 477:35-b

 **477:35-b Previous Conveyances. –**
                                             
 I. Any conveyance of standing trees made prior to August 29, 1969,
which includes therein a stipulation requiring that the trees be removed
within a certain time or by a certain date, but which does not include
therein any terms to the effect that the right to the trees shall revert
to the grantor upon the passage of the stated time or stated date, shall
be presumed as having intended to grant an absolute property interest in
the trees to the purchaser even though the trees remain uncut beyond the
stipulated time or date; provided, however, that any such right to said
trees on the part of the purchaser or his heirs or assigns must be
asserted and any litigation begun within 7 years after August 29, 1969,
or within 7 years of the stipulated time of removal of the trees,
whichever occurs last, or otherwise all such rights to said trees shall
revert to the grantor or his heirs or assigns. Nothing in this section
shall be construed as precluding the introduction of any evidence in any
action to rebut the presumption of the granting of ownership of trees as
provided by this section.
                                             
 II. Any conveyance of standing trees prior to the effective date of
this paragraph which does not include therein a stipulation requiring
that such trees be removed within a certain time or by a certain date,
shall be presumed as having intended to grant to the purchaser an
absolute property interest in the trees standing at the date of the
conveyance even though the trees remain uncut beyond a reasonable time
for their removal after said date; provided, however, that any such
right to said trees on the part of the purchaser or his heirs or assigns
must be asserted and litigation begun with 7 years after the effective
date of this paragraph or otherwise all such rights to said trees shall
revert to the grantor or his or her heirs or assigns. Nothing in this
section shall be construed as precluding the introduction of any
evidence in any action to rebut the presumption of the granting of
ownership of trees as provided by this paragraph.

**Source.** 1969, 325:1. 2003, 138:8, eff. Aug. 16, 2003.

### Section 477:36

 **477:36 Requisites. –** No deed of bargain and sale, mortgage or
other conveyance of standing trees, or any lease of the same for more
than 7 years from the making thereof shall be valid to hold standing
trees against any person but the grantor and his heirs only unless
acknowledged and recorded as provided in RSA 477:37 and 477:38.

**Source.** 1907, 27:2. PL 213:25. RL 259:25.

### Section 477:37

 **477:37 Mortgagee's Consent to Cutting. –** Whenever standing trees
have been mortgaged as real estate or are covered by a mortgage of the
land on which they stand, the mortgagee may indorse upon said mortgage a
consent that the trees may be cut, which consent shall be recorded in
the registry of deeds.

**Source.** 1921, 76:1. PL 213:26. RL 259:26. 2008, 322:5, eff. Aug. 31,
2008.

### Section 477:38

 **477:38 Continuance of Mortgage Lien. –** After execution of the
mortgage provided for in RSA 477:37, both parties to the mortgage may
then execute and attach thereto the affidavit required by law to be
attached to mortgages of personal property; said mortgage, consent and
affidavit may then be recorded with the proper town clerk, as mortgages
of personal property are required to be recorded; and thereupon the lien
of said mortgage shall be extended to cover said trees after they are
cut, and the lumber therefrom, as fully as though the same had been
mortgaged as personal property after cutting.

**Source.** 1921, 76:1. PL 213:27. RL 259:27.

Conveyance of Remainders, Etc.
------------------------------

### Section 477:39

 **477:39 Petition for Trustee; Order for Sale. –** When real estate
is subject to a contingent or vested remainder, executory devise or
power of appointment, the superior court for the county in which said
real estate is situated may, upon petition of any person who has an
estate in possession, remainder or reversion in such real estate, and
after notice and other proceedings as provided in RSA 477:40 and 477:41,
appoint one or more trustees, and authorize him or them to sell or
mortgage and convey such estate or any part thereof in fee simple if
such sale, mortgage or conveyance appears to the court to be necessary
or expedient, and such conveyance shall be valid and binding upon all
parties.

**Source.** 1893, 19:1. 1925, 121:1. PL 213:28. RL 259:28.

### Section 477:40

 **477:40 Notice. –** Notice of any such petition shall be given in
such manner as the court may order to all persons who are or may become
interested in the real estate to which the petition relates, and to all
persons whose issue not in being may become interested therein.

**Source.** 1893, 19:2. PL 213:29. RL 259:29.

### Section 477:41

 **477:41 Appearances; Costs. –** The court shall appoint a suitable
person to appear and act therein as the next friend of all minors,
persons not ascertained and persons not in being who are or may become
interested in such real estate, and the cost of the appearance and
services of such next friend, including the compensation of his counsel,
to be determined by the court, shall be paid as the court may order
either out of the proceeds of the sale or by the petitioner. In the
latter case, execution therefor may issue in the name of the next
friend.

**Source.** 1893, 19:2. PL 213:30. RL 259:30.

### Section 477:42

 **477:42 Trustee's Bond; Duties. –** Every trustee appointed under
RSA 447:39 shall give bond to the judge of probate for the county in
which said real estate or the greater part thereof is situated in such
form and for such an amount as the court appointing him may order, and
he shall receive and hold, invest or apply the proceeds of any sale made
by him for the benefit of the persons who would have been entitled to
the real estate if such sale had not been made and apply the proceeds of
any mortgage for the benefit of the persons interested in the real
estate, subject to the orders and decrees of the court authorizing the
same.

**Source.** 1893, 19:3. 1925, 121:2. PL 213:31. RL 259:31.

### Section 477:43

 **477:43 Probate Jurisdiction. –** The probate court for said county
shall have jurisdiction of all matters thereafter arising in relation to
such trust, subject to the right of appeal on questions of law.

**Source.** 1893, 19:3. PL 213:32. RL 259:32. RSA 477:43. 1975, 395:3,
eff. Jan. 1, 1976.

Buildings on Land of Another
----------------------------

### Section 477:44

 **477:44 Buildings; Manufactured Housing. –**
                                             
 I. Application of Real Estate Laws. Buildings situated on land not
belonging to the owners of the buildings shall be deemed real estate for
purposes of transfer, whether voluntary or involuntary, and shall be
conveyed, mortgaged or leased, and shall be subjected to attachment,
other liens, foreclosure and execution, in the same manner and with the
same formality as real estate.
                                             
 II. Manufactured Housing. Manufactured housing, as defined by RSA
674:31, shall be deemed a building for the purpose of paragraph I when
such manufactured housing is placed on a site and tied into required
utilities. Any deed conveying manufactured housing or evidencing its
relocation within this state shall be substantially in the form provided
in subparagraphs (a) and (b). If a deed for any manufactured housing is
recorded in the registry of deeds of one county of this state and if
such manufactured housing is relocated to another site in that county or
to a site in another county of this state, a deed evidencing the change
of location shall be recorded in the registry of deeds of the county in
which it was originally located and a duplicate original shall also be
recorded in the registry of deeds of the county to which it was
relocated. If such manufactured housing is relocated to a site outside
of this state, a statement evidencing the change of location
substantially in the form provided in subparagraph (c) shall be recorded
in the registry of deeds of the county in this state in which it was
previously located. An attachment, lien or other encumbrance on
manufactured housing, when properly created and recorded as required by
law, shall continue to be enforceable until released or discharged
notwithstanding the relocation of the manufactured housing within or
outside of this state.
                                             
 (a) A deed in substance following the form provided in this
subparagraph shall, when duly executed and delivered, have the force and
effect of a deed in fee simple to the grantee, heirs, successors and
assigns, to their own use, with covenant on the part of the grantor, for
the grantor, the grantor's heirs, executors and administrators that, at
the time of the delivery of such deed, the grantor was lawfully seized
in fee simple of the manufactured housing; that such manufactured
housing was free from all incumbrances, except as stated; that the
grantor had good right to sell and convey the same to the grantee, the
grantee's heirs, successors and assigns; and that the grantor and the
grantor's heirs, executors and administrators shall warrant and defend
the same to the grantee and the grantee's heirs, successors and assigns,
against the lawful claims and demands of all persons. No owner of land
shall unreasonably withhold the consent required by this statutory form.

Form for Manufactured Housing Warranty Deed


                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
County, State of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, for consideration paid, grant to

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, (complete mailing address) 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,
of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ Street, Town (City) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, with
warranty covenants, the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (Description of
manufactured housing being conveyed: name of manufacturer, model and
serial number and incumbrances, exceptions, reservations, if any) which
manufactured housing is situated, or is to be situated, at

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (state name of park, if any, and street address),
Town (City) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State
of New Hampshire.
                                             
 The tract or parcel of land upon which the manufactured housing is
situated, or is to be situated, is owned by 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ by deed
dated 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ and recorded at Book 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, Page in the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County Registry of Deeds. 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
(wife) (husband) of said grantor, release to said grantee all rights and
other interests therein.
                                             
 Signed this 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _.

(Here add acknowledgment)


                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, owner of the tract or parcel of land upon
which the aforesaid manufactured housing is situated, or is to be
situated, hereby consents to the conveyance of the manufactured
housing.
                                             
 Signed this 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _.

(Here add acknowledgment)


                                             
 
                                             [ 
                                             ] Check box if the manufactured housing has been relocated from
one site to another within New Hampshire. The manufactured housing was
previously located at 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (state name of park, if any,
and street address), Town (City) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State of New Hampshire and title, if any,
to the same was recorded at Book 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, Page 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, in the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County Registry of Deeds. If the relocation is to a
county of the State of New Hampshire other than the county in which the
deed to the grantor was recorded, a duplicate original of the deed must
be recorded in the registry of deeds of that county at the same time
this deed is recorded.
                                             
 (b) A deed in substance following the form provided in this
paragraph shall, when duly executed and delivered, have the force and
effect of a deed in fee simple to the grantee, heirs, successors and
assigns, to their own use, with covenants on the part of the grantor,
for the grantor, the grantor's heirs, executors and administrators with
the grantee, the grantee's heirs, successors and assigns that at the
time of the delivery of such deed the manufactured housing was free from
all incumbrances made by the grantor, except as stated, and that the
grantor and the grantor's heirs, executors and administrators shall
warrant and defend the same to the grantee and the grantee's heirs,
successors and assigns forever against the lawful claims and demands of
all persons claiming, by, through or under the grantor, but against none
other. No owner of land shall unreasonably withhold the consent required
by this statutory form.

Form for Manufactured Housing Quitclaim Deed


                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
County, State of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, for consideration paid, grant to

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, (complete mailing address) 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,
of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ Street, Town (City) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, with
quitclaim covenants, the (Description of manufactured housing being
conveyed: name of manufacturer, model and serial number and
incumbrances, exceptions, reservations, if any) which manufactured
housing is situated, or is to be situated, at 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
(state name of park, if any, and street address), Town (City) of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State of New
Hampshire.
                                             
 The tract or parcel of land upon which the manufactured housing is
situated, or is to be situated, is owned by 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ by deed
dated 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ and recorded at Book 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, Page 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, in
the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County Registry of Deeds. 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
(wife) (husband) of said grantor, release to said grantee all rights and
other interest therein.
                                             
 Signed this 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _.

(Here add acknowledgment)


                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, owner of the tract or parcel of land upon
which the aforesaid manufactured housing is situated, or is to be
situated, hereby consents to the conveyance of the manufactured
housing.
                                             
 Signed this 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _.

(Here add acknowledgment)


                                             
 
                                             [ 
                                             ] Check box if the manufactured housing has been relocated from
one site to another within New Hampshire. The manufactured housing was
previously located at 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (state name of park, if any,
and street address), Town (City) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State of New Hampshire and title, if any,
to the same was recorded at Book 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, Page 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, in the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County Registry of Deeds. If the relocation is to a
county of the State of New Hampshire other than the county in which the
deed to the grantor was recorded, a duplicate original of the deed must
be recorded in the registry of deeds of that county at the same time
this deed is recorded.
                                             
 (c) An out-of-state transfer statement in substance following the
form appended to this paragraph shall, when duly executed and recorded
in the registry of deeds of the county in which the manufactured housing
was previously located, have the force and effect of transferring title
of the manufactured housing to the grantee, the grantee's heirs,
successors and assigns and terminating the record title of the
manufactured housing in such registry of deeds under circumstances by
which the manufactured housing is relocated to a site outside of this
state. No owner of land shall unreasonably withhold the consent required
by this statutory form. No manufactured housing may be relocated to a
site outside of this state unless all holders of liens, attachments or
incumbrances, if any, consent thereto in writing on the transfer
statement.

Form for Out-of-State Transfer Statement


                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, County, State of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, for consideration paid, grant to

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, (complete mailing address) 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,
of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ Street, Town (City) of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, the

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (Description of manufactured housing being
conveyed: name of manufacturer, model and serial number and
incumbrances, exceptions, reservations, if any) which manufactured
housing, was situated at 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (state name of park, if
any, and street address), Town (City) 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County, State of New Hampshire.
                                             
 The tract or parcel of land upon which the manufactured housing was
situated is owned by 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ by deed 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
dated 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ and recorded at Book 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, Page 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ in
the 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ County Registry of Deeds. 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
(wife) (husband) of said grantor, release to said grantee all rights and
other interest therein.
                                             
 Signed this 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _.

(Here add acknowledgment)


                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, owner of the tract or parcel of land upon
which the aforesaid manufactured housing was situated, hereby consents
to the conveyance of the manufactured housing.
                                             
 Signed this 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _.

(Here add acknowledgment)


                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, holder of (lien, attachment or encumbrance)
hereby consent to the conveyance of the aforesaid manufactured housing,
subject to condition that the aforesaid (lien, attachment or
encumbrance) shall remain in force and effect thereon.
                                             
 Signed this 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _.

(Here add acknowledgment)


                                             
 III. Initial Transfer of Title to Manufactured Housing. A deed,
substantially in the form prescribed by subparagraphs II(a) and (b),
duly executed and delivered, shall be required to transfer title to any
manufactured housing in a transaction occurring prior to connection of
such manufactured housing to the required utilities.
                                             
 IV. As an alternative to the methods prescribed in paragraph II for
mortgages of and foreclosures and executions upon manufactured housing,
security interests in manufactured housing may be created in the manner
prescribed in RSA 382-A:9. Such security interest, properly perfected in
the manner prescribed in RSA 382-A:9-501(a)(1) shall be entitled to
priority over any other interests in such manufactured housing arising
after such perfection. A person holding a security interest in
manufactured housing shall have all the rights, remedies and obligations
provided in RSA 382-A:9; subject, however, to homestead rights as
provided in RSA 480:1. In the event such homestead rights are not
waived, a secured party foreclosing upon a security interest created
under this paragraph shall first pay to the debtor an amount equal to
that which a person is entitled to under RSA 480:1, and the same amount
to his or her spouse, if any, out of the proceeds of the sale of the
manufactured housing, which payment shall extinguish all homestead
rights therein.
                                             
 V. Any manufactured housing park owner required to sign a deed under
this section shall sign the deed no later than 15 days after the new
tenant is approved and the park owner is requested to do so. The tenant
shall deliver the deed to the manufactured housing park owner's place of
business for signature. The fee for any such signature on a deed shall
not exceed 
                                             $25 and shall be paid by the tenant.
                                             
 VI. All deeds which have been acknowledged and recorded according to
the provisions of this section since August 17, 1983, but which were not
witnessed, shall be considered valid under this section.

**Source.** 1965, 119:1. 1983, 230:14. 1994, 314:1. 1997, 127:1, 2.
2001, 102:44. 2006, 7:4, eff. April 11, 2006.

Conservation and Preservation Restrictions
------------------------------------------

### Section 477:45

 **477:45 Definitions. –**
                                             
 I. A conservation restriction shall mean a right to prohibit or
require, a limitation upon, or an obligation to perform, acts on or with
respect to, or uses of, a land or water area, whether stated in the form
of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will, or
other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the area or in
any order of taking, which right, limitation, or obligation is
appropriate to retaining or maintaining such land or water area,
including improvements thereon, predominantly in its natural, scenic, or
open condition, or in agricultural, farming, open space or forest use,
or in any other use or condition consistent with the protection of
environmental quality.
                                             
 II. A preservation restriction shall mean a right to prohibit or
require, a limitation upon, or an obligation to perform, acts on or with
respect to, or uses of, a structure or site historically significant for
its architecture, archaeology or associations, whether stated in the
form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed,
will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the
structure or site or in any order of taking, which right, limitation or
obligation is appropriate to the preservation or restoration of such
structure or site.
                                             
 III. "Agricultural preservation restriction'' means the restraint
placed on the development rights of agricultural land whether stated in
the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed,
will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the
land which is appropriate to retaining land or water areas predominantly
in their agricultural use, to prohibit or limit construction or
placement of buildings except those used for agricultural purposes or
for dwellings used for family living by the land owner, his immediate
family or employees; excavation, dredging or removal of loam, sod, peat,
gravel, soil, rock or other mineral substance in such a manner as to
adversely affect the land's future agricultural potential; or other acts
or uses detrimental to such retention of the land for agricultural use.

**Source.** 1973, 391:1. 1979, 301:4, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.

### Section 477:46

 **477:46 Restrictions Enforceable. –** No conservation restriction
held by any governmental body or by a charitable, educational or other
corporation, association, trust or other entity whose purposes include
conservation of land or water areas or of a particular such area, no
preservation restriction held by any governmental body or by a
charitable, educational or other corporation, association, trust or
other entity whose purposes include preservation of structures or sites
of historical significance or of a particular such structure or site and
no agricultural preservation restriction held by any governmental body
or charitable corporation, trust or other entity whose purposes include
preservation of land or water areas predominantly in their agricultural
state shall be unenforceable against any owner of the restricted land or
structure on account of lack of privity of estate or contract or lack of
benefit to particular land or on account of the benefit being assignable
or being assigned to any other governmental body or to any entity with
like purposes. This section shall not be construed to imply that any
restriction, easement, covenant or condition which does not have the
benefit of this section shall, on account of any provisions hereof, be
unenforceable. Any doctrine of law which might otherwise cause the
termination of such a restriction shall not be affected by the
provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1973, 391:1. 1979, 301:5, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.

### Section 477:47

 **477:47 Interests in Real Estate. –** Conservation, preservation,
and agricultural preservation restrictions are interests in real estate
and a document creating such a restriction shall be deemed a conveyance
of real estate for purposes of RSA 477:3 and RSA 477:3-a relating to
execution and recording. Such a restriction may be enforced by an action
at law or by injunction or other proceeding in equity. No grantee or
contingent grantee interest in such a restriction shall be created or
amended by any document unless it bears the notarized signature of the
grantee and any and all contingent grantees.

**Source.** 1973, 391:1. 1979, 301:6. 1992, 138:4. 2008, 125:1, eff.
Aug. 2, 2008.

### Section 477:48

 **477:48 Security Deposits. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 100:7, eff. July 9,
1985.
                                             ]

Solar Skyspace Easements
------------------------

### Section 477:49

 **477:49 Definitions. –** As used in this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Solar energy'' means radiant energy, whether direct, diffuse, or
reflected, received from the sun at wavelengths suitable for conversion
into thermal, chemical, or electrical energy.
                                             
 II. "Solar energy collector'' means part or all of a device or
structure used to transform solar energy into thermal, chemical, or
electrical energy and any space or structural components of a building
specifically designed to retain heat derived from solar energy.
                                             
 III. "Solar skyspace'' means the space between a solar energy
collector and the sun which must remain unobstructed in order to permit
sufficient solar energy to the collector for thermally efficient
operation.
                                             
 IV. "Solar skyspace easement'' means a limitation, whether or not
stated in the form of a restrictive easement, covenant, or condition, in
any deed or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the landowner
described in the deed or instrument creating and preserving a right to
unobstructed access to solar energy; provided, however, the easement
shall be exempt from the frontage and area requirements of local zoning
ordinances.

**Source.** 1985, 369:3, eff. Aug. 17, 1985.

### Section 477:50

 **477:50 Creation of a Solar Skyspace Easement. –**
                                             
 I. A solar skyspace easement may be acquired and transferred and
shall be recorded in the same manner as any other conveyance of an
interest in real property. The easement shall run with the land
benefited and burdened and shall terminate upon the conditions stated in
the instrument creating the easement or upon court decree based upon
abandonment or changed conditions or as provided in RSA 477:26;
provided, however, that no planning board may require a landowner to
grant an easement.
                                             
 II. An instrument creating a solar skyspace easement shall include,
but not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) A description of the vertical and horizontal angles,
expressed in degrees and measured from the site of the solar energy
system, at which the solar skyspace easement extends over the real
property subject to the solar skyspace easement, or any other
description which describes the 3-dimensional space, or the place and
times of day in which an obstruction to solar energy is prohibited or
limited;
                                             
 (b) Terms or conditions under which the easement is granted or
shall be terminated;
                                             
 (c) Provisions for compensation of the benefited landowner in the
event of interference with the enjoyment of the easement or compensation
of the burdened landowner for maintaining the easement; and
                                             
 (d) A description of the real property subject to the solar
skyspace easement and a description of the real property benefiting from
the solar skyspace easement.
                                             
 III. A solar skyspace easement shall not terminate within 10 years
after its creation unless an earlier termination is expressly stated in
the instrument or is otherwise negotiated by the owners of the benefited
and burdened land. The easement may be enforced by proceedings in equity
and by actions at law for damages.

**Source.** 1985, 369:3, eff. Aug. 17, 1985.

### Section 477:51

 **477:51 Statutory Form of Solar Skyspace Easement. –** A recorded
instrument in the following form shall be sufficient to create a solar
skyspace easement. The authorization of this form shall not preclude the
use of other forms for the creation of a solar skyspace easement.

(Form for solar skyspace easement)


                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, of
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _county, state
of
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _for consideration paid,
hereby conveys, grants and warrants to
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _of
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _county, state
of
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, a negative easement to restrict, in accordance
with the following terms, the future use and development of the real
property of grantor recorded in
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _registry of deeds,
vol.
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, page
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _. The solar energy
collector for which solar skyspace is to be protected is on the real
property of grantee, which is recorded in registry of deeds,
vol.
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, page
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, at the following
locations:
                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
The boundaries of the solar skyspace for the solar collector of grantee
are as follows: (Description of boundaries with reference to applicable
survey map, if any.)

(Alternative A)


                                             
 No structure, vegetation, activity, or land use of grantor except
utility lines, antennas, wires, and poles shall cast a shadow on a solar
energy collector of grantee during the times specified unless such
structure, vegetation, activity, or land use exists on the effective
date of this easement and is not required to be removed or is excepted
by the terms of this instrument. A shadow shall not be cast from 3 hours
before noon to 3 hours after noon from September 22 through March 21 and
from 4 hours before noon to 4 hours after noon from March 22 to
September 21, all times being eastern standard time.

(or)

(Alternative B)


                                             
 No structure, vegetation, activity, or land use other than those
which exist on the effective date of this easement and which are not
required to be removed or are excepted by the terms of this instrument
shall penetrate the airspace at a height greater than over the real
property of grantor.
                                             
Burdens and benefits of this easement are transferable and run with the
land to subsequent grantees of the grantor and the grantee. This solar
skyspace easement shall remain in effect until use of the solar energy
collector is abandoned, provided it shall remain in effect for a period
of at least 10 years, or until the grantee and grantor or their
successors in interest terminate it. The solar energy terms used in this
instrument are defined in RSA 477:49. The survey map depicting the
affected properties and the boundaries of the protected areas of solar
skyspace is incorporated by reference as part of this instrument.
                                             
 Witness
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _hand this
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _day
of
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, 20
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _Witness:

(Here add acknowledgement)

**Source.** 1985, 369:3, eff. Aug. 17, 1985.

Funding of Loans at Real Estate Closings
----------------------------------------

### Section 477:52

 **477:52 Funding of Loans at Real Estate Closings. –** The funds
provided by a mortgagee to fund a loan secured by real estate at a real
estate closing shall be in the form of:
                                             
 I. Cash;
                                             
 II. Wired funds or electronic transfer;
                                             
 III. Certified check;
                                             
 IV. Checks issued by a governmental entity or instrumentality;
                                             
 V. Any transfer of funds by check or otherwise that are finally
collected and unconditionally available to the settlement agent;
                                             
 VI. Checks or other drafts drawn by a state-chartered or
federally-chartered financial institution;
                                             
 VII. Checks or other drafts drawn by a state-chartered or
federally-chartered credit union;
                                             
 VIII. Checks issued by an insurance company licensed and regulated
by the department of insurance; or
                                             
 IX. Cashier's check, teller's check, or treasurer's check.

**Source.** 1999, 88:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2000.
