---
title: CHAPTER 478 REGISTERS OF DEEDS
---

TITLE XLVIII
                                             
CONVEYANCES AND MORTGAGES OF REALTY
===================================

CHAPTER 478
                                             
REGISTERS OF DEEDS
------------------

### Section 478:1

 **478:1 Duties. –** The register of deeds shall carefully keep in
the office provided by the county at all times, except when he may be
required by a court to produce them as evidence or when the same may be
removed for the purposes of repair, all books, records, files and papers
belonging thereto, and when not in use shall keep them in a safe
location where their protection from fire, theft, water and the elements
is insured, and he shall permit no paper there deposited for record to
be taken from his office before it is recorded. Whenever any of the
volumes of records in his office shall be in need of repair, he shall
seasonably cause them to be suitably repaired at the expense of the
county, and, if necessary, he may allow such volumes to be taken out of
his office for a reasonable time for that purpose.

**Source.** RS 22:4. CS 23:4. GS 26:3. GL 23:15; 27:3. PS 29:1. 1911,
80:1. PL 40:1. RL 49:1. RSA 478:1. 1975, 149:2, eff. May 26, 1975.

### Section 478:1-a

 **478:1-a Recording of Plats. –**
                                             
 I. No register of deeds shall file or record a plat of a
subdivision, or a plat prepared for the purpose of showing existing
property lines, if such plat has not been prepared and certified by a
licensed land surveyor, since July 1, 1981, or by a registered land
surveyor between January 1, 1970 and June 30, 1981, and any such filing
or recording shall be void. For the purposes of this section the
definition of the word "subdivision'' shall be that contained in RSA
672:14. A "plat'' for the purpose of this section shall be a map of a
specific land area whose boundaries are defined by metes and bounds. A
plat may show:
                                             
 (a) Newly created parcels, streets, alleys, and easements as in a
subdivision; or
                                             
 (b) A lot-line-adjustment or site plan depicting existing parcels
defined by legal descriptions contained in deeds, grants, or other legal
documents.
                                             
 II. Each register of deeds shall establish a policy for providing
adequate space, on the plat, for recording the registry plan number and
recording information.
                                             
 III. The register of deeds shall refuse for recording any map that
does not meet the definition of a plat under paragraph I and any plat
that does not contain the information or meet the specifications
required by this section. Construction plans, construction details, and
maps that do not define the limits or extent of legal rights or interest
in land shall not be recorded.
                                             
 IV. All plats shall be drawn with the following sizes: 8.5" x 11,"
11" x 17," 17" x 22," 22" x 34," or such specifications and sizes as may
be required by the register of deeds. The material composition of the
plats shall be suitable for electronic scanning and archiving by the
register of deeds.
                                             
 V. All plats shall have a minimum of 1/2 inch margins on all sides.
                                             
 VI. All text and dimensions shall be legible for reproduction, and
the text sizes shall be no smaller than .08 of an inch for mechanical
drafting and 1/8 inch for hand drafting.
                                             
 VII. All certifications, seals, and approval blocks shall have
original dates and signatures in a legible, permanent black ink.
                                             
 VIII. All title blocks shall be located in the lower right hand
corner, when possible, and shall indicate the following:
                                             
 (a) Type of survey, such as a boundary survey, subdivision,
American Land Title Association (ALTA) survey, or lot line adjustment.
                                             
 (b) Owner of record.
                                             
 (c) Title of plat or development.
                                             
 (d) Tax map number.
                                             
 (e) Name of the town in which the parcel is located.
                                             
 (f) Plat and revision dates.
                                             
 IX. All plats shall have a scale both as a written and graphic
representation.
                                             
 X. All plats shall have a north arrow with reference to magnetic
grid or astronomic north, as applicable. The north arrow shall be
labeled with its reference direction.
                                             
 XI. Shading over any text shall not be permitted on any plat. Cross
hatching or other hatching at a scale large enough not to interfere with
text legibility, before and after reproduction, may be permitted.
                                             
 XII. No lines, whether hatching, boundary lines, or topographic
contours shall obstruct or interfere with the legibility, either before
or after reproduction, of any bearings, dimensions, or text.
                                             
 XIII. The minimum line widths on plats shall not be smaller than .01
inches.

**Source.** 1988, 233:3. 1995, 303:1. 2004, 103:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2005.

### Section 478:2

 **478:2 Deputy Registers. –** Registers of deeds may appoint
deputies to perform the duties of their offices in cases of sickness or
the temporary absence of the officer making the appointment. The
appointment shall be made in writing, shall be approved by the bondsmen
of the officer appointing and by the county commissioners, and shall be
for a length of time not exceeding 2 years. The register of deeds shall
be held responsible for any neglect or official misconduct of his
deputies. The deputy shall be qualified in the same manner as the
officer appointing him. The salaries of the deputies shall be paid by
the county.

**Source.** 1881, 44:1; 45:1. PS 25:9. 1911, 124:1. PL 36:10. RL 45:11.
RSA 478:2. 1979, 376:4. 1981, 244:1. 1983, 262:3, eff. Aug. 17, 1983.

### Section 478:2-a

 **478:2-a Assistants. –** The register of deeds may employ
individuals to assist him in the performance of his official duties. The
salaries of the assistants and any other expenses of the office of
register of deeds shall be paid by the county.

**Source.** 1957, 92:1. 1981, 244:2. 1983, 262:4, eff. Aug. 17, 1983.

### Section 478:3

 **478:3 Disability of Register. –** When the register, by reason of
sickness, absence, or other cause, is disabled from executing the duties
of his office, his deputy shall execute the same until such disability
is removed or a register is chosen in accordance with the provisions of
RSA 661:9.

**Source.** 1907, 88:2. PL 36:12. RL 45:13.

### Section 478:4

 **478:4 Recording. –** The register of deeds shall receive, file and
record for the legal charges all original deeds and instruments brought
for that purpose, and shall furnish certificates or copies thereof when
required. All documents submitted for recording in each registry of
deeds should be on material with markings and of a size to insure
suitable, permanent recording thereof.

**Source.** RS 22:5. CS 23:5. GS 26:4. GL 27:4. PS 29:2. PL 40:2. RL
49:2. RSA 478:4. 1971, 449:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1971.

### Section 478:4-a

 **478:4-a Form of Records. –**
                                             
 I. The register of deeds shall not accept a deed or instrument for
filing and recording unless it recites the following information:
                                             
 (a) The latest mailing address of the grantees named in the deed
or instrument;
                                             
 (b) In the first sentence of the first description paragraph, the
names of all municipalities in which the property is located;
                                             
 (c) The name of each person signing the deed or instrument as a
party to the transaction printed or typewritten under the signature.
                                             
 II. All documents shall be suitable for reproduction as determined
by the register of deeds, who shall provide document standards as
amended and adopted by the New Hampshire registers of deeds. The
standards and any amendments thereto shall include a statement of their
effective date, and shall be posted in and distributed by all registries
of deeds for at least 60 days prior to such effective date.

**Source.** 1975, 484:1. 1989, 154:1. 2001, 260:20, eff. Sept. 11, 2001.

### Section 478:4-b

 **478:4-b Records; Social Security Numbers and Financial
Information. –**
                                             
 I. The preparer of a document shall not include an individual's
social security number, armed forces service number, credit card number,
or deposit account numbers in a document that is prepared and presented
for recording in the office of the register of deeds. This paragraph
shall not apply to state or federal tax liens and certified copies of
death certificates filed or recorded in the office of the register of
deeds. For the purpose of this section, "preparer'' shall mean the
person who drafts the documents that are recorded with the register of
deeds. Preparer shall not include any person who hires, requires,
refers, pays, or requests that the documents be drafted or recorded.
                                             
 II. If a deed or instrument that includes an individual's social
security number, armed forces service number, credit card number, or
deposit account numbers, was filed with the register of deeds and is
available on the Internet, and if the information is discovered by the
register of deeds in the ordinary course of business after the effective
date of this section, the register of deeds shall redact such
information from the Internet record. The register of deeds shall also
establish a procedure by which individuals may request that such
information be redacted from its files which are available on the
Internet. Upon request, the information shall be redacted.
                                             
 III. The register of deeds shall comply with an individual's request
to redact his or her social security number, armed forces service
number, credit card number, or deposit account numbers within 5 business
days of the receipt of the request, or sooner, if ordered to do so by a
court, for good cause shown.

**Source.** 2006, 221:7. 2009, 69:1, eff. Aug. 8, 2009. 2013, 147:1,
eff. Aug. 27, 2013.

### Section 478:4-c

 **478:4-c Violation; Enforcement. –** An individual aggrieved by a
violation of RSA 478:4-b, I may bring against the preparer:
                                             
 I. An action to enjoin such violation.
                                             
 II. An action to recover actual monetary loss from such a violation,
or to receive up to 
                                             $1,000 in damages for each such violation,
whichever is greater.
                                             
 III. Both such actions.

**Source.** 2006, 221:7, eff. Mar. 1, 2007.

### Section 478:5

 **478:5 Record; Index. –** Upon acceptance of any deed or instrument
for recording, the register of deeds shall enter into the index of the
grantors the names of the grantors-to-grantees and into the index of the
grantees the names of the grantees-to-grantors.

**Source.** RS 22:7. CS 23:7. GS 26:5. GL 27:5. PS 29:3. PL 40:3. RL
49:3. RSA 478:5. 1969, 492:2. 1990, 183:1. 2004, 60:1. 2008, 322:6, eff.
Aug. 31, 2008.

### Section 478:6

 **478:6 Index Reproduction. –** The register of deeds may cause the
indexes to be reproduced into indexes of grantors and grantees using an
acceptable recording method.

**Source.** RS 22:6. CS 23:6. GS 26:6. GL 27:6. PS 29:4. PL 40:4. RL
49:4. 2008, 322:6, eff. Aug. 31, 2008.

### Section 478:7

 **478:7 Levy; Extent. –** The names of the debtors or defendants
upon whose land any levy or extent shall be made, if the same is
recorded, shall be entered as such in the index of grantors, and the
names of the creditors or plaintiffs, as such, in the index of the
grantees.

**Source.** GS 26:7. GL 27:7. PS 29:5. PL 40:5. RL 49:5. 2008, 322:7,
eff. Aug. 31, 2008.

### Section 478:8

 **478:8 Conveyance by Authority. –** When the property of any person
living or the estate of any person deceased is conveyed by any officer
or other person by authority of law or otherwise, the names of the
persons whose estate is so conveyed, if they appear in the instrument,
and of the persons by whom the conveyance is made shall be entered in
the index of grantors.

**Source.** GS 26:8. GL 27:8. PS 29:6. PL 40:6. RL 49:6. 2008, 322:7,
eff. Aug. 31, 2008.

### Section 478:9

 **478:9 Estates Affected. –** The names of all persons whose estates
appear to be affected by any deed or decree of partition entered on such
record shall be entered in the indexes of grantors and grantees.

**Source.** GS 26:9. GL 27:9. PS 29:7. PL 40:7. RL 49:7. 2008, 322:7,
eff. Aug. 31, 2008.

### Section 478:10

 **478:10 Creditors; Mortgagees. –** The names of the creditors in
any proceeding for foreclosure and the names of the original mortgagees,
if they appear by the proceedings, shall be entered, as such, in the
index of grantees; and the names of the debtor, defendant and original
mortgagors, if they appear, shall be entered in the index of grantors.

**Source.** GS 26:10. GL 27:10. PS 29:8. PL 40:8. RL 49:8. 2008, 322:7,
eff. Aug. 31, 2008.

### Section 478:11

 **478:11 Parties Unknown. –** If the name of the person whose
property or estate is conveyed in either of the cases aforesaid does not
appear, or if the name of the original mortgagor or mortgagee of
property foreclosed does not appear, the grantors or mortgagors shall be
referred to as unknown in the index of grantors under the letter U, and
the original mortgagee in the same manner in the index of grantees.

**Source.** GS 26:11. GL 27:11. PS 29:9. PL 40:9. RL 49:9. 2008, 322:7,
eff. Aug. 31, 2008.

### Section 478:12

 **478:12 Index Copied. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008, 322:12, IV, eff. Aug.
31, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 478:13

 **478:13 Office Hours. –** Every register shall keep his or her
office open daily except Sundays and state holidays. It may be closed on
Saturday if not incompatible with public business; provided, however,
that the register may keep his or her office open on Saturday mornings
in the custody of a single custodian whenever he or she deems it
necessary.

**Source.** GL 23:15. PS 29:11. 1903, 92:1. PL 40:11. RL 49:11. 1947,
234:1. 1951, 91:1. RSA 478:13. 1981, 244:3. 2008, 322:8, eff. Aug. 31,
2008.

### Section 478:13-a

 **478:13-a Recording of Plans. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2004, 103:2, eff. Jan.
1, 2005.
                                             ]

### Section 478:14

 **478:14 Copies of Conveyances for Tax Purposes. –** Every register
shall, upon request, in an acceptable media, send copies of all deeds,
mortgages, and other conveyances of real estate which have been recorded
in the registry during the preceding 3 months to the selectmen of each
town and to the assessors of each city in his county quarterly, each
year, between January 1 and January 5, April 1 and April 5, July 1 and
July 5, and October 1 and October 5. The register shall send, between
April 1 and April 5, in an acceptable media, copies of all deeds,
mortgages, and other conveyances of real estate which have been recorded
in the registry during the preceding tax year to every town and city in
the county which did not request the quarterly copies.

**Source.** 1935, 57:1. RL 49:12. 1949, 255:1. RSA 478:14. 1955, 80:1.
1979, 222:1. 1981, 244:4. 2008, 322:9, eff. Aug. 31, 2008.

### Section 478:15

 **478:15 Information Furnished. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, eff.
Aug. 10, 1981.
                                             ]

### Section 478:16

 **478:16 Penalty for Neglect of Duty. –** If the register shall
neglect any duty imposed by this chapter, he shall forfeit 
                                             $20 to be
recovered by an action of debt in the name of the treasurer for the use
of the county, and shall also be liable to an action on his bond.

**Source.** RS 22:8. CS 23:8. GS 26:13. GL 27:13. PS 29:12. PL 40:12. RL
49:14.

### Section 478:17

 **478:17 Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1977, 89:10, eff. March 1983.
                                             ]

### Section 478:17-a

 **478:17-a Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 217:2, I, eff. Aug. 11,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 478:17-b

 **478:17-b Register of Deeds, Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 217:2, II,
eff. Aug. 11, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 478:17-c

 **478:17-c Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 217:2, III, eff. Aug. 11,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 478:17-d

 **478:17-d Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 217:2, IV, eff. Aug. 11,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 478:17-e

 **478:17-e Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 217:2, V, eff. Aug. 11,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 478:17-f

 **478:17-f Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 262:5, eff. Aug. 17, 1983.
                                             ]

### Section 478:17-g

 **478:17-g Recording Fees and Surcharge. –** Unless otherwise
specified, the register of deeds in each county shall be entitled to the
following fees and shall collect the land and community heritage
investment program surcharge as follows:
                                             
 I. The charge for recording each document shall be 
                                             $10 for the
first recorded page plus 
                                             $4 for each additional recorded page. The
charge for assignments of mortgages shall be 
                                             $10 for the first recorded
page, including the first mortgage assigned, plus 
                                             $5 for each
additional mortgage assigned plus 
                                             $4 for each additional recorded page.
The charge for recording a discharge of a mortgage, a release of a lien,
or filings pursuant to RSA 21-J, RSA 260, RSA 282-A, RSA 382-A, RSA 439,
RSA 450, RSA 454-B, RSA 498, RSA 511, or RSA 511-A shall be 
                                             $15 for the
first recorded page plus 
                                             $4 for each additional recorded page. The
charge for recording each plan shall be 
                                             $9 for the first 200 square
inches or portion thereof and 
                                             $2.50 for each additional 100 square
inches or portion thereof. The charges provided for herein shall include
the register's responsibility to provide information in compliance with
RSA 478:14.
                                             
 II. (a) An additional charge of 
                                             $25 shall also be assessed for
recording each deed, mortgage, mortgage discharge or plan, but shall not
be assessed for the recording of any other document. The charge provided
for herein shall be paid by the grantee in a deed, the grantor in a
mortgage, the person or entity discharging a mortgage in the case of a
discharge, and the primary owner of property shown on a plan. The charge
provided for in this section shall not be assessed for the recording of
any documents in which the United States or any instrumentality thereof,
the state, a state agency, a county, a municipality, a village district,
or a school district is a party.
                                             
 (b) The collection of the assessment provided for by this section
shall be administered by the commissioner of the department of revenue
administration, and all powers and duties available to the commissioner
to enforce and administer laws under RSA 21-J and RSA 78-B shall apply
to the administration and enforcement of this paragraph. The
commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the
administration of this paragraph. Each register of deeds shall retain 4
percent of the total additional charges collected as payment for the
service of collecting the additional charges, which shall be deducted
prior to remitting the revenue collected.
                                             
 (c) Each register of deeds shall remit the additional charges
collected under subparagraph (a) to the department of revenue
administration monthly or more often. All funds received shall be paid
over to the state treasurer for deposit in the trust fund for the land
and community heritage investment program established under RSA
227-M:7.
                                             
 (d) The payment of the additional charge imposed by subparagraph
(a) shall be evidenced by stamps, or other indicia as approved by the
commissioner of the department of revenue administration, attached to
the recorded instrument.
                                             
 III. For copying any document or providing any other service, the
charge shall be established and posted by the register of deeds.

**Source.** 1973, 217:1. 1977, 89:1. 1981, 244:5. 1983, 185:1. 1986,
36:1. 1987, 115:1. 1989, 154:2. 1990, 3:29. 1998, 382:11. 2000, 262:12.
2001, 102:45. 2007, 263:45, 48. 2008, 294:7, eff. July 1, 2008 at 12:01
a.m.

### Section 478:17-h

 **478:17-h Carroll and Coos. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 262:6, eff. Aug.
17, 1983.
                                             ]

### Section 478:17-i

 **478:17-i Distribution. –** Each register of deeds shall pay over
once a month to his county treasurer, for use of the county, all fees
received by him as such register and all charges paid to him for
services arising out of or because of his office, including but not
limited to payments for duties under RSA 78-B:8.

**Source.** 1973, 415:2. 1981, 244:6. 1983, 262:7, eff. Aug. 17, 1983.

### Section 478:17-j

 **478:17-j Register of Deeds Equipment Account. –**
                                             
 I. The provisions of this section shall apply in a county only after
they have been approved by a majority vote of both the county
commissioners and the county convention.
                                             
 II. (a) There is hereby established in the county treasury a
register of deeds equipment account. If the county commissioners and the
county convention vote to adopt the provisions of this section, the
register of deeds shall impose a surcharge not to exceed 
                                             $2, the exact
amount of which shall be set by the register, for recording each
document for which the register of deeds imposes a fee under RSA
478:17-g. The surcharge shall be on a per document, and not on a per
page basis. After the surcharge is adopted, it shall take effect on the
first day of January following the annual budget acceptance by the
county convention. Each register of deeds shall provide reasonable
public notice that a surcharge shall be imposed along with the exact
amount of the surcharge, at least 60 days prior to the date on which the
surcharge takes effect.
                                             
 (b) Once each month, the register of deeds shall pay over to the
county treasurer all surcharges paid to the register. All surcharges
received by the county treasurer shall be deposited in the register of
deeds equipment account.
                                             
 (c) The register of deeds equipment account shall be a separate,
nonlapsing account, and the moneys in the account shall not be available
for use as general revenue of the county. All interest earned on the
account shall be credited to the equipment account. The moneys in the
account shall be appropriated only for the use of the office of the
register of deeds, and any such appropriation shall require prior
approval by a majority vote of both the county commissioners and the
county convention. Moneys in the account may only be used for the
purchase, rental, or repair of equipment.
                                             
 III. The register of deeds shall not impose the surcharge, which
shall not exceed 
                                             $2 as provided in paragraph II, whenever the moneys in
the equipment account exceed 
                                             $500,000.

**Source.** 1993, 175:1, eff. Aug. 8, 1993.

Register for Strafford County
-----------------------------

### Section 478:18

 **478:18 Salary. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 514:18, XXII, eff. Jan. 1,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 478:18-a

 **478:18-a Receipts. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, I, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

### Section 478:18-b

 **478:18-b Assistants. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, II, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

### Section 478:18-c

 **478:18-c Register of Deeds, Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 217:2, VI,
eff. Aug. 11, 1973.
                                             ]

Register for Rockingham County
------------------------------

### Section 478:19

 **478:19 Salary. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 514:18, XXIII, eff. Jan. 1,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 478:20

 **478:20 Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, III, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

### Section 478:21

 **478:21 Assistants. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, IV, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

Register for Grafton County
---------------------------

### Section 478:22

 **478:22 Compensation. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 514:18, XXIV, eff. Jan.
1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 478:23

 **478:23 Receipts. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, V, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

### Section 478:24

 **478:24 Assistants. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, VI, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

Register for Merrimack County
-----------------------------

### Section 478:25

 **478:25 Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 217:2, VII, eff. Aug. 11,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 478:26

 **478:26 Receipts. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, VII, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

### Section 478:27

 **478:27 Compensation. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 514:18, XXV, eff. Jan.
1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 478:28

 **478:28 Assistants. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, VIII, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

Register for Belknap County
---------------------------

### Section 478:29

 **478:29 Receipts. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, IX, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

### Section 478:30

 **478:30 Salary. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 514:18, XXVI, eff. Jan. 1,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 478:31

 **478:31 Assistants. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, X, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

Register for Cheshire County
----------------------------

### Section 478:32

 **478:32 Salary. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 514:18, XXVII, eff. Jan. 1,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 478:33

 **478:33 Receipts. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, XI, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

### Section 478:34

 **478:34 Assistants. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, XII, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

Register for Sullivan County
----------------------------

### Section 478:35

 **478:35 Receipts. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, XIII, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

### Section 478:36

 **478:36 Salary. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 514:18, XXVIII, eff. Jan. 1,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 478:37

 **478:37 Assistants. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, XIV, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

Register for Hillsborough County
--------------------------------

### Section 478:38

 **478:38 Salary. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 514:18, XXIX, eff. Jan. 1,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 478:39

 **478:39 Fees. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 217:2, VIII, eff. Aug. 11,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 478:40

 **478:40 Receipts. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, XV, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

### Section 478:41

 **478:41 Assistants. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 244:7, XVI, eff. Aug. 10,
1981.
                                             ]

Fraudulent Filings
------------------

### Section 478:42

 **478:42 Fraudulent Filings. –**
                                             
 I. A person may not knowingly present for filing or cause to be
presented for filing in a registry or other public office, any type of
document that fraudulently purports to be a judgment or other document
to memorialize or evidence an act, order, directive, or process of
creating a lien without having been authorized under state law, the
Constitution, or the laws of the United States.
                                             
 II. For purposes of this section, a document or instrument that
purports to create a lien on, assert a claim against, or assert an
interest in, real or personal property, is presumed to be fraudulent if
it:
                                             
 (a) Is not certified or ordered by a court or a judicial entity
expressly created or established under the Constitution or the laws of
this state or of the United States; or
                                             
 (b) Is not a document or instrument provided for by the
Constitution or the laws of this state or the United States.
                                             
 III. Nothing contained herein shall affect the validity of a
mechanic's or statutory lien created pursuant to state or federal law.
                                             
 IV. If a register of deeds or other public official believes in good
faith that a document filed with the registry of deeds or other public
office purports to create a lien that is fraudulent, the register or
other public official shall index the document only under the signer of
the document in the grantor index and shall identify the document as a
notice in the document type. No other names appearing on the document
shall be indexed.
                                             
 (a) The register or other public official shall send a copy of
such document to the county attorney for the county where the document
was filed or to the New Hampshire attorney general's office for review
and possible prosecution.
                                             
 (b) The county attorney or attorney general receiving a copy of a
document under subparagraph (a) shall send a notice of the action taken
under this paragraph to the person presenting or causing such filing by
regular mail at his or her last known address no later than the next
business day after such action.
                                             
 (c) Any such document or instrument on file with the registry of
deeds or other public office presumed to be fraudulent or deemed
fraudulent as described in this section shall be considered invalid,
void, and having no force or effect on any named person or persons named
within the document or instrument.
                                             
 (d) Any register of deeds or other public official acting in good
faith pursuant to this chapter shall be immune from civil and criminal
liability.
                                             
 V. Any person who knowingly files a document or instrument to
fraudulently create a lien on real or personal property shall be guilty
of a class B felony.

**Source.** 2014, 86:1, eff. June 11, 2014.
