---
title: 'CHAPTER 479-B FORECLOSURE CONSULTANTS AND PRE-FORECLOSURE CONVEYANCES'
---

TITLE XLVIII
                                             
CONVEYANCES AND MORTGAGES OF REALTY
===================================

CHAPTER 479-B
                                             
FORECLOSURE CONSULTANTS AND PRE-FORECLOSURE CONVEYANCES
-------------------------------------------------------

### Section 479-B:1

 **479-B:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Foreclosure consultant'' means any person, or any person acting
in concert with such person, or any agent or employee of such person who
provides a foreclosure consulting service.
                                             
 II. "Foreclosure consulting contract'' means a written, oral, or
constructive agreement between a foreclosure consultant and a homeowner
for the provision of any foreclosure consulting service or
pre-foreclosure conveyance.
                                             
 III. "Foreclosure consulting service'' means:
                                             
 (a) An effort undertaken on behalf of or for the benefit of a
homeowner to delay or prevent the loss of a home because of a mortgage
default, delinquency, foreclosure, or execution of a tax deed.
                                             
 (b) Receiving money for the purpose of distributing it to
creditors in payment or partial payment of any obligation secured by a
lien on a residence in foreclosure;
                                             
 (c) Contacting mortgagees or other creditors secured by a
homeowner's primary residence on behalf of the homeowner;
                                             
 (d) Arranging or attempting to arrange for an extension of the
period within which a homeowner may cure the homeowner's default and
reinstate the homeowner's obligation;
                                             
 (e) Arranging or attempting to arrange for any delay or
postponement of the sale of a residence in foreclosure;
                                             
 (f) Arranging or facilitating the purchase of a homeowner's legal
or equitable title or any property interest in a homeowner's residence
within 30 days of:
                                             
 (1) The publication or letter of notice of a foreclosure sale;
or
                                             
 (2) The letter notice of a municipality's intent to execute a
tax deed.
                                             
 (g) Arranging or facilitating any transaction through which a
homeowner will become a lessee, optionee, life tenant, partial
homeowner, or vested or contingent remainderman of the homeowner's
residence;
                                             
 (h) Arranging or facilitating the sale of a homeowner's residence
or transfer of legal title and any property interest in a homeowner's
residence, in any form, to another party as an alternative to
foreclosure;
                                             
 (i) Arranging for a homeowner to have an option to repurchase the
homeowner's residence after a sale or transfer; or
                                             
 (j) Arranging for or facilitating a homeowner remaining in the
homeowner's residence as a tenant, renter, or lessee.
                                             
 IV. "Pre-foreclosure purchaser'' means any person or any person
acting in concert with such person, who acquires title or possession of
a deed or other interest in a residence in foreclosure as a result of a
pre-foreclosure conveyance, or any person who participates in a joint
venture or joint enterprise involving a pre-foreclosure conveyance.
                                             
 V. "Pre-foreclosure conveyance'' means a transaction involving:
                                             
 (a) The transfer of title to real property or a beneficial
interest in the property by a homeowner to delay or prevent a mortgage
default or delinquency, foreclosure, or execution of a tax deed, either
by transfer of any interest from the homeowner to another party or by
creation of a mortgage, trust, or other lien or encumbrance during the
foreclosure process, that allows the acquirer to obtain legal or
equitable title to all or part of the property; and
                                             
 (b)(1) The transaction includes the subsequent conveyance, the
promise of a subsequent conveyance, or a right to a subsequent
conveyance of an interest back to the homeowner from the acquirer or a
person acting in participation with the acquirer, including an interest
in a contract for deed, purchase agreement, land installment sale,
contract for sale, option to purchase, sale/leaseback, trust, or other
contractual arrangement; or
                                             
 (2) The transaction does not pay or otherwise fully satisfy
the homeowner's obligations under any existing note and mortgage
securing such note.
                                             
 VI. "Homeowner'' means any owner or co-owner of a residence who is
facing the loss of a home due to default, acceleration, or foreclosure
of a deed of trust, mortgage, lien, or similar instrument or due to the
notice, auction, or execution of a tax deed.
                                             
 VII. "Person'' means an individual, corporation, governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trustee for a trust,
partnership, association, limited liability company, joint venture,
government, or any other legal or commercial entity or agent.
                                             
 VIII. "Residence in foreclosure'' means residential real property
consisting of not more than 4 dwelling units, one of which the owner
occupies as his or her principal place of residence, where a loan
secured by the home is in default, or where real property taxes are
delinquent.
                                             
 IX. "Settlement'' means an in-person meeting with the homeowner to
complete final documents incident to the sale or transfer of real
property, or the creation of a mortgage or equitable interest in real
property, conducted by a settlement agent who is not employed by or an
affiliate of the pre-foreclosure purchaser.
                                             
 X. "Execution of tax deed'' means the procedures by which
residential property is executed to a tax lienholder under RSA 80:76 or
executed to a tax sale purchaser under RSA 80:38.
                                             
 XI. "Short sale'' means the sale of a homeowner's residence in which
the proceeds of the sale, less closing costs, are less than the amount
owed, creating a deficit to the seller and in which the sale also
results in a short payoff to one or more of the seller's creditors.

**Source.** 2007, 322:1. 2011, 145:1, eff. Aug. 6, 2011.

### Section 479-B:2

 **479-B:2 Foreclosure Consulting Contracts. –**
                                             
 I. A foreclosure consultant shall not enter into any agreement or
provide any services on behalf of a homeowner until the homeowner has
executed a foreclosure consulting contract. A foreclosure consulting
contract shall:
                                             
 (a) Be provided to the homeowner for review before signing;
                                             
 (b) Be written in the same language that is spoken by the
homeowner if the homeowner is unable to adequately understand or to
express himself or herself in the spoken or written English language;
                                             
 (c) Fully disclose the exact nature of the foreclosure consulting
services to be provided, including any pre-foreclosure conveyance that
may be involved, and the total amount and terms of any compensation to
be received by the foreclosure consultant or any other person involved
in the transaction; and
                                             
 (d) Be dated and personally signed by the homeowner and the
foreclosure consultant and be witnessed and acknowledged by a notary
public or justice of the peace appointed and commissioned by the state
of New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. The contract shall contain on the first page:
                                             
 (a) The name, mailing address, physical address, electronic
address, and facsimile number of the foreclosure consultant to which the
notice of cancellation is to be mailed; and
                                             
 (b) The date the homeowner signed the contract.
                                             
 III. The contract shall be accompanied by a "notice of
cancellation,'' which must be attached to the contract, be easily
detachable, and explain the homeowner's right to cancel the contract and
how to exercise that right. Each homeowner shall be given 2 copies of
the completed notice of cancellation.
                                             
 IV. The foreclosure consultant shall provide the homeowner with a
signed and dated copy of the contract and the attached notice of
cancellation immediately upon execution of the contract.
                                             
 V. Any provision in a foreclosure consulting contract that attempts
or purports to waive any of the rights specified in this chapter are
void.

**Source.** 2007, 322:1, eff. July 16, 2007.

### Section 479-B:3

 **479-B:3 Pre-Foreclosure Conveyances. –**
                                             
 I. No pre-foreclosure conveyance shall transfer any interest in real
property unless the homeowner has received, at least 72 hours prior to
his or her execution of conveyance documents, a document entitled
"notice of loss of ownership.''
                                             
 II. The document entitled "notice of loss of ownership'' shall:
                                             
 (a) Contain the entire agreement of the parties;
                                             
 (b) Be written in the same language that is spoken by the
homeowner if the homeowner is unable to adequately understand or to
express himself or herself in the spoken or written English language;
                                             
 (c) Be dated and personally signed by the homeowner and the
pre-foreclosure purchaser and witnessed and acknowledged by a notary
public or justice of the peace appointed and commissioned by the state
of New Hampshire;
                                             
 (d) Describe in detail the terms of the pre-foreclosure
conveyance including:
                                             
 (1) The name, mailing address, physical address, electronic
address, telephone number, and facsimile number of the person to whom
the deed or title will be transferred;
                                             
 (2) The address of the residence in foreclosure;
                                             
 (3) The total consideration to be paid by the pre-foreclosure
purchaser, the foreclosure consultant, and any other party as a result
of the transfer, and the total consideration paid to the homeowner, with
a specific dollar amount stated for each figure;
                                             
 (4) The date on which title is to be transferred to the
pre-foreclosure purchaser and the terms of any conveyance;
                                             
 (5) Any financial or legal obligations that the homeowner may
remain subject to, such as any mortgages, liens, or other obligations
that will remain or be assumed pursuant to the transaction, and an
affirmation by the pre-foreclosure purchaser that:
                                             
 (A) The terms of the remaining or assumed obligations are
not violated by the pre-foreclosure conveyance; and
                                             
 (B) The pre-foreclosure conveyance will not cause a default
in the remaining or assumed obligations;
                                             
 (6) A description of any services of any nature that the
pre-foreclosure purchaser will perform for the homeowner before or after
the sale or transfer;
                                             
 (7) A complete description of the terms of any related
agreement designed to allow the homeowner to remain in the home,
including the terms of any rental agreement, repurchase agreement,
contract for deed, land installment contract, or option to buy, and any
provisions for eviction or removal of the homeowner with an affirmation
by the pre-foreclosure purchaser that he or she has verified and can
demonstrate that the homeowner has the ability to perform the
transaction in a timely manner; and
                                             
 (8) The amount of any repurchase price or fee associated with
any transfer of title or deed back to the homeowner and how that fee
will be calculated; and
                                             
 (e) Contain a statement, located in immediate proximity to the
space reserved for the homeowner's signature, stating: "You have a right
to cancel this transaction within 5 business days until midnight of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (insert date). If you cancel, you must pay within 60 days

                                             $
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, which is the amount paid to your lender to stop the
foreclosure sale or to the municipality, county, or state to prevent
execution of a tax deed.''
                                             
 (f) Contain an itemization of amounts expended on the homeowner's
behalf to the homeowner's lender to stop the foreclosure sale or to the
municipality, county, or state to prevent execution of a tax deed.
                                             
 III. The pre-foreclosure purchaser shall also provide each homeowner
with 2 copies of a notice of right to cancel transfer of deed or title
immediately on execution of any document that includes a pre-foreclosure
conveyance. The notice must be attached to the contract, be easily
detachable, and explain the homeowner's right to cancel the contract and
how to exercise that right. Each homeowner must be given 2 copies of the
completed notice of right to cancel transfer of deed or title.
                                             
 IV. Any provision in a foreclosure consulting contract or other
agreement concerning a pre-foreclosure conveyance that attempts to waive
the homeowner's rights under this section is void.
                                             
 V. A pre-foreclosure conveyance may not be carried out using a power
of attorney from the homeowner to the pre-foreclosure purchaser or any
agent or employee of or person acting in concert with the
pre-foreclosure purchaser.

**Source.** 2007, 322:1, eff. July 16, 2007.

### Section 479-B:4

 **479-B:4 Right of Cancellation. –**
                                             
 I. In addition to any other right under law to cancel or rescind a
contract, a homeowner has the unconditional right to:
                                             
 (a) Cancel a foreclosure consulting contract at any time; and
                                             
 (b) Cancel a pre-foreclosure conveyance at any time before
midnight of the fifth business day after the latter of:
                                             
 (1) Any conveyance, or transfer in any manner, of a legal or
equitable property interest in a residence in foreclosure; or
                                             
 (2) Delivery of the notices required for pre-foreclosure
conveyance.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the
homeowner's right of cancellation shall expire upon the sale of the
residence to a third party.
                                             
 III. Subject to the limitation of paragraph II, during the
pre-foreclosure conveyance cancellation period, no deed or other
document affecting title to the homeowner's residence may be recorded,
and no interest in the property may be encumbered, transferred, or
assigned in any manner.
                                             
 IV. Cancellation occurs when the homeowner gives written notice of
cancellation to the foreclosure consultant at the address specified in
the contract or through any facsimile or electronic mail address
identified in the contract or other materials provided to the homeowner
by the foreclosure consultant.
                                             
 V. Notice of cancellation, if given by mail, is effective when
deposited in the United States mail, properly addressed, with postage
prepaid. If notice is given by facsimile or electronic mail, it is
effective when successfully transmitted.
                                             
 VI. Notice of cancellation need not be in the form provided with the
contract and is effective, however expressed, if it indicates the
intention of the homeowner to cancel the foreclosure consulting contract
or pre-foreclosure conveyance.
                                             
 VII. As part of the cancellation of a foreclosure consulting
contract or pre-foreclosure conveyance, the homeowner shall repay,
within 60 days from the date of cancellation or such longer period of
time as may be deemed equitable by the court, any funds actually paid by
a foreclosure consultant or pre-foreclosure purchaser to delay or
prevent a mortgage default or delinquency, foreclosure, or execution of
a tax deed in the form of mortgage arrearage, property tax arrearage,
current mortgage payments, current tax payments, late fees, penalties,
and any other out-of-pocket expenditures necessary to avoid the loss of
the home by the homeowner. The amount to repay shall not include any
fees or interest charged by the pre-foreclosure purchaser.
                                             
 VIII. The right to cancel and the return of any property interest to
the homeowner may not be conditioned on the repayment of any funds.
                                             
 IX. The period during which a homeowner may cancel a pre-foreclosure
conveyance does not commence until each homeowner has received clear,
conspicuous, and accurate copies of all notices and documents required
by this chapter.
                                             
 X. Within 5 days after receipt of a notice of cancellation given in
accordance with this chapter, the pre-foreclosure purchaser shall
return, without condition, any original deed, title, contract, and any
other document signed by the homeowner.

**Source.** 2007, 322:1, eff. July 16, 2007.

### Section 479-B:5

 **479-B:5 Unlawful Practices. –**
                                             
 I. A foreclosure consultant shall have a fiduciary duty to the
homeowner who retains his or her services and shall not act contrary to
the interest of the homeowner.
                                             
 II. A foreclosure consultant may not:
                                             
 (a) Enter any agreement or provide any services on behalf of a
homeowner until the homeowner has executed a foreclosure consulting
contract;
                                             
 (b) Claim, demand, charge, collect, or receive any compensation
until after the foreclosure consultant has fully performed each and
every service the foreclosure consultant contracted to perform or
represented that the foreclosure consultant would perform;
                                             
 (c) Take any wage assignment, any lien of any type on real or
personal property, or other security to secure the payment of
compensation. Any such security is null and void;
                                             
 (d) Receive any consideration from any third party in connection
with foreclosure consulting services provided to a homeowner unless the
consideration is first fully disclosed in writing to the homeowner and
the third party's interest does not conflict with the homeowner's or
create a conflict between the consultant and the homeowner;
                                             
 (e) Acquire any interest, directly or indirectly, or by means of
a subsidiary, affiliate, or corporation in which the foreclosure
consultant or a member of the foreclosure consultant's immediate family
is a primary stockholder, in a residence in foreclosure from a homeowner
with whom the foreclosure consultant has contracted;
                                             
 (f) Take any power of attorney from a homeowner for any purpose,
except to inspect documents as provided by law;
                                             
 (g) Induce or attempt to induce any homeowner to enter into a
foreclosure consulting contract that does not comply in all respects
with this chapter; or
                                             
 (h) Create or facilitate a transaction which would violate a
homeowner's current deed of trust or other security interest, or which
would constitute a default or cause a foreclosure or an acceleration of
the debt secured by those agreements.
                                             
 III. A pre-foreclosure purchaser may not:
                                             
 (a) Enter into, or attempt to enter into, a pre-foreclosure
conveyance with a homeowner unless:
                                             
 (1) The pre-foreclosure purchaser verifies and can demonstrate
that the homeowner has or will have a reasonable ability to pay for the
subsequent reconveyance of the property back to the homeowner on
completion of the terms of a pre-foreclosure conveyance, and if the
pre-foreclosure conveyance provides for a lease with an option to
repurchase the property, the homeowner has or will have a reasonable
ability to make the lease payments and to repurchase the property within
the term of the option to repurchase; and
                                             
 (2) The pre-foreclosure purchaser and the homeowner complete a
formal settlement before any transfer of an interest in the property is
effected;
                                             
 (b) Assign or transfer or facilitate the assignment or transfer
of any interest in the homeowner's property until the requirements of
this chapter have been met. Any such transfer or assignment shall be
null and void;
                                             
 (c) Obtain any interest in the homeowner's property on terms
which would violate a homeowner's current deed of trust or other
security interest, or which would constitute a default or cause a
foreclosure or acceleration of the debt secured by those agreements;
                                             
 (d) Fail to:
                                             
 (1) Ensure that title to the property has been reconveyed to
the homeowner in a timely manner if this chapter or the terms of a
pre-foreclosure conveyance agreement require a reconveyance;
                                             
 (2) Sell the property, if allowed under the terms of the
conveyance, at a bona fide market sale to an unaffiliated third party;
or
                                             
 (3) Make payment to the homeowner within 90 days of any resale
of the property so that the homeowner receives cash payments or
consideration in an amount equal to at least 90 percent of the net
proceeds from any resale of the property should a property subject to a
pre-foreclosure conveyance be sold within 36 months after entering into
a pre-foreclosure conveyance agreement. As used in this subparagraph,
the term "net proceeds from any resale'' means the resale price minus
any necessary funds actually expended by the pre-foreclosure purchaser
on the homeowner's behalf in order to delay or prevent the mortgage
default of delinquency, foreclosure, or execution of a tax deed;
                                             
 (e) Represent, directly or indirectly, that:
                                             
 (1) The pre-foreclosure purchaser is acting as an advisor or a
consultant, or in any other manner represent that the pre-foreclosure
purchaser is acting on behalf of the homeowner;
                                             
 (2) The pre-foreclosure purchaser has certification licensure
or affiliations that the pre-foreclosure purchaser does not have; or
                                             
 (3) The foreclosure purchaser is assisting the homeowner to
avoid the loss of ownership, to "save the house,'' or a substantially
similar phrase; or
                                             
 (f) Until the homeowner's right to cancel the transaction has
expired:
                                             
 (1) Record any document transferring or encumbering any
interest in the home; or
                                             
 (2) Transfer or encumber or purport to transfer or encumber
any interest in the residence to any third party.
                                             
 IV. (a) The pre-foreclosure purchaser shall make a detailed
accounting of the basis for the amount of a payment made to the
homeowner of a property resold within 36 months after entering into a
pre-foreclosure conveyance agreement.
                                             
 (b) The accounting shall include detailed documentation of
expenses and other consideration paid by the pre-foreclosure purchaser
and deducted from the resale price.

**Source.** 2007, 322:1, eff. July 16, 2007.

### Section 479-B:6

 **479-B:6 Waiver of Rights Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. A person may not induce or attempt to induce a homeowner to waive
the homeowner's rights under this chapter.
                                             
 II. Any waiver by a homeowner of the provisions of this chapter is
void and unenforceable as contrary to public policy.

**Source.** 2007, 322:1, eff. July 16, 2007.

### Section 479-B:7

 **479-B:7 Maintenance of Rights Against Transferee. –**
                                             
 I. Any agreement, encumbrance, assignment or transfer of any
interest in violation of this chapter shall be voidable at the option of
the homeowner, until the time of a completed conveyance to a third
party.
                                             
 II. No action shall be brought under this chapter more than 3 years
from the date of the violation.

**Source.** 2007, 322:1, eff. July 16, 2007.

### Section 479-B:8

 **479-B:8 Violation of the Consumer Protection Act. –** A violation
of this chapter is considered to be a violation of the New Hampshire
consumer protection act, RSA 358-A, and all remedies of the consumer
protection act are available for such violations.

**Source.** 2007, 322:1, eff. July 16, 2007.

### Section 479-B:9

 **479-B:9 Criminal Penalties. –** A person who violates any
provision of this chapter is guilty of a class A misdemeanor.

**Source.** 2007, 322:1, eff. July 16, 2007.

### Section 479-B:10

 **479-B:10 Contracts and Notices. –**
                                             
 I. All disclosures, contracts, and notices required by this chapter
shall be made clearly and conspicuously in language comprehensible by
persons without training or knowledge in the area of real property and
finance.
                                             
 II. All notices required by this chapter, other than the homeowner's
notice that he or she is canceling a contract, shall be printed in at
least 14-point type.
                                             
 III. Notices of cancellation that are required by this chapter to
accompany certain contracts shall be their own separate documents, not
printed on the back of any other document.

**Source.** 2007, 322:1, eff. July 16, 2007.

### Section 479-B:11

 **479-B:11 Exemptions. –**
                                             
 I. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
                                             
 (a) A duly licensed attorney at law acting on behalf of a
client;
                                             
 (b) A person who holds or is owed an obligation secured by a lien
on any residence in foreclosure while the person performs services in
connection with the obligation or lien, if the obligation or lien did
not arise as a result of a pre-foreclosure conveyance;
                                             
 (c) Any bank, trust company, savings and loan association, credit
union, or insurance company chartered under the laws of any state or the
United States or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agency thereof;
                                             
 (d) A prejudgment or post-judgment lien creditor of the
homeowner;
                                             
 (e) A person licensed as a mortgage banker or mortgage broker
while engaged in any activity for which the person is licensed under RSA
397-A;
                                             
 (f) A person licensed as a real estate broker, associate real
estate broker, or real estate salesperson, while engaged in any activity
for which the person is licensed under RSA 331-A;


                                             [Paragraph I(g) effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph
I(g) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 (g) A nonprofit organization or government entity that offers
counseling or advice to homeowners in foreclosure or loan default, if
the organization is not directly or indirectly related to and does not
contract for services with for-profit lenders, foreclosure consultants,
or pre-foreclosure purchasers; or


                                             [Paragraph I(g) effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph I(g) set
out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 (g) A nonprofit organization or government entity that offers
counseling or advice to homeowners in foreclosure or loan default, if
the organization is not directly or indirectly related to and does not
contract for services with for-profit lenders, foreclosure consultants,
or pre-foreclosure purchasers;


                                             [Paragraph I(h) effective until January 1, 2017; see also paragraph
I(h) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 (h) A creditors' committee or trustee participating in a place of
reorganization or repayment through a proceeding under the jurisdiction
of the United States Bankruptcy Court.


                                             [Paragraph I(h) effective January 1, 2017; see also paragraph I(h) set
out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 (h) A creditors' committee or trustee participating in a place of
reorganization or repayment through a proceeding under the jurisdiction
of the United States Bankruptcy Court or


                                             [Paragraph I(i) effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]


                                             
 (i) A person licensed to engage in the business of debt
adjustment under RSA 399-D.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any provision of the law to the contrary, the
provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a person who purchases a
homeowner's residence in a short sale in which:
                                             
 (a) As consideration for the sale, all liens against the
property, including mortgages, were discharged or released;
                                             
 (b) If, as part of the sale, a deficiency was required by any
creditor, the exact terms and conditions of any deficiencies were
disclosed to the borrower by the purchaser at least 72 hours before the
transfer. The disclosure shall be:
                                             
 (1) Printed in at least 14-point type and in boldface; and
                                             
 (2) Dated and personally signed by the homeowner and witnessed
and acknowledged by a notary public or a justice of the peace appointed
and commissioned by the state of New Hampshire; and
                                             
 (c) The homeowner received from the purchaser, at least 72 hours
before the transfer, a document entitled "notice of short sale.'' The
document entitled "notice of short sale'' shall:
                                             
 (1) Be printed in at least 14-point type;
                                             
 (2) Be dated and personally signed by the homeowner and
witnessed and acknowledged by a notary public or a justice of the peace
appointed and commissioned by the state of New Hampshire;
                                             
 (3) Contain a prominent statement, printed in at least
16-point type and in boldface, that the homeowner is selling his or her
home, will no longer have any ownership of the home after the sale, and
will no longer have the right to live in the home after the sale; and
                                             
 (4) Describe in detail the terms of the sale.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding any provision of the law to the contrary, the
provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a person who attempts to
negotiate a short sale in which the person would purchase the
homeowner's residence as set forth in paragraph II, but does not
purchase the homeowner's residence or arrange for another person to
purchase the homeowner's residence.

**Source.** 2007, 322:1. 2011, 145:2, eff. Aug. 6, 2011. 2016, 151:2,
eff. Jan. 1, 2017.
