---
title: 'CHAPTER 125-F RADIOLOGICAL HEALTH PROGRAM'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 125-F
                                             
RADIOLOGICAL HEALTH PROGRAM
---------------------------

### Section 125-F:1

 **125-F:1 Policy. –** It is hereby declared to be the public policy
of the state of New Hampshire:
                                             
 I. To prohibit the mining or milling of uranium, thorium, or other
source material within the state of New Hampshire. In this section,
milling means any processing of ore including underground solution
extraction of unmined ore;
                                             
 II. To institute and maintain a regulatory program for sources of
radiation to provide (a) compatibility and consistency with the
standards and regulation within the state, and (b) a system consonant
insofar as possible with those of other states; and
                                             
 III. To institute and maintain a regulatory program to permit
development and utilization of sources of radiation for peaceful
purposes, consistent with the health and safety of the public.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1, eff. July 27, 1986.

### Section 125-F:2

 **125-F:2 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to effectuate
the policy set forth in RSA 125-F:1 by providing:
                                             
 I. A program of effective regulation of sources of radiation to
protect the occupational and public health and safety.
                                             
 II. A program to promote an orderly regulatory pattern within the
state, among the states, and between the federal government and the
state, to facilitate intergovernmental cooperation with respect to use
and regulation of sources of radiation and to avoid duplication of
regulation.
                                             
 III. A program to establish procedures for assumption and
performance of certain regulatory responsibilities with respect to
naturally occurring, artificially produced, byproduct, source, and
special nuclear materials and radiation equipment.
                                             
 IV. A program to permit utilization of sources of radiation
consistent with the health and safety of the public.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1, eff. July 27, 1986.

### Section 125-F:3

 **125-F:3 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Artificially produced radioactive material'' means any material
made radioactive (emits radiation spontaneously) by a particle
accelerator or other means other than those which produce byproduct
material.
                                             
 II. "Byproduct material'' means any radioactive material, except
special nuclear material, yielded in or made radioactive by exposure to
the radiation incident to the process of producing or utilizing special
nuclear material.
                                             
 III. "Civil penalty'' means any monetary penalty levied on a
licensee or registrant because of violations of statutes, rules,
licenses, or registration certificates, but does not include criminal
penalties.
                                             
 IV. "Closure'' or "site closure'' means all activities performed at
a waste disposal site, such as stabilization and contouring, to assure
that the site is in a stable condition so that only minor custodial
care, surveillance, and monitoring are necessary at the site following
termination of licensed operation.
                                             
 V. "Decommissioning'' means final operational activities at a
facility to dismantle site structures, to decontaminate site surfaces
and remaining structures, to stabilize and contain residual radioactive
material, and to carry out any other activities to prepare the site for
post-operational care.
                                             
 VI. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 VII. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 VII-a. "Generator'' means a person who produces or treats low-level
radioactive waste in the state.
                                             
 VIII. "High-level radioactive waste'' means (a) irradiated reactor
fuel, (b) liquid waste resulting from the operation of the first cycle
solvent extraction system or equivalent, and concentrated wastes from
subsequent extraction cycles, or equivalent, in a facility for
reprocessing irradiated reactor fuel, and (c) solids into which such
liquid waste has been converted.
                                             
 IX. "License'' general and specific:
                                             
 (a) "General license'' means a license pursuant to rules adopted
by the program without the filing of an application with the program, or
the issuance of licensing documents to particular persons to transfer,
acquire, own, possess or use quantities of, or devices or equipment
utilizing, radioactive material.
                                             
 (b) "Specific license'' means a license issued to a named person
upon application filed pursuant to the rules adopted under this chapter,
to use, manufacture, produce, transfer, receive, acquire, own or possess
quantities of, or devices or equipment utilizing, radioactive material.
                                             
 X. "Low-level radioactive waste'' means radioactive waste not
classified as high-level radioactive waste, transuranic waste, spent
nuclear fuel, or byproduct material as defined in paragraph II.
                                             
 XI. "Naturally occurring radioactive material'' means any material
of natural origin that emits radiation spontaneously, excluding uranium
and thorium.
                                             
 XII. "Person'' means any individual, corporation, partnership, firm,
association, trust, estate, public or private institution, group, agency
of this state other than the program, political subdivision of this
state, any other state or political subdivision or agency, and any legal
successor, representative, or agent of the foregoing, other than federal
government agencies.
                                             
 XIII. "Program'' means the radiological health program of the
department of health and human services.
                                             
 XIV. "Radiation'' means ionizing radiation and nonionizing
radiation:
                                             
 (a) "Ionizing radiation'' means gamma rays and x-rays, alpha and
beta particles, high speed electrons, neutrons, protons, and other
nuclear particles, but not sound or radio waves or visible, infrared or
ultraviolet light;
                                             
 (b) "Nonionizing radiation'' means:
                                             
 (1) Any electromagnetic radiation other than ionizing
radiation which the program determines by rule to present a biological
hazard to the occupational or public health and safety; and
                                             
 (2) Any sonic, ultrasonic, or infrasonic wave which the
program determines by rule to present a biological hazard to the
occupational or public health or safety.
                                             
 XV. "Radiation equipment'' means any manufactured product or device,
the component part of such product or device, or any machine or system
which during operation is able to generate or emit radiation, except
those which emit radiation only from radioactive material.
                                             
 XVI. "Radioactive material'' means any material, whether solid,
liquid, or gas, which emits radiation spontaneously. It includes
artificially produced, byproduct, naturally occurring, source, and
special nuclear materials.
                                             
 XVII. "Radiation waste management'' means receipt, storage, and
processing of radioactive wastes prior to disposal or disposal of
radioactive wastes.
                                             
 XVIII. "Registration'' means registration in accordance with rules
adopted pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 XIX. "Source material'' means (a) uranium, thorium, or any other
material which the governor declares by order to be source material
after the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission or its successor
has determined the material to be source material or (b) ores containing
one or more of the foregoing materials in such concentration as the
governor declares by order to be source material after the United States
Nuclear Regulatory Commission or its successor has determined the
material in such concentration to be source material.
                                             
 XX. "Source of radiation'' means, collectively, radioactive material
and radiation equipment.
                                             
 XXI. "Special nuclear material'' means (a) plutonium, uranium 233,
uranium enriched in the isotope 233 or in the isotope 235, and any other
material which the governor declares by order to be special nuclear
material after the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission or its
successor has determined the material to be special nuclear material,
but does not include source material; or (b) any material artificially
enriched by any of the foregoing, but does not include source material.
                                             
 XXII. "Spent nuclear fuel'' means irradiated nuclear fuel that has
undergone at least one year's decay since being used as a source of
energy in a power reactor. Spent fuel includes the special nuclear
material, byproduct material, source material, and other radioactive
materials associated with fuel assemblies.
                                             
 XXIII. "Transuranic waste'' means radioactive waste containing alpha
emitting transuranic elements, with radioactive half lives greater than
5 years in excess of 100 nanocuries per gram.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1. 1989, 398:14. 1995, 310:74, 181, eff. Nov. 1,
1995.

### Section 125-F:4

 **125-F:4 Radiological Health Program. –** There is hereby
established a radiological health program in the department of health
and human services. The commissioner of the department of health and
human services shall designate a manager of the program, who shall
perform the functions vested in the department under this chapter.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1. 1995, 310:175, 181, 182, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125-F:5

 **125-F:5 Powers; Duties. –** For the protection of occupational and
public health and safety, the department shall:
                                             
 I. Develop systems for evaluation and control of hazards associated
with the use of sources of radiation.
                                             
 II. Develop systems described in paragraph I, with due regard for
compatibility with federal programs for regulation of byproduct, source,
and special nuclear materials.
                                             
 III. Develop systems described in paragraph I, with due regard for
consistency with federal programs for regulation of radiation
equipment.
                                             
 IV. Adopt under RSA 541-A, after public hearing, rules relative to
registration of sources of radiation, as necessary to prohibit and
prevent unnecessary radiation.
                                             
 V. Adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, which provide for licensing
or registration relative to control of sources of radiation, including,
but not limited to, low-level radioactive waste, with due regard to
compatibility with the regulatory programs of the federal government and
such other rules as are necessary for the administration of this
chapter.
                                             
 VI. Issue such orders or modifications as necessary in connection
with licensing and registration of sources of radiation under RSA
125-F:7.
                                             
 VII. Advise, consult, and cooperate with other agencies of the
state, the federal government, other states, interstate agencies,
political subdivisions, and with groups concerned with control of
sources of radiation.
                                             
 VIII. Accept and administer loans, grants or other funds or gifts,
conditional or otherwise, from the federal government and other sources,
public or private.
                                             
 IX. Encourage, participate in, or conduct studies, investigations,
training, research, and demonstrations relative to the control of
sources of radiation.
                                             
 X. Collect and disseminate information relative to control of
sources of radiation including maintenance of:
                                             
 (a) A file of all license applications, issuances, denials,
amendments, transfers, renewals, modifications, suspensions, and
revocations;
                                             
 (b) A file of registrants possessing sources of radiation
requiring registration under the provisions of the chapter, and any
administrative or judicial action pertaining thereto; and
                                             
 (c) A file of all rules relative to regulation of sources of
radiation, pending or adopted, and proceedings thereon.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125-F:6

 **125-F:6 State Radiation Advisory Committee. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established an advisory committee to be known as
the state radiation advisory committee which shall consist of 9 members.
The committee membership shall at all times be limited to no more than 2
members from any one field or profession representing a physical
science, life science, industry, medicine, veterinary medicine,
dentistry, nursing, or other healing arts and one public member. The
members shall be residents of the state and shall be appointed by the
governor with consent of the council. Each member shall be appointed for
a term of 4 years and until his successor shall be appointed; provided,
that of the original appointments, 3 shall be appointed for a term of 2
years, 3 for a term of 3 years, and 3 for a term of 4 years. In order to
assure the proper balance of technical skills, whenever a vacancy or
vacancies occur, the committee shall submit to the governor and council
for their consideration the names of up to 3 nominees for each vacancy.
The members shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall
receive necessary travel and other expenses while engaged in the actual
work of the committee. The manager of the program shall act as technical
secretary to the committee.
                                             
 II. The governor shall appoint a chairman from among members of the
advisory committee who shall serve for the period of his term. The
committee shall hold meetings when the chairman or manager of the
program wishes, but at least once per calendar quarter.
                                             
 III. The committee shall recommend programs and policies to the
radiological health program and serve as advisers to the program's
manager. They shall keep the governor and council informed, at least
annually, on matters relative to radiation issues within the state.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1. 1987, 93:1, eff. July 5, 1987.

### Section 125-F:7

 **125-F:7 Licensing and Registration of Sources of Radiation. –**
                                             
 I. When adopting rules under RSA 541-A, the department, through its
program, shall provide for general or specific licensing of naturally
occurring, artificially produced, byproduct, source, and special nuclear
materials or devices or equipment utilizing such material. The rules
shall provide for amendment, suspension, and revocation of licenses.
                                             
 II. The department, through its program, may require registration of
other sources of radiation.
                                             
 III. The department, through its program, is authorized to exempt
certain sources of radiation or kinds of uses or users from the
licensing or registration requirements of this section, provided they
shall be specifically named in a schedule of such exempt uses, users, or
sources of radiation within the context of rules adopted under RSA
541-A.
                                             
 IV. The rules may provide for recognition of other state or federal
licenses and radiation machine registration as the program may deem
desirable, subject to such registration requirements, including the
payment of such fees, as the department, through its program, may
establish.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1. 1995, 310:175. 2003, 319:28, eff. July 1, 2003.

### Section 125-F:8

 **125-F:8 Radiation User and Laboratory Fees. –**
                                             
 I. The department, through its program, shall prescribe and collect
such fees as may be established by rule for radiation protection
services provided under this chapter. Services for which fees may be
established include:
                                             
 (a) Registration of radiation equipment and other sources of
radiation;
                                             
 (b) Issuance, amendment, and renewal of general or specific
licenses for radioactive materials as well as the recognition of other
state and federal licenses and radiation machine registrations in
accordance with RSA 125-F:7, IV;
                                             
 (c) Inspections of registrants or licensees;
                                             
 (d) Environmental surveillance activities to assess the
radiological impact of activities conducted by licensees;
                                             
 (e) Evaluation of products to be distributed to persons generally
licensed or persons exempt from licensing;
                                             
 (f) Laboratory radiochemical sample analyses; and
                                             
 (g) Radiological response and radiation safety assessments.
                                             
 II. When a registrant or licensee fails to pay the applicable fee,
the program may suspend or revoke the registration or license or may
issue an appropriate order.
                                             
 III. Except as provided in paragraph IV, all fees collected under
this section shall be forwarded to the state treasurer to be deposited
in the general fund.
                                             
 IV. Any increase in fees after the effective date of this paragraph
and collected under this section shall be deposited in the radiation
user and laboratory fees fund established in RSA 125-F:8-b and shall be
used solely for the administration of the department's responsibilities
under this chapter.
                                             
 V. Application fees collected under this provision shall not be
refundable.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1. 1995, 310:175. 2002, 258:4. 2003, 319:29, eff.
July 1, 2003.

### Section 125-F:8-a

 **125-F:8-a Low-Level Radioactive Waste Management Fund. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established the New Hampshire low-level
radioactive waste management fund to be used for the purposes of this
section. This nonlapsing, revolving special fund is hereby continually
appropriated to be expended by the department of health and human
services in accordance with this section. Money collected under this
section but not needed to meet the obligations of the department of
health and human services under this section shall be deposited in the
New Hampshire low-level radioactive waste management fund. The state
treasurer shall invest the moneys so deposited as provided by law.
Interest received on investments made by the state treasurer shall also
be credited to the fund.
                                             
 II. The fund shall be used to provide for the adequate and safe
management and disposal of low-level radioactive waste generated within
New Hampshire. After the governor certifies that circumstances require
the use of the fund, the department of health and human services may
enter into contracts, agreements, or consultative services and use the
fund for the following purposes:
                                             
 (a) Paying any disposal costs and associated surcharges for the
disposal of low-level radioactive waste;
                                             
 (b) Hiring of consultants and personnel;
                                             
 (c) Purchase, lease or rental of necessary equipment; and
                                             
 (d) Other necessary expenses directly associated with the
management and disposal of low-level radioactive waste.
                                             
 III. Every generator of low-level radioactive waste located in this
state which exports the waste for disposal shall pay quarterly a
low-level radioactive waste generator fee to the department of health
and human services. This quarterly fee shall be based on a per cubic
foot of waste exported. The commissioner shall, by rules adopted
pursuant to RSA 541-A, establish a schedule of low-level radioactive
waste generator fees. The department of health and human services shall
forward the fees collected under this paragraph to the state treasurer
for deposit in the low-level radioactive waste management fund.
                                             
 IV. Any low-level radioactive waste disposal surcharge collected by
the appropriate federal agency pursuant to the Low-Level Radioactive
Waste Policy Act of 1980, as amended, and returned to the state of New
Hampshire shall also be deposited in the low-level radioactive waste
management fund.

**Source.** 1989, 398:15. 1995, 310:181, 183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125-F:8-b

 **125-F:8-b Radiation User and Laboratory Fees Fund. –** There is
hereby established the radiation user and laboratory fees fund to be
used to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The fund shall be
composed of fees collected in accordance with RSA 125-F:8, IV. The fund
shall be nonlapsing and shall be continually appropriated to the
commissioner for the purposes of this chapter.

**Source.** 2002, 258:5, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 125-F:9

 **125-F:9 Notification of Significant Events. –**
                                             
 I. Each licensee of a nuclear powered reactor shall comply with the
reporting requirements for significant events contained in the
regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
                                             
 II. As used in this section, "significant event'' means any event
which must be reported to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission operations
center pursuant to 10 C.F.R., section 50.72.
                                             
 III. Any person who purposely violates the provisions of this
section and who is found by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to have
violated its regulations shall be guilty of a class B felony if the
severity of the incident is at level I or II and guilty of a misdemeanor
if the severity of the incident is at level III, IV, or V as said levels
are defined by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in 10 C.F.R., Part 2.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1, eff. July 27, 1986.

### Section 125-F:10

 **125-F:10 Authority of the Commissioner in Cases of Emergency. –**
Whenever the commissioner finds that an emergency exists requiring
immediate action to protect the public health or welfare, he may issue
an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that
such action be taken as necessary to meet the emergency. Such order
shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is
directed shall comply with the order immediately, but on application to
the commissioner of the department of health and human services, shall
be afforded a hearing within 15 days. On the basis of such hearing, the
commissioner of the department of health and human services shall
continue such order in effect, revoke it, or modify it.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1. 1995, 310:182, 183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125-F:11

 **125-F:11 Surety Requirement. –**
                                             
 I. For licensed activities involving low-level radioactive waste,
the department through its program shall, and for other classes of
licensed activity, the department, through its program, may adopt by
rule standards and procedures to ensure that the licensees shall provide
an adequate surety or other financial arrangement to permit the
completion of all requirements established by the department through its
program for the decontamination, decommissioning, closure, and
reclamation of sites, structures, and equipment used in conjunction with
such licensed activity.
                                             
 II. All sureties under paragraph I which are forfeited shall be paid
to the department for deposit by the state treasurer in the radiation
long-term care fund, established by RSA 6:12, I(b)(20). All moneys in
this fund are hereby continually appropriated and may be expended by the
department as necessary to complete such requirements on which licensees
have defaulted. Moneys in the fund shall not be used for normal
operating expenses of the program or any other component of the
department.
                                             
 III. For licensed activities which will require surveillance or
control after the licensed activity ceases, the department, through its
program, shall adopt by rule, standards and procedures to ensure that
the licensee, before termination of the license, shall make available
such funding arrangements as necessary to provide for long-term site
surveillance and control.
                                             
 IV. All funds collected from licensees under paragraph III shall be
paid to the department for deposit by the state treasurer in the
radiation long-term care fund, established by RSA 6:12, I(b)(20). All
funds accrued as interest on moneys deposited in this fund are hereby
continually appropriated and may be expended by the department for the
continuing long-term surveillance, maintenance and other care of
facilities from which such funds are collected as necessary for the
protection of the public health, safety, and environment.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph, if title to and
custody of any radioactive material and its disposal site are
transferred to the United States upon termination of any license but for
which funds had been collected for such long-term care, the collected
funds and interest accrued thereon shall be transferred to the United
States; provided, however, that such funds do not include moneys held in
surety where no default has occurred and a reclamation for other bonded
activity has been performed.
                                             
 V. The sureties or financial arrangements and funds required by
paragraphs I and III shall be established in amounts sufficient to
ensure compliance with standards, if any, established by the United
States Nuclear Regulatory Commission or successor thereto pertaining to
reclamation and long-term site surveillance and control of such
facilities and sites.
                                             
 VI. In order to provide for the proper care and surveillance of
sites subject to paragraph III, the state may acquire by gift or
transfer from another government agency or private person, any land or
appurtenances necessary to fulfill the purposes of this section. Any
such gift or transfer is subject to approval and acceptance by the state
in accordance with RSA 4:8.
                                             
 VII. All lands, buildings, and ground acquired by the state under
paragraph VI shall be owned in fee simple absolute by the state and
dedicated in perpetuity to the purpose of this section. All radioactive
material received at the site and located therein, at the time of
acquisition of ownership by the state or thereafter, shall become the
property of the state.
                                             
 VIII. The department, through its program, may enter into contracts,
agreements, leases, or licenses with any person, including another state
agency, to provide for the decontamination, decommissioning,
reclamation, surveillance, or other care of a site subject to this
section, as necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.
                                             
 IX. If a person licensed by any state or federal agency other than
by the program desires to transfer a site to the state in accordance
with RSA 4:8 for the purpose of administering or providing perpetual
care, a lump sum deposit shall be made to the radiation long-term care
fund. The amount of the deposit shall be determined by the program,
taking into account the factors stated in paragraphs III and V of this
section.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1. 1995, 310:175. 2003, 174:2, 3, eff. July 1,
2003.

### Section 125-F:12

 **125-F:12 Inspection and Right of Entry. –** The program, or its
duly authorized representatives, shall have the power to enter at all
reasonable times upon any private or public property to determine
whether there is compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the
rules adopted thereunder, except that entry into areas under the
jurisdiction of the federal government shall be effected only with the
concurrence of the federal government or its duly designated
representative.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1, eff. July 27, 1986.

### Section 125-F:13

 **125-F:13 Records. –**
                                             
 I. The program shall require each person who manufactures,
possesses, distributes, sells, installs, repairs, or uses a source of
radiation to maintain records relative to its receipt, storage,
transfer, or disposal, and such other records as the program may require
subject to exemptions as provided by rules.
                                             
 II. The program shall require each person who possesses or uses a
source of ionizing radiation to maintain appropriate records showing the
radiation exposure of all individuals for whom personnel monitoring is
required by rules of the program. Copies of these records and those
required by paragraph I shall be submitted to the program on request.
Any person possessing or using a source of ionizing radiation shall
furnish to each employee for whom personnel monitoring is required, a
copy of such employee's personnel exposure record annually, at any time
such employee has received excessive exposure, and upon termination of
employment.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1, eff. July 27, 1986.

### Section 125-F:14

 **125-F:14 Federal-State Agreements. –**
                                             
 I. The governor and council, on behalf of this state, are authorized
to enter into agreements with the United States Nuclear Regulatory
Commission or any successor thereto, pursuant to section 274(b) of the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, providing for discontinuance of
certain of the commission's licensing and related regulatory authority
with respect to byproduct, source, and special nuclear materials and the
assumption of regulatory authority by this state.
                                             
 II. Any person who, on the effective date of an agreement under
paragraph I, possesses a license issued by the United States Nuclear
Regulatory Commission or any successor thereto for radioactive material
subject to the agreement, shall be deemed to possess a like license
issued under this chapter, which shall expire either 90 days after
receipt from the program of a notice of expiration of such license, or
on the date of expiration specified in the Nuclear Regulatory Commission
license, whichever is earlier.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1, eff. July 27, 1986.

### Section 125-F:15

 **125-F:15 Inspection Agreements and Training Programs. –** In
addition to any other contract authority, the department, through its
program, is authorized to enter into an agreement or agreements with the
federal government pursuant to section 274(i) of the Atomic Energy Act
of 1954, as amended, other states, or interstate agencies relative to
inspections or other functions relative to control of sources of
radiation. The program may institute training programs for the purpose
of qualifying the provisions of this chapter and may make such personnel
available for participation in any program or programs of the federal
government, other states, or interstate agencies in furtherance of the
purposes of this chapter.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125-F:16

 **125-F:16 Conflicting Laws. –** This chapter shall not be construed
as repealing any laws of the state relating to radiation sources,
exposures, radiation protection, and professional licensure, but shall
be held and construed as auxiliary and supplementary to them, except to
the extent that they are in direct conflict, in which case this chapter
shall be controlling. Nothing in this chapter or in any rules adopted
under it shall preclude the right of any governing body of a
municipality to adopt ordinances, regulations, or rules not inconsistent
with this chapter.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1, eff. July 27, 1986.

### Section 125-F:17

 **125-F:17 Administrative Procedure. –** Procedures for action by
the department through its program on license applications, action
against licensees, and availability of adjudication proceedings shall be
in accordance with RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125-F:18

 **125-F:18 Injunctive Relief. –** A civil action may be instituted
in superior court on behalf of the department for injunctive relief to
prevent the violation of the provisions of this chapter or rules adopted
hereunder. The court may proceed in the action in a summary manner or
otherwise and may restrain in all such cases any person in violation of
any provisions of this chapter or its rules.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125-F:19

 **125-F:19 Prohibited Uses. –** It shall be unlawful for any person
to use, manufacture, or produce, distribute, sell, transport, transfer,
install, repair, receive, acquire, own or possess any source of
radiation unless licensed by or registered with the department in
conformance with rules, if any, adopted in accordance with this chapter.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125-F:20

 **125-F:20 Exceptions. –** Nothing in this chapter shall be
interpreted as limiting reasonable intentional exposure of patients to
radiation by members of any legally recognized healing profession as
authorized by law.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1, eff. July 27, 1986.

### Section 125-F:21

 **125-F:21 Criminal Penalties. –** Any person who violates any of
the provisions of this chapter or rule adopted pursuant to this chapter
or who violates any order of the program issued under the authority of
this chapter, except as provided in RSA 125-F:9, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other
person. In addition to these penalties such person shall be enjoined
from continuing such violation. Each day any person neglects or refuses
to comply with such order shall constitute a separate offense.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1, eff. July 27, 1986.

### Section 125-F:22

 **125-F:22 Civil Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who violates any license or registration provision of
this chapter or any rule or order issued thereunder, or any term,
condition, or limitation of any license or registration certificate
issued thereunder, or commits any violation for which a license or
registration certificate may be revoked under rules adopted pursuant to
this chapter, may be subject to a civil penalty, to be imposed by the
department. The department, through its program, shall adopt by rule a
schedule of civil penalties graduated by degree of severity of the
violation. If any violation is a continuing one, each day of such
violation shall constitute a separate violation for the purpose of
computing the applicable civil penalty. The department shall have the
power to compromise, mitigate, or remit such penalties.
                                             
 II. Whenever the department through its program proposes to subject
a person to the imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of
this section it shall notify such person in writing:
                                             
 (a) Setting forth the date, facts, and nature of each act or
omission for which the person is charged;
                                             
 (b) Specifically identifying the particular provision or
provisions of the law, rule, order, license, or registration certificate
involved in the violation; and
                                             
 (c) Advising the person of each penalty which the department
imposes and its amount.
                                             
 III. The written notice shall be sent by registered or certified
mail by the program to the last known address of such person. The person
so notified shall be granted an opportunity to show in writing within
such reasonable period as the program by rule may prescribe, why such
penalty should not be imposed. The notice shall also advise such person
that upon failure to pay the civil penalty subsequently determined by
the department, if any, the penalty may be collected by civil action.
                                             
 IV. Upon request of the department of health and human services, the
department of justice is authorized to institute civil action to collect
a penalty imposed pursuant to this section. The attorney general shall
have the exclusive power to compromise, mitigate, or remit such civil
penalties as are referred to him for collection. All civil penalties
collected under this section shall be forwarded to the state treasurer.
The state treasurer shall deposit all moneys received under this
section, and interest received on such money, to the public health
services special fund, which shall be nonlapsing.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125-F:23

 **125-F:23 Existing Remedies Unimpaired. –** No existing civil or
criminal remedy for any wrongful action which is a violation of the
rules adopted hereunder shall be excluded or impaired by this chapter.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1, eff. July 27, 1986.

### Section 125-F:24

 **125-F:24 Protection of Powers. –** The powers and functions vested
in the department of health and human services, under the provisions of
this chapter, shall not be construed to affect, in any manner, powers,
duties and functions vested in the department of health and human
services under any other provisions of law.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125-F:25

 **125-F:25 Severability of Provisions. –** If any provision of this
chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held
invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications
of the chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions
or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.

**Source.** 1986, 169:1, eff. July 27, 1986.
