---
title: 'CHAPTER 125-S MOTOR VEHICLE AIR POLLUTION ABATEMENT FUND'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 125-S
                                             
MOTOR VEHICLE AIR POLLUTION ABATEMENT FUND
------------------------------------------

### Section 125-S:1

 **125-S:1 Purpose. –** The general court finds that emissions of air
contaminants from motor vehicles represent a potential serious health
problem to the citizens of New Hampshire and a threat to the air quality
of the state. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a fund to be
used for costs incurred by the department of environmental services in
the prevention and abatement of emissions of air contaminants from motor
vehicles registered for on-road use in the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 2009, 144:48, eff. July 1, 2009.

### Section 125-S:2

 **125-S:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 II. "Motor vehicle inspection fee'' means the fee collected by the
department of safety pursuant to RSA 266:2.
                                             
 III. "Mobile source'' means, for the purposes of this chapter, any
motor vehicle registered for on-road use by the department of safety,
division of motor vehicles.

**Source.** 2009, 144:48, eff. July 1, 2009.

### Section 125-S:3

 **125-S:3 Fund Established. –** There is established a motor vehicle
air pollution abatement fund, which shall be administered by the
department of environmental services. This fund shall be used for costs
incurred by the department in the course of carrying out activities that
are designed to reduce air pollution in the state from the mobile source
sector. All fees and monetary grants, gifts, donations, or interest
generated by these funds shall be deposited with the state treasurer in
a special nonlapsing fund to be known as the motor vehicle air pollution
abatement fund and shall be continually appropriated to the department
for the administration of this chapter.

**Source.** 2009, 144:48, eff. July 1, 2009.

### Section 125-S:4

 **125-S:4 Fund Established; Collection. –** Funding for the motor
vehicle air pollution abatement fund shall be from the portion of the
motor vehicle inspection fee established by RSA 266:2.

**Source.** 2009, 144:48, eff. July 1, 2009.
