---
title: 'CHAPTER 125-H HEALTH RISK ASSESSMENTS'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 125-H
                                             
HEALTH RISK ASSESSMENTS
-----------------------

### Section 125-H:1

 **125-H:1 Findings, Intent. –** The general court finds that
protection of the public health and welfare demands a state-wide
capacity to assess the nature of and risks to both humans and ecosystems
associated with exposure to a variety of environmental contaminants.
Recognizing that health risk assessment entails responding to situations
where scientific data and exposure standards are often incomplete at
best, the general court finds that the success of such a program
requires flexible access to medical, scientific, and engineering
expertise in all agencies of state government. The general court enacts
this chapter in order to provide a mechanism for health risk assessment.
The general court intends that the department of health and human
services, which has primary state responsibility for protecting the
public health, shall be the lead agency for health risk assessment. It
further intends that other state agencies shall cooperate fully in
making personnel with training experience in the disciplines necessary
to accomplish such assessments available to the department of health and
human services on a reasonable basis. In establishing this function, the
general court intends to provide regulatory decision-makers who shall
analyze, assess, and manage public and environmental health risks with
the most timely and accurate information and analysis available.

**Source.** 1986, 202:13. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125-H:2

 **125-H:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Acute health effect'' means an adverse health outcome or disease
which manifests itself upon or shortly after exposure to an
environmental hazard.
                                             
 II. "Adverse health outcome'' means any condition which results in
human morbidity, mortality, impaired reproductive function, toxicity,
teratogenic, carcinogenic, or mutagenic effects.
                                             
 III. "Chronic health effect'' means an adverse health outcome or
disease which manifests itself over a long incubation or latency period.
Chronic health effects can result from either a limited high-level or
long-term, low-level exposure to an environmental hazard.
                                             
 IV. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 V. "Department'' means the department of health and human services.
                                             
 VI. "Dose-response assessment'' means the determination of the
relation between the magnitude of exposure to environmental hazards and
the probability of occurrence of adverse health effects.
                                             
 VII. "Environmental hazard'' means any biological, chemical, or
physical agent present in the environment which has the potential of
causing disease or adverse health outcome.
                                             
 VIII. "Environmental health risk assessment'' means the use of
scientific and medical data to define potential health effects of
exposure of individuals or populations to environmental hazards.
                                             
 IX. "Exposure assessment'' means the determination of the extent of
human exposure to an environmental hazard.
                                             
 X. "Hazard identification'' means the scientific process of
collecting and validating data to determine if biological, chemical or
physical agents, man-made or naturally occurring, can be causally linked
to particular chronic or acute health effects.
                                             
 XI. "Imminent health hazard'' means the immediate threat to the
population of an adverse health outcome posed by an environmental
hazard.
                                             
 XII. "Risk characterization'' means the description of the nature
and, when possible, the magnitude of human risk from an environmental
hazard, including its attendant uncertainty.
                                             
 XIII. "Risk management'' means the use of the results of
environmental health risk assessments or other information in order to
develop and evaluate regulatory options, within a statutory framework,
to reduce the risk of harm to human health and ecosystems to the
greatest possible degree.

**Source.** 1986, 202:13. 1995, 310:75, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125-H:3

 **125-H:3 Health Risk Assessment Bureau; Duties. –**
                                             
 I. There is established within the department of health and human
services a health risk assessment bureau under the direction of a
classified administrator of health risk assessments. The bureau shall be
responsible for administering the health risk assessment program.
                                             
 II. The bureau shall provide completed health risk assessments to
other state agencies for use in risk management activities. This
includes human health risk assessment of known or suspected
environmental hazards and on pending regulatory actions regarding
environmental protection being considered by other state agencies. The
health risk assessment shall consist of some or all of the following
information: hazard identification, dose-response assessment, exposure
assessment, and risk characterization.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall have the authority to establish and
dissolve risk assessment teams as necessary, based upon the need for
assessment of particular situations.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner shall have responsibility for developing
proposed environmental quality standards, criteria and guidelines to
protect human health. These shall be presented to the commissioner of
environmental services for consideration by him for inclusion in rules
adopted by the commissioner of environmental services.
                                             
 IV-a. The commissioner shall have responsibility for developing
guidelines for risk assessments.
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall have the authority to apply for and accept
federal funds or other assistance available for the conduct of
environmental health risk assessment activities or to carry out this
chapter.

**Source.** 1986, 202:13. 1990, 261:7. 1995, 310:181, 183. 1996, 241:9,
eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 125-H:4

 **125-H:4 Imminent Health Hazard. –** The commissioner shall have
the responsibility, upon the receipt and validation of information of an
imminent health hazard, to inform the commissioner of environmental
services who shall inform the governor of such threat and request that
the state agencies responsible by statute take necessary and immediate
action to abate the environmental hazard. The commissioner shall provide
recommendations and advice as necessary, and shall determine when the
imminent hazard has been abated.

**Source.** 1986, 202:13. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125-H:5

 **125-H:5 Interagency Cooperation. –**
                                             
 I. In order to carry out health risk assessment, the commissioner is
authorized to request and receive, on a reasonable basis, the assistance
of personnel in any agency of state government with training or
experience in any of the following fields:
                                             
 (a) Medicine.
                                             
 (b) Toxicology.
                                             
 (c) Epidemiology.
                                             
 (d) Environmental epidemiology.
                                             
 (e) Environmental health.
                                             
 (f) Industrial hygiene.
                                             
 (g) Occupational health nursing.
                                             
 (h) Ecology.
                                             
 (i) Environmental sanitation.
                                             
 (j) Engineering.
                                             
 (k) Radiological health.
                                             
 (l) Biological sciences, including wildlife biology.
                                             
 (m) Any other necessary discipline.
                                             
 II. In order to assure cooperation among agencies in the health risk
assessment process, the commissioner shall initiate the preparation of
written memoranda of understanding with the executive head of any other
agency of state government employing personnel needed for carrying out
environmental health risk assessments. The memoranda shall include, at a
minimum, the following:
                                             
 (a) A procedure for identifying and agreeing upon the personnel,
facilities, and equipment available for environmental health risk
assessments.
                                             
 (b) The contents and timing of a request for assistance.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall initiate the process of preparing
memoranda of understanding with a written, dated request to undertake
the process to the executive head of the agency concerned. If agreement
between the commissioner and the concerned agency head is not reached
within 90 days, the commissioner shall send written notification of the
impasse to the governor. The governor shall cause a memorandum of
understanding to be prepared and put into effect within 60 days of
receiving the notification from the commissioner.
                                             
 IV. If a dispute arises regarding the implementation of any
memorandum of understanding under this section, the commissioner shall
notify the governor with a written, dated document of the dispute. The
governor shall resolve the dispute within 5 working days of receiving
notification from the commissioner.

**Source.** 1986, 202:13. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125-H:6

 **125-H:6 Reports. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall prepare written reports detailing the
results of any environmental health risk assessment undertaken pursuant
to this chapter.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall make these reports available to those
state or local officials responsible for risk management decisions and
activities.

**Source.** 1986, 202:13. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125-H:7

 **125-H:7 Environmental Risk Analysis. –** Any environmental hazard
assigned to the risk analysis and management unit in the office of the
commissioner of environmental services shall be the direct
responsibility of the assistant commissioner, who shall have the same
duties and responsibilities relative to environmental hazards as the
commissioner of the department of health and human services has relative
to human health risks under this chapter. The assistant commissioner of
environmental services and the commissioner of the department of health
and human services shall consult regularly and shall work together to
assure that the risk analysis and management unit and the health risk
assessment bureau operate in a mutually efficient and cooperative
fashion.

**Source.** 1986, 202:13. 1995, 310:182, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.
