---
title: 'CHAPTER 125-M MERCURY EMISSIONS REDUCTION AND CONTROL PROGRAM'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 125-M
                                             
MERCURY EMISSIONS REDUCTION AND CONTROL PROGRAM
-----------------------------------------------

### Section 125-M:1

 **125-M:1 Findings and Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. The general court finds that mercury is a persistent, toxic
pollutant that accumulates in the food chain and poses a significant
adverse threat to the state's public health and welfare and to the
natural environment, including fish and wildlife. As a potent
neurotoxin, mercury exposure in humans can lead to birth defects, brain
damage, elevated blood pressure, abnormal heart rhythms, low grade
intermittent fevers, gastrointestinal irritation, muscle degeneration,
and even death. The effects of mercury exposure on plants include
decreased chlorophyll production, inhibited growth, root and leaf
damage, accelerated aging, and death. Reproductive problems are the
primary concern for birds. In response to the human health risk posed by
mercury, the state of New Hampshire has issued a statewide advisory on
the consumption of fresh water fish. This fish consumption advisory
applies to all freshwater fish species collected from all inland waters.
It advises women of childbearing age and young children to limit their
consumption of freshwater fish to no more than one meal per month; all
other people are advised to limit their consumption to no more than 4
meals per month. The Department of the Interior and the Department of
Commerce have estimated that fishing expenditures in the state equal
approximately 
                                             $320 million annually, while the American Sportfishing
Association has estimated that these expenditures support about 7,700
jobs in New Hampshire. Consequently, mercury deposition may have an
impact on New Hampshire's recreational economy.
                                             
 II. The general court further finds that deposition of mercury and
mercury compounds is occurring in the state of New Hampshire. While the
majority of emissions originate from sources outside of New Hampshire,
sources within the state also contribute to mercury deposition in New
Hampshire and in the northeast region. Therefore, it is incumbent upon
the state of New Hampshire to undertake prudent action to reduce its
contribution to mercury deposition. Approximately 98 percent of the
mercury emitted by anthropogenic (man-made) sources in New Hampshire
comes from the incineration of municipal solid waste and medical waste,
and from the combustion of fossil fuels, such as coal and oil.
                                             
 III. The general court acknowledges that in June of 1998, the New
England states and the eastern Canadian provinces jointly endorsed the
implementation of a Regional Mercury Action Plan calling for the virtual
elimination of anthropogenic mercury emissions, with an interim goal of
reducing mercury emissions 50 percent by the year 2003.
                                             
 IV. The general court recognizes the importance of additional
research into the human health and ecological impacts of mercury
contamination, the development of technologies to reduce and measures to
avoid mercury emissions to the ambient air from sources such as
coal-burning electricity generation plants, and the assessment of the
relative cost-effectiveness of such technologies and measures. The
general court finds, however, that reducing the substantial mercury
emissions from municipal waste combustors and hospital, medical and
infectious waste incinerators through the use of existing technology
where it can be applied cost effectively is prudent environmental policy
for the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 V. Ash landfills which serve municipal waste combustors may
experience increased mercury levels in the ash disposed at such
landfills as a result of efforts to lower mercury emissions from such
municipal waste combustors. Therefore, the general court finds that it
is appropriate to implement mercury controls on municipal waste
combustors after the department of environmental services conducts a
detailed study and review of the ash landfills in the state to make
certain that all necessary safeguards are in place to protect against
environmental degradation from such sources and ensure the protection of
drinking water supplies.

**Source.** 1999, 350:1, eff. Jan. 21, 2000.

### Section 125-M:2

 **125-M:2 Definitions. –**
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
environmental services.
                                             
 II. "Control efficiency'' means the percentage of mercury removed by
the pollution control system expressed as a percentage of the total
mercury that is introduced into the pollution control system.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 IV. "Design capacity'' means the maximum design 24-hour charging
rate of a municipal waste combustor capable of continuously burning
municipal solid waste.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. "Governor'' means the governor of the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 VII. "Hospital, medical and infectious waste incinerator'' means any
device that combusts any amount of hospital waste or medical/infectious
waste.
                                             
 VIII. "Hospital waste'' means discards generated at a hospital,
except unused items returned to the manufacturer. Hospital waste does
not include human corpses, remains, and anatomical parts that are
intended for interment or cremation.
                                             
 IX. "Medical/infectious waste'' means "medical/infectious waste'' as
defined in 40 CFR 60.51c.
                                             
 X. "Municipal solid waste'' means solid waste generated at
residences, commercial or industrial establishments, and institutions,
but excluding construction and demolition debris, automobile scrap and
other motor vehicle waste, infectious waste, asbestos waste,
contaminated soil and other absorbent media and ash other than ash from
household stoves.
                                             
 XI. "Municipal waste combustor'' or "combustor'' means a device that
combusts solid, liquid, or gaseous municipal solid waste for the primary
purpose of volume reduction or disposal. Municipal waste combustors do
not include internal combustion engines, gas turbines, or other
combustion devices that combust landfill gases collected by landfill gas
collection systems.
                                             
 XII. "Solid waste'' means "solid waste'' as defined by RSA 149-M:4,
XXII.

**Source.** 1999, 350:1. 2002, 172:5, eff. May 15, 2002.

### Section 125-M:3

 **125-M:3 Mercury Reduction and Control Program. –** The department
shall develop a mercury reduction and control program. The program shall
include, but is not limited to, the following:
                                             
 I. Any municipal waste combustor with a design capacity to burn 100
tons per day or more of municipal solid waste shall reduce its mercury
emissions to achieve a mercury emission rate of no greater than 0.028
mg/dscm corrected to 7 percent oxygen by volume on a dry basis, or at
least 85 percent control efficiency.
                                             
 II. The department shall evaluate the technical and economic
feasibility of establishing a mercury emission limit of 0.028 mg/dscm
corrected to 7 percent oxygen by volume on a dry basis for:
                                             
 (a) Municipal waste combustors with a design capacity to burn
less than 100 tons per day of municipal solid waste; and
                                             
 (b) Hospital, medical and infectious waste incinerators.
                                             
 III. The department shall evaluate the technical and economic
feasibility of establishing a mercury emission limit for coal-burning
electricity generation plants.

**Source.** 1999, 350:1. 2002, 172:1, eff. May 15, 2002.

### Section 125-M:4

 **125-M:4 Rulemaking Authority. –** The commissioner shall adopt
rules, under RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 I. Procedures and frequency for stack testing, testing protocols,
measurement methods, and other such actions as may be necessary to
verify compliance with this chapter.
                                             
 II. Fees for implementing and enforcing the terms and conditions
relating to reduction of mercury emissions of a permit issued in
accordance with RSA 125-C.

**Source.** 1999, 350:1, eff. Jan. 21, 2000.

### Section 125-M:5

 **125-M:5 Compliance. –** No person shall operate a municipal waste
combustor with the design capacity to burn 100 tons per day or more of
municipal solid waste without a temporary or operating permit issued by
the department in accordance with RSA 125-C. Any source subject to this
section shall file a complete application for a permit or permit
modification under the provisions of RSA 125-C and a plan for achieving
compliance with this chapter.

**Source.** 1999, 350:1. 2002, 172:2, eff. May 15, 2002.

### Section 125-M:6

 **125-M:6 Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. All of the enforcement provisions of RSA 125-C:15 shall apply to
violations of this chapter.
                                             
 II. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate
violation.

**Source.** 1999, 350:1, eff. Jan. 21, 2000.

### Section 125-M:7

 **125-M:7 Variances. –** Any variance granted under this chapter
shall be granted by the commissioner upon application and after a
hearing, in accordance with RSA 125-C:16.

**Source.** 1999, 350:1, eff. Jan. 21, 2000.
