---
title: 'CHAPTER 125-R OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED HYDRONIC HEATERS'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 125-R
                                             
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED HYDRONIC HEATERS
-----------------------------------

### Section 125-R:1

 **125-R:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Clean wood'' means wood that has not been painted, stained,
coated, preserved, or treated with chemicals such as copper chromium
arsenate, creosote, or pentachlorophenol. The term does not include
construction and demolition debris as defined in RSA 149-M:4, IV-a.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
environmental services.
                                             
 III. "EPA'' means the United States Environmental Protection
Agency.
                                             
 IV. "Municipality'' means cities, towns, and counties in which there
are located unincorporated towns or organized places. Municipality shall
not mean village districts.
                                             
 V. "Outdoor wood-fired hydronic heater'' (OWHH) or "outdoor wood
boiler'' means a fuel burning device:
                                             
 (a) Designed to burn wood or other solid fuels;
                                             
 (b) That the manufacturer specifies for outdoor installation or
in structures not normally occupied by humans, including structures such
as garages and sheds; and
                                             
 (c) Which heats building space and water through the
distribution, typically through pipes, of a fluid heated in the device,
typically water or a mixture of water and antifreeze.
                                             
 VI. "Person'' means any individual, partnership, firm or
co-partnership, association, company, trust, corporation, department,
bureau, agency, private or municipal corporation, or any political
subdivision of the state, the United States or political subdivisions or
agencies thereof, or any other entity recognized by law as subject to
rights and duties.
                                             
 VII. "Phase I OWHH'' means an OWHH that has been certified or
qualified by the EPA as meeting a particulate matter emission limit of
0.6 pounds per million British Thermal Units input and is labeled
accordingly.
                                             
 VIII. "Phase II OWHH'' means an OWHH that has been certified or
qualified by the EPA as meeting a particulate matter emission limit of
0.32 pounds per million British Thermal Units output and is labeled
accordingly.

**Source.** 2008, 362:2, eff. Aug. 10, 2008.

### Section 125-R:2

 **125-R:2 Unit Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. Effective January 1, 2009, no person shall sell, offer for sale,
or distribute for sale an OWHH that is not a Phase I or Phase II OWHH.
                                             
 II. Effective April 1, 2010, no person shall sell, offer for sale,
or distribute for sale an OWHH that is not a Phase II OWHH. The
commissioner shall delay or indefinitely postpone the effective date of
this paragraph through rule adoption under RSA 541-A if the EPA does not
establish or is delayed later than April 1, 2009 in establishing a
certification or qualification process for Phase II OWHHs as determined
by the commissioner.

**Source.** 2008, 362:2, eff. Aug. 10, 2008.

### Section 125-R:3

 **125-R:3 Setback and Stack Height Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall install a Phase I OWHH unless it is installed at
least 100 feet from the nearest property line and has a permanent
attached stack that is at least 2 feet higher than the peak of the roof
of a residence or place of business not served by the OWHH if that
residence or place of business is located within 300 feet of the OWHH.
                                             
 II. No person shall install a Phase II OWHH unless it is at least 50
feet from the nearest property line.
                                             
 III. No person shall install an OWHH that is not a Phase I or Phase
II OWHH unless it is located at least 200 feet from the nearest abutting
residence and has a permanent attached stack that is at least 2 feet
higher than the peak of the roof of a residence or place of business not
served by the OWHH if that residence or place of business is located
within 300 feet of the OWHH.

**Source.** 2008, 362:2, eff. Aug. 10, 2008.

### Section 125-R:4

 **125-R:4 Permitted Fuels. –** Any person that owns or operates an
OWHH shall not use a fuel other than the following:
                                             
 I. Clean wood;
                                             
 II. Wood pellets made from clean wood;
                                             
 III. Home heating oil, natural gas, or propane that complies with
all applicable sulfur limits and is used as a starter or supplemental
fuel for dual-fired OWHHs; or
                                             
 IV. Other fuels as approved by the commissioner through rules
adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 2008, 362:2, eff. Aug. 10, 2008.

### Section 125-R:5

 **125-R:5 Exemption. –** An OWHH that is specifically designed to
burn wood pellet fuel with metered fuel and air feed and controlled
combustion engineering, which is operated according to manufacturers'
specifications and burns only wood pellet fuel shall be exempt from this
chapter.

**Source.** 2008, 362:2, eff. Aug. 10, 2008.

### Section 125-R:6

 **125-R:6 Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any rule
adopted under this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and may be
assessed by the commissioner, after notice and hearing, an
administrative fine for the first offense not to exceed 
                                             $250 and for
each subsequent offense not to exceed 
                                             $500. All fine proceeds shall be
deposited in the general fund.
                                             
 II. Whenever the commissioner finds a person has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter or rule established under this chapter, the
commissioner may issue an order of abatement establishing a compliance
schedule with which the person shall comply. Any order of abatement
shall become final and enforceable by the commissioner within 30 days of
its issuance unless an appeal is filed with the air resources council
before the expiration of said 30-day period. The council shall hold a
hearing on any such appeal promptly, and shall thereafter issue a
decision upholding, modifying, or abrogating the commissioner's order of
abatement or any part thereof. The council's decision shall become final
10 days after it is issued.

**Source.** 2008, 362:2, eff. Aug. 10, 2008.

### Section 125-R:7

 **125-R:7 Municipal Authority. –** Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to limit the authority of a municipality or the department of
health and human services to prevent and remove nuisances and protect
public health in accordance with RSA 147, or of a municipality to adopt
and enforce land use ordinances and regulations pursuant to RSA 674 and
675 relative to OWHHs, including but not limited to provisions relative
to setbacks and stack heights that are more restrictive than RSA
125-R:3, prohibiting the installation of OWHHs in one or more zoning
districts, or requiring in one or more zoning districts the installation
of lower emitting versions of OWHHs that have been certified or
qualified under this chapter. A municipality shall not establish
quantifiable emission limits, require testing, monitoring, or
certification, or specify the types of fuels used. In exercising its
authority under this section, a municipality shall not unreasonably
limit the installation of or hinder the operation of OWHHs.

**Source.** 2008, 362:2, eff. Aug. 10, 2008.

### Section 125-R:8

 **125-R:8 Notice to Buyers. –**
                                             
 I. Prior to the execution of a sale for a new or used OWHH, the
distributor/seller shall provide the prospective buyer with a copy of
this chapter and a written notice which includes:
                                             
 (a) An acknowledgment that the buyer was provided with a copy of
this chapter;
                                             
 (b) A list of approved fuel; and
                                             
 (c) A statement that even if the requirements set forth in this
chapter are met there may be ordinances imposed by the buyer's
municipality or findings of adverse effects by the commissioner that
will limit or prohibit the use of the purchased OWHH.
                                             
 II. The notice shall be signed and dated by the buyer and the
distributor/seller when the sale of the OWHH is completed. The name and
address of the owner, name of the manufacturer, and model and date of
manufacture of the OWHH shall be included in the completed notice.
                                             
 III. A copy of the signed written notice required pursuant to
paragraph I shall be kept on file by the distributor/seller for a period
not less than 3 years from the date of sale and shall be made available
upon request for copying and/or inspection to the commissioner, the
municipal health officer in the municipality in which the purchased OWHH
is installed, and the commissioner of the department of health or human
services.

**Source.** 2008, 362:2, eff. Aug. 10, 2008.
