---
title: 'CHAPTER 125-L VOLUNTARY GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS REGISTRY'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 125-L
                                             
VOLUNTARY GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS REGISTRY
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 125-L:1

 **125-L:1 Definitions. –**
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
environmental services.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 III. "Emission'' means a release into the outdoor atmosphere of a
greenhouse gas.
                                             
 IV. "Greenhouse gas'' means but is not limited to such gases as
carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons,
perfluorocarbons, or sulfur hexafluoride.
                                             
 V. "Source'' means any entity, building, structure, facility,
installation, article, or thing which, in the opinion of the
commissioner, emits or may emit a greenhouse gas.

**Source.** 1999, 220:2, eff. Sept. 4, 1999.

### Section 125-L:2

 **125-L:2 Eastern Climate Registry. –**
                                             
 I. In order to help protect the interests of New Hampshire sources
and the state's economy under a future federal regulatory scheme
relating to greenhouse gas emissions, and to help encourage the
voluntary reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by New Hampshire
sources, the department shall encourage sources to register their
inventory of greenhouse gas emissions with the Eastern Climate
Registry.
                                             
 II. The department shall work with other states to expand upon the
Eastern Climate Registry and develop a broader multi-state registry for
greenhouse gas emissions records to support emissions reporting and
reduction policies.
                                             
 III. The department shall prepare an annual report for the general
court summarizing New Hampshire's participation in the Eastern Climate
Registry.

**Source.** 1999, 220:2. 2007, 226:1, eff. Aug. 24, 2007.

### Section 125-L:3

 **125-L:3 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules
consistent with the Eastern Climate Registry or a broader multi-state
registry under RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Information, forms, procedures, and applicable thresholds for
registering voluntarily achieved reductions of greenhouse gas
emissions.
                                             
 II. Methods and procedures for calculating, estimating, or otherwise
quantifying voluntary reductions of greenhouse gas emissions.
                                             
 III. Methods and procedures for verifying, where necessary, that
emissions reductions to be registered have actually been achieved.
                                             
 IV. Methods and procedures for determining or verifying the
ownership of greenhouse gas emissions reductions in order to avoid
doublecounting such reductions.
                                             
 V. General supervision and administration of this chapter.

**Source.** 1999, 220:2. 2007, 226:2, eff. Aug. 24, 2007.
