---
title: 'CHAPTER 125-Q NEW HAMPSHIRE COMMISSION ON DEAFNESS AND HEARING LOSS'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 125-Q
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE COMMISSION ON DEAFNESS AND HEARING LOSS
-----------------------------------------------------

### Section 125-Q:1

 **125-Q:1 Commission Established; Chairperson; Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. A commission, to be known as the New Hampshire commission on
deafness and hearing loss is hereby created and established. The
commission shall consist of the following members:
                                             
 (a) Two members of the house of representatives, one of whom
shall be from the health, human services and elderly affairs committee,
appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (b) One member from the governor's commission on disabilities,
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (c) Two representatives of the department of health and human
services, appointed by the commissioner.
                                             
 (d) One representative of the department of employment security,
appointed by the commissioner.
                                             
 (e) Two representatives of the department of education, appointed
by the commissioner.
                                             
 (f) One representative of the administrative office of the
courts, appointed by the chief justice of the New Hampshire superior
court.
                                             
 (g) The president of the New Hampshire Association of the Deaf,
or designee.
                                             
 (h) One representative of the New Hampshire Association of the
Deaf, appointed by the president of the association, or designee.
                                             
 (i) The president of the New Hampshire chapter of the Hearing
Loss Association of America, or designee.
                                             
 (j) One representative from the New Hampshire chapter of the
Hearing Loss Association of America, appointed by the president of such
association, or designee.
                                             
 (k) One representative of the New Hampshire Registry of
Interpreters for the Deaf, appointed by the president of the New
Hampshire Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf, or designee.
                                             
 (l) The attorney general, or designee.
                                             
 (m) The commissioner of the department of safety, or designee.
                                             
 (n) The commissioner of the department of corrections, or
designee.
                                             
 (o) The executive director of Granite State Independent Living,
or designee.
                                             
 (p) The executive director of the governor's commission on
disability.
                                             
 (q) The executive director of Northeast Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Services, Inc.
                                             
 (r) The executive director of the Disabilities Rights Center.
                                             
 (s) One representative of the New Hampshire Academy of Audiology,
appointed by the president of the academy.
                                             
 II. The members of the commission shall elect a chairperson from
among the members. Members of the commission shall serve without
compensation except that legislative members of the commission shall
receive mileage at the legislative rate when attending to the duties of
the commission.
                                             
 III. Legislative members of the commission shall serve a term which
is coterminous with their elected office.

**Source.** 2007, 294:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2007.

### Section 125-Q:2

 **125-Q:2 Organization; Meetings. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall be convened by the first-named member of the
house of representatives, and shall hold its first meeting no later than
30 days after the effective date of this chapter.
                                             
 II. The department of education and the department of health and
human services shall provide administrative support, in equal measure,
for the commission, including interpreter services for commission
meetings.

**Source.** 2007, 294:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2007.

### Section 125-Q:3

 **125-Q:3 Duties. –** The commission shall:
                                             
 I. Recommend, where applicable, statutes, rules, policies, and
education programs necessary to successfully provide New Hampshire
citizens who are deaf or hard of hearing with access to competent
interpreters at all levels of local and state government.
                                             
 II. Investigate establishing an information and referral service
operated by and for persons who are deaf and hard of hearing to promote
access of such persons to the community-based health care, educational,
employment, and social services that are available to all citizens.
                                             
 III. Develop peer counseling, job placement, and advocacy services
which would enhance the ability of individuals who are deaf or hard of
hearing to contribute to their communities.
                                             
 IV. Recommend legislation and identify funding sources by working in
collaboration with the following agencies and organizations:
                                             
 (a) The governor's commission on disability.
                                             
 (b) The Disabilities Rights Center.
                                             
 (c) Northeast Deaf and Hard of Hearing Services, Inc.
                                             
 (d) The department of health and human services.
                                             
 (e) The department of safety.
                                             
 (f) The department of corrections.
                                             
 (g) The department of education.
                                             
 (h) The department of justice.
                                             
 (i) Granite State Independent Living.

**Source.** 2007, 294:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2007.

### Section 125-Q:4

 **125-Q:4 Report. –** The commission shall make an annual report
commencing on November 1, 2008, together with any recommendations, to
the speaker of the house of representatives, the president of the
senate, and the governor.

**Source.** 2007, 294:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2007.
