---
title: 'CHAPTER 125-O MULTIPLE POLLUTANT REDUCTION PROGRAM'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 125-O
                                             
MULTIPLE POLLUTANT REDUCTION PROGRAM
------------------------------------

### Section 125-O:1

 **125-O:1 Findings and Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. The general court finds that while air quality has improved in
recent years, scientific advances have demonstrated that adequate
protection of public health, environmental quality, and economic
well-being--the 3 cornerstones of New Hampshire's quality of
life--requires additional, concerted reductions in air pollutant
emissions. The general court also finds that the state's tradition of
environmental leadership--setting an example for similarly feasible air
pollution reductions from upwind jurisdictions--is also well served by
additional emission reductions.
                                             
 II. Recent studies and scientific evidence, documented in the New
Hampshire Clean Power Strategy issued in January 2001 by the department
of environmental services, indicates that significant negative human
health and ecosystem impacts continue to be caused by air pollution. The
general court finds that the substantial quantities of several harmful
air pollutants that continue to be emitted from existing fossil fuel
burning steam electric power plants, despite recent reductions in the
emission of certain air pollutants from some of these facilities,
contribute to these harmful impacts and that additional emissions
reductions from these sources are warranted.
                                             
 III. Specifically, the general court finds that aggressive further
reductions in emissions of sulfur dioxide (SO~2~), oxides of nitrogen
(NOx), mercury, and carbon dioxide (CO~2~) must be pursued. These
pollutants are primarily responsible for the human health and ecosystem
impacts documented in the New Hampshire Clean Power Strategy issued in
January 2001 by the department of environmental services.
                                             
 IV. The general court finds that, as demonstrated by recent
analyses, a high quality-of-life environment has been, and will continue
to be, essential to New Hampshire's economic well-being. The general
court further finds that protecting New Hampshire's high quality-of-life
environment by reducing air pollutant emissions returns substantial
economic benefit to the state through avoided health care costs; greater
tourism resulting from healthier lakes and improved vistas; more visits
by fishermen, hunters, and wildlife viewers to wildlife ecosystems, and
a more productive forest and agricultural sector.
                                             
 V. For the above reasons and others, the general court finds that
substantial additional reductions in emissions of SO~2~, NOx, mercury,
and CO~2~ must be required of New Hampshire's existing fossil fuel
burning steam electric power plants. Due to the collateral benefits and
economies of scale associated with reducing multiple pollutant emissions
at the same time, the general court finds that such aggressive emission
reductions are both feasible and cost-effective if implemented
simultaneously through a comprehensive, integrated power plant
strategy.
                                             
 VI. The general court also finds that the environmental benefits of
air pollutant reductions can be most cost-effectively achieved if
implemented in a fashion that allows for regulatory and compliance
flexibility under a strictly limited overall emissions cap.
Specifically, market-based approaches, such as trading and banking of
emission reductions within a cap-and-trade system, allow sources to
choose the most cost-effective ways to comply with established emission
reduction requirements. This approach also provides sources with an
incentive to reduce air pollutant emissions sooner and by greater
amounts, promotes the development and use of innovative new emission
control technologies, and specifies to the greatest extent possible
performance results regarding environmental improvement rather than
dictating expensive, facility-specific, command-and-control regulatory
requirements. The general court acknowledges that future federal
regulations may mandate some facility-specific requirements regarding
mercury reductions.
                                             
 VII. The general court also finds that energy conservation results
in direct reductions in air pollutant emissions. Thus, incentives for
energy conservation are an important component of an overall clean power
strategy. The general court recognizes that energy conservation
expenditures made by utilities using system benefits charge funds can
benefit all citizens and ratepayers.

**Source.** 2002, 130:2, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 125-O:2

 **125-O:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Affected sources'' means existing fossil fuel burning steam
electric power plant units in this state, specifically Merrimack Units 1
and 2 in Bow; Schiller Units 4, 5, and 6 in Portsmouth; and Newington
Unit 1 in Newington, excluding any of these units that may be
repowered.
                                             
 II. "Allowance'' means a limited authorization to emit one ton of
SO~2~, one ton of NOx, one pound of mercury, or one ton of CO~2~ during
a specified year.
                                             
 III. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
environmental services.
                                             
 IV. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 V. "Discrete emission reduction'' or "DER'' means an emission
reduction generated over a discrete period of time, and measured in
weight (e.g., tons).
                                             
 VI. "Ozone transport region'' means the ozone transport region as
established by section 184(a) of the Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. section
7511c.
                                             
 VII. "Person'' means any individual, partnership, firm or
co-partnership, association, company, trust, corporation, department,
bureau, agency, private or municipal corporation, or any political
subdivision of the state, the United States or political subdivisions or
agencies thereof, or any other entity recognized by law as subject to
rights and duties.
                                             
 VIII. "Renewable energy'' means energy derived from hydro,
geothermal, wind, solar thermal, photovoltaic, biomass, methane waste,
tidal, or other source approved by the department.
                                             
 IX. "Repowered unit'' means an affected source that has installed
qualifying repowering technology as defined by 40 C.F.R. part 72, or has
replaced a unit by a new unit, provided the new replacement unit:
                                             
 (a) Is on the same or contiguous property as the replaced unit,
regardless of owner;
                                             
 (b) Has a maximum power output rate equal to or greater than the
maximum power output rate of the replaced unit; and
                                             
 (c) Is designed to control, or is equipped with best available
technology to control, emissions of multiple pollutants simultaneously,
and in conformity with the emissions rates and reductions used to
establish RSA 125-O:3.
                                             
 IX-a. "Sustainable energy'' means energy that supplies present
energy needs without permanently depleting resources, while considering
environmental impacts, and without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own energy needs.
                                             
 X. "System benefits charge funds'' or "SBC funds'' means revenues
collected by Public Service Company of New Hampshire (PSNH) (currently
at a rate of 1.8 mills (
                                             $0.0018) per retail kilowatt-hour sold as set
by the general court in 2001, 29:14) to fund energy efficiency and
conservation and load management programs approved by the public
utilities commission.

**Source.** 2002, 130:2. 2009, 171:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2009.

### Section 125-O:3

 **125-O:3 Integrated Power Plant Strategy. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall implement an integrated, multi-pollutant
strategy to reduce air emissions from affected sources.
                                             
 II. The integrated, multi-pollutant strategy shall be implemented in
a market-based fashion that allows trading and banking of emission
reductions to comply with the overall statewide annual emission caps
established under RSA 125-O:3, III. Allowances, up to the amount of
these caps, shall be allocated to each affected source based on the
output of each affected source. The department shall make publicly
available all allocations prior to the effective date of such
allocations.
                                             
 III. The strategy shall include implementation of the following
statewide annual emissions caps:
                                             
 (a) 7,289 tons annually applicable to total sulfur dioxide
(SO~2~) emissions from the affected sources;
                                             
 (b) 3,644 tons annually applicable to total oxides of nitrogen
(NOx) emissions from the affected sources;
                                             
 (c) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]


                                             [Paragraph III(d) repealed by 2012, 281:11, I, effective as provided by
2012, 281:17.
                                             ]


                                             
 (d) 5,425,866 tons annually applicable to total carbon dioxide
(CO~2~) emissions from the affected sources until December 31, 2008.

**Source.** 2002, 130:2. 2006, 105:2, I. 2008, 182:3. 2012, 281:11, I,
eff. as provided by 2012, 281:17.

### Section 125-O:4

 **125-O:4 Compliance. –**
                                             
 I. The owner or operator of each affected source shall file a
compliance plan with the department describing the technologies,
operational modifications, market-based approaches, or other methods
that will be used to comply with the emission caps established under RSA
125-O:3, III. Compliance plans shall also include a report of the
mercury content analysis program results required under RSA 125-O:4, II
and a report of the stack testing results for mercury emissions from
Merrimack Units 1 and 2 and either Schiller Unit 4, 5, or 6 required
under RSA 125-O:4, III. An initial compliance plan shall be filed no
later than one year after the effective date of this section. Amended
compliance plans shall be submitted to the department 45 days prior to
the implementation of any change to the plan.
                                             
 II. The owner or operator of each affected source burning coal as
fuel shall conduct a mercury content analysis program. This program
shall consist of monthly fuel samples and analyses for at least 12
consecutive months and the submittal of a final report to the department
no later than one year after the effective date of this section.
                                             
 III. Stack testing for mercury emissions from Merrimack Units 1 and
2 and either Schiller Unit 4, 5, or 6 shall be completed using a
department approved test method no later than one year after the
effective date of this section. The owner or operator shall submit a
test protocol to the department at least 45 days prior to the
commencement of stack testing.
                                             
 IV. Compliance with the emission caps established under RSA 125-O:3,
III may be demonstrated by making emission reductions at the affected
sources, using compliance market-based approaches, or other methods
acceptable to the department.
                                             
 (a)(1) Affected sources may use SO~2~ allowances from federal or
regional trading and banking programs and incentive programs established
under this chapter to comply with the SO~2~ emission cap established
under RSA 125-O:3, III. In addition, allowances or credits from other
programs may be acceptable as determined by the department.
                                             
 (2) Affected sources shall transfer to the department all
annual allocations provided under the federal acid rain program.
Affected sources shall receive from the department SO~2~ allowances
equivalent to the cap established in RSA 125-O:3, III. Additionally, in
order to promote local reductions, for each year after the compliance
date that combined SO~2~ emissions from affected sources are below the
annual average emissions for the previous 3 years, affected sources
shall receive additional SO~2~ allowances in a combined amount equal to
the difference between the current year emissions and the average annual
emissions for the previous 3 years.
                                             
 (3) Further, in order to encourage reductions in upwind
emissions and thereby provide greater benefit to air quality in New
Hampshire, for each 0.80 allowance purchased by an affected source under
the federal acid rain program and utilized for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter which originates from within the ozone
transport region, the affected source shall receive an additional 0.20
allowance from the department.
                                             
 (4) The combined sum of all allowances received by the
affected sources under subparagraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3) shall not exceed
20,000 in any given year, and shall be credited to the affected sources'
accounts in the year following each annual compliance period.
                                             
 (b) Affected sources may use NOx allowances from federal or
regional trading and banking programs, or other programs acceptable to
the department, and NOx discrete emissions reductions by affected
sources other than Merrimack Units 1 and 2 from state trading and
banking programs, to comply with the NOx emission cap established under
RSA 125-O:3, III. NOx discrete emissions reductions may only be used to
comply with that portion of the NOx emission cap established under RSA
125-O:3, III which does not apply to emissions between May 1 and
September 30 of any calendar year.
                                             
 (c) Affected sources may use CO~2~ allowances from federal or
regional trading and banking programs, or other programs acceptable to
the department, to comply with the CO~2~ emission cap established under
RSA 125-O:3, III. Early reductions of CO~2~ may be banked for future use
in regional or national trading programs or to meet the emission caps
established under RSA 125-O:3, III.
                                             
 (d) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 V. The owner or operator of each affected source shall be allowed to
recover all prudent costs associated with compliance in a manner
consistent with RSA 374-F, RSA 369-B, and the Agreement to Settle PSNH
Restructuring, dated August 2, 1999, Revised and Conformed in Compliance
with NHPUC Order No. 23,549.

**Source.** 2002, 130:2. 2006, 105:2, II, eff. June 8, 2006.

### Section 125-O:5

 **125-O:5 Energy Efficiency, Renewable Energy, and Conservation and
Load Management Incentive. –**
                                             
 I. In order to encourage energy efficiency, energy conservation,
renewable energy, and the reductions in local emissions which result,
the integrated multi-pollutant strategy shall promote energy efficiency
and conservation through conservation and load management programs.
                                             
 II. Public Service Company of New Hampshire (PSNH) may utilize SBC
funds equivalent to the unencumbered amount, if any, rolled over from
the prior program year for energy efficiency projects at facilities
owned and operated by PSNH, provided that the company made a good faith
effort in the prior program year to meet the goals approved by the
public utilities commission for its core energy efficiency programs, and
provided that the SBC funds used by PSNH shall not exceed 2 percent of
all SBC funds collected in the prior program year. PSNH may utilize
these funds to implement approved core energy efficiency initiatives or
measures at PSNH's facilities that are cost effective and which enhance
the efficient use of energy at PSNH facilities. Any energy savings
resulting from the use of these funds by PSNH at its facilities will not
be included in the calculation of PSNH's energy efficiency program
goals, any shareholder incentive, or any other incentive program. In any
year that PSNH utilizes SBC funds, PSNH shall submit a report to the
public utilities commission and the department detailing how these funds
were utilized, and will make the report available to interested parties.
Any party may request that the public utilities commission schedule a
hearing to review these reports and the expenditure by PSNH of rolled
over SBC funds at its facilities.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 2002, 130:2. 2008, 182:10, eff. June 11, 2008.

### Section 125-O:5-a

 **125-O:5-a Energy Efficiency and Sustainable Energy Board. –**
                                             
 I. An energy efficiency and sustainable energy board is hereby
created to promote and coordinate energy efficiency, demand response,
and sustainable energy programs in the state. The board's duties shall
include but not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) Review available energy efficiency, conservation, demand
response, and sustainable energy programs and incentives and compile a
report of such resources in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (b) Develop a plan to achieve the state's energy efficiency
potential for all fuels, including setting goals and targets for energy
efficiency that are meaningful and achievable.
                                             
 (c) Develop a plan for economic and environmental sustainability
of the state's energy system including the development of high
efficiency clean energy resources that are either renewable or have low
net greenhouse gas emissions.
                                             
 (d) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (e) Explore opportunities to coordinate programs targeted at
saving more than one fuel resource, including conversion to renewable
resources and coordination between natural gas and other programs which
seek to reduce the overall use of nonrenewable fuels.
                                             
 (f) Develop tools to enhance outreach and education programs to
increase knowledge about energy efficiency and sustainable energy among
New Hampshire residents and businesses.
                                             
 (g) Expand upon the state government's efficiency programs to
ensure that the state is providing leadership on energy efficiency and
sustainable energy including reduction of its energy use and fuel
costs.
                                             
 (h) Encourage municipalities and counties to increase investments
in energy efficiency and sustainable energy through financing tools, and
to create local energy committees.
                                             
 (i) Work with community action agencies and the office of energy
and planning to explore ways to ensure that all customers participating
in programs for low-income customers and the Low Income Home Energy
Assistance Program (LIHEAP) have access to energy efficiency
improvements, and where appropriate, renewable energy resources, in
order to reduce their energy bills.
                                             
 (j) Investigate potential sources of funding for energy
efficiency and sustainable energy development and delivery mechanisms
for such programs, coordinate efforts between funding sources to reduce
duplication and enhance collaboration, and review investment strategies
to increase access to energy efficiency and renewable energy resources.
                                             
 II. The members of the board shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) The chairman of the public utilities commission, or
designee.
                                             
 (b) The director of the office of energy and planning, or
designee.
                                             
 (c) The consumer advocate, or designee.
                                             
 (d) The commissioner of the department of environmental services,
or designee.
                                             
 (e) The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development, or designee.
                                             
 (f) The president of the Business and Industry Association of New
Hampshire, or designee.
                                             
 (g) The executive director of the New Hampshire Municipal
Association, or designee.
                                             
 (h) The executive director of New Hampshire Legal Assistance, or
designee.
                                             
 (i) The president of the Homebuilders & Remodelers Association of
New Hampshire, or designee.
                                             
 (j) Two members of the house science, technology and energy
committee appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (k) One member of the senate energy, environment and economic
development committee, appointed by the president of the senate.
                                             
 (l) Three representatives from not-for-profit groups representing
energy, environmental, consumer, or public health issues and
knowledgeable in energy conservation policies and programs, appointed by
the chairman of the public utilities commission.
                                             
 (m) The commissioner of the department of administrative
services, or designee.
                                             
 (n) The state fire marshal, or designee.
                                             
 (o) The executive director of the New Hampshire housing finance
authority, or designee.
                                             
 III. The board shall include, as nonvoting participants, the
following:
                                             
 (a) One representative from each utility-administered electric
and natural gas energy efficiency program appointed by the chairman of
the public utilities commission.
                                             
 (b) A representative of energy services companies delivering
energy efficiency services to residential and business customers,
appointed by the chairman of the public utilities commission.
                                             
 (c) A representative of a business or association of businesses
selling or installing sustainable or renewable energy systems, appointed
by the chairman of the public utilities commission.
                                             
 (d) A representative from the investment community with expertise
in efficiency investments and financing, appointed by the chairman of
the public utilities commission.
                                             
 IV. The chairman of the public utilities commission shall call the
first meeting of the board. The board shall elect a chairperson from
among its members. Seven members of the board shall constitute a quorum.
The board shall make an annual report on December 1 to the governor, the
speaker of the house of representatives, the president of the senate,
the house science, technology and energy committee, the senate energy,
environment and economic development committee, and the public utilities
commission, to provide an update on its activities and recommendations
for action including possible legislation.
                                             
 V. The board shall be administratively attached to the public
utilities commission under RSA 21-G:10.
                                             
 VI. Legislative members of the commission shall receive mileage at
the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the board.
                                             
 VII. No member of the board shall vote on a matter in which the
member, his or her spouse or dependent, or the organization or entity
represented by or employing the member, has a private interest which may
directly or indirectly affect or influence the performance of his or her
duties.

**Source.** 2008, 292:1. 2012, 281:10, I, eff. Jan. 1, 2013.

### Section 125-O:6

 **125-O:6 Powers and Duties of the Commissioner. –** The
commissioner may:


                                             [Paragraph I effective until the date that the commissioner of the
department of environmental services certifies to the secretary of state
and the director of the office of legislative services that certain
states have terminated or have authorized termination of their
participation in the regional greenhouse gas initiative; see also
paragraph I set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. Develop a trading and banking program to provide appropriate
compliance flexibility in meeting the emission caps established under
RSA 125-O:3, III and allowance requirements of RSA 125-O:21 and RSA
125-O:22, and to encourage earlier and greater emissions reductions and
the development of new emission control technologies in order to
maximize the cost-effectiveness with which the environmental benefits of
this chapter are achieved.


                                             [Paragraph I effective the date that the commissioner of the department
of environmental services certifies to the secretary of state and the
director of the office of legislative services that certain states have
terminated or have authorized termination of their participation in the
regional greenhouse gas initiative; see also paragraph I set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. Develop a trading and banking program to provide appropriate
compliance flexibility in meeting the emission caps established under
RSA 125-O:3, III, and to encourage earlier and greater emissions
reductions and the development of new emission control technologies in
order to maximize the cost-effectiveness with which the environmental
benefits of this chapter are achieved.
                                             
 II. Propose to the general court for legislative enactment a program
to reduce emissions that impair visibility in mandatory Class I Federal
Areas, including the Great Gulf Wilderness Area and the Presidential-Dry
River Wilderness, if evaluation and assessment of the program
established under 125-O:6, I reveals after its implementation that
further reductions of emissions that impair visibility are necessary.
Any program proposed under this paragraph shall be at least as stringent
as that specified in the Clean Air Act, amendments thereto, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                             
 III. Propose to the general court for legislative enactment
appropriate processes to encourage pollution prevention, energy
efficiency, and other methods to cost-effectively achieve emissions
reductions.

**Source.** 2002, 130:2. 2008, 182:4. 2012, 281:12, eff. as provided by
2012, 281:17.

### Section 125-O:7

 **125-O:7 Enforcement. –**
                                             
 I. Any violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any rule
adopted under this chapter, shall be subject to enforcement by
injunction, including mandatory injunction, issued by the superior court
upon application of the attorney general. Any such violation shall also
be subject to a civil forfeiture to the state of not more than 
                                             $25,000
for each violation, and for each day of a continuing violation.
                                             
 II. Any person who knowingly violates any of the provisions of this
chapter, or any rule adopted under this chapter, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other
person.
                                             
 III. The commissioner, after notice and hearing pursuant to RSA
541-A, may impose an administrative fine not to exceed 
                                             $2,000 for each
offense upon any person who violates any provision of this chapter or
any rule adopted pursuant to this chapter. Rehearings and appeals from a
decision of the commissioner under this paragraph shall be in accordance
with RSA 541. Any administrative fine imposed under this paragraph shall
not preclude the imposition of further penalties under this chapter. The
proceeds of administrative fines imposed pursuant to this paragraph
shall be deposited in the general fund.
                                             
 (a) Notice and hearing prior to the imposition of an
administrative fine shall be in accordance with RSA 541-A and procedural
rules adopted by the commissioner pursuant to RSA 541-A:16.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner shall determine fines based on the
following:
                                             
 (1) For a minor deviation from a requirement causing minor
potential for harm, the fine shall be not less than 
                                             $100 and not more
than 
                                             $1,000.
                                             
 (2) For a minor deviation from a requirement causing moderate
potential for harm, the fine shall be not less than 
                                             $601 and not more
than 
                                             $1,250.
                                             
 (3) For a minor deviation from a requirement causing major
potential for harm, the fine shall be not less than 
                                             $851 and not more
than 
                                             $1,500.
                                             
 (4) For a moderate deviation from a requirement causing minor
potential for harm, the fine shall be not less than 
                                             $601 and not more
than 
                                             $1,250.
                                             
 (5) For a moderate deviation from a requirement causing
moderate potential for harm, the fine shall be not less than 
                                             $851 and
not more than 
                                             $1,500.
                                             
 (6) For a moderate deviation from a requirement causing major
potential for harm, the fine shall be not less than 
                                             $1,251 and not more
than 
                                             $1,750.
                                             
 (7) For a major deviation from a requirement causing minor
potential for harm, the fine shall be not less than 
                                             $851 and not more
than 
                                             $1,500.
                                             
 (8) For a major deviation from a requirement causing moderate
potential for harm, the fine shall be not less than 
                                             $1,251 and not more
than 
                                             $1,750.
                                             
 (9) For a major deviation from a requirement causing major
potential for harm, the fine shall be not less than 
                                             $1,501 and not more
than 
                                             $2,000.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner may assess additional fines for repeat
violations.

**Source.** 2002, 130:2, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 125-O:8


                                             


                                             [RSA 125-O:8 effective until the date that the commissioner of the
department of environmental services certifies to the secretary of state
and the director of the office of legislative services that certain
states have terminated or have authorized termination of their
participation in the regional greenhouse gas initiative; see also RSA
125-O:8 set out below.
                                             ]

 **125-O:8 Rulemaking Authority. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A, commencing no
later than 180 days after the effective date of this section, relative
to:
                                             
 (a) The establishment of trading and banking programs as
authorized by RSA 125-O:6, I.
                                             
 (b) The establishment of a method for allocating allowances and
other emissions reduction units or mechanisms as authorized by RSA
125-O:3, II and III.
                                             
 (c) Emissions and allowance monitoring, tracking, recordkeeping,
reporting, and other such actions as may be necessary to verify
compliance with this chapter.
                                             
 (d) The method and requirements for auctioning budget allowances
under RSA 125-O:21, which may use regional organizations.
                                             
 (e) Defining eligible projects for early reduction allowances
under RSA 125-O:21, IV, and establishing criteria to quantify and grant
such allowances.
                                             
 (f) Defining eligible projects for offset allowances under RSA
125-O:21, V, and establishing criteria to quantify and grant such
allowances, including the accreditation of third-party verifiers,
provided that the department may incorporate national or regional
forestry protocols by reference that are referenced in the RGGI model
rule.
                                             
 (g) The forms and information required on applications for a
temporary or operating permit required under RSA 125-O:22.
                                             
 II. The public utilities commission shall adopt rules, under RSA
541-A, to administer the energy efficiency fund and auction proceeds
received pursuant to RSA 125-O:23.


                                             [RSA 125-O:8 effective the date that the commissioner of the department
of environmental services certifies to the secretary of state and the
director of the office of legislative services that certain states have
terminated or have authorized termination of their participation in the
regional greenhouse gas initiative; see also RSA 125-O:8 set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**125-O:8 Rulemaking Authority.** --
                                             
 The commissioner shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A, commencing no
later than 180 days after the effective date of this section, relative
to:
                                             
 I. The establishment of trading and banking programs as authorized
by RSA 125-O:6, I.
                                             
 II. The establishment of a method for allocating allowances and
other emissions reduction units or mechanisms as authorized by RSA
125-O:3, II and III.
                                             
 III. Emissions and allowance monitoring, tracking, recordkeeping,
reporting, and other such actions as may be necessary to verify
compliance with this chapter.

**Source.** 2002, 130:2. 2008, 182:5. 2012, 281:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2013;
281:13, eff. as provided by 2012, 281:17.

### Section 125-O:9


                                             


                                             [RSA 125-O:9 effective until the date that the commissioner of the
department of environmental services certifies to the secretary of state
and the director of the office of legislative services that certain
states have terminated or have authorized termination of their
participation in the regional greenhouse gas initiative; see also RSA
125-O:9 set out below.
                                             ]

 **125-O:9 Compliance Dates. –**
                                             
 The owner or operator of each affected source shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter, excluding the subdivision on mercury
emissions, RSA 125-O:11 through 125-O:18, and the subdivision for CO~2~
emissions, RSA 125-O:19 through RSA 125-O:28, by December 31, 2006.


                                             [RSA 125-O:9 effective the date that the commissioner of the department
of environmental services certifies to the secretary of state and the
director of the office of legislative services that certain states have
terminated or have authorized termination of their participation in the
regional greenhouse gas initiative; see also RSA 125-O:9 set out
above.
                                             ]


                                             
**125-O:9 Compliance Dates.** --
                                             
 The owner or operator of each affected source shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter, excluding the subdivision on mercury
emissions, RSA 125-O:11 through 125-O:18, by December 31, 2006.

**Source.** 2002, 130:2. 2006, 105:3. 2008, 182:6. 2012, 281:14, eff. as
provided by 2012, 281:17.

### Section 125-O:10


                                             


                                             [RSA 125-O:10 effective until the date that the commissioner of the
department of environmental services certifies to the secretary of state
and the director of the office of legislative services that certain
states have terminated or have authorized termination of their
participation in the regional greenhouse gas initiative; see also RSA
125-O:10 set out below.
                                             ]

 **125-O:10 Non-Severability. –**
                                             
 No provision of RSA 125-O:1 through RSA 125-O:18 of this chapter
shall be implemented in a manner inconsistent with the integrated,
multi-pollutant strategy or RSA 125-O:1 through RSA 125-O:18 of this
chapter, and to this end, the provisions of RSA 125-O:1 through RSA
125-O:18 of this chapter are not severable.


                                             [RSA 125-O:10 effective the date that the commissioner of the
department of environmental services certifies to the secretary of state
and the director of the office of legislative services that certain
states have terminated or have authorized termination of their
participation in the regional greenhouse gas initiative; see also RSA
125-O:10 set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
**125-O:10 Non-Severability.** --
                                             
 No provision of this chapter shall be implemented in a manner
inconsistent with the integrated, multi-pollutant strategy of this
chapter, and to this end, the provisions of this chapter are not
severable.

**Source.** 2002, 130:2. 2008, 182:7. 2012, 281:15, eff. as provided by
2012, 281:17.

Mercury Emissions
-----------------

### Section 125-O:11

 **125-O:11 Statement of Purpose and Findings. –** The general court
finds that:
                                             
 I. It is in the public interest to achieve significant reductions in
mercury emissions at the coal-burning electric power plants in the state
as soon as possible. The requirements of this subdivision will prevent,
at a minimum, 80 percent of the aggregated mercury content of the coal
burned at these plants from being emitted into the air by no later than
the year 2013. To accomplish this objective, the best known commercially
available technology shall be installed at Merrimack Station no later
than July 1, 2013.
                                             
 II. The department of environmental services has determined that the
best known commercially available technology is a wet flue gas
desulphurization system, hereafter "scrubber technology,'' as it best
balances the procurement, installation, operation, and plant efficiency
costs with the projected reductions in mercury and other pollutants from
the flue gas streams of Merrimack Units 1 and 2. Scrubber technology
achieves significant emissions reduction benefits, including but not
limited to, cost effective reductions in sulfur dioxide, sulfur
trioxide, small particulate matter, and improved visibility (regional
haze).
                                             
 III. After scrubber technology is installed at Merrimack Station,
and after a period of operation has reliably established a consistent
level of mercury removal at or greater than 80 percent, the department
will ensure through monitoring that that level of mercury removal is
sustained, consistent with the proven operational capability of the
system at Merrimack Station.
                                             
 IV. To ensure that an ongoing and steadfast effort is made to
implement practicable technological or operational solutions to achieve
significant mercury reductions prior to the construction and operation
of the scrubber technology at Merrimack Station, the owner of the
affected coal-burning sources shall work to bring about such early
reductions and shall be provided incentives to do so.
                                             
 V. The installation of scrubber technology will not only reduce
mercury emissions significantly but will do so without jeopardizing
electric reliability and with reasonable costs to consumers.
                                             
 VI. The installation of such technology is in the public interest of
the citizens of New Hampshire and the customers of the affected
sources.
                                             
 VII. Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 125-O:1, VI, the purchase
of mercury credits or allowances to comply with the mercury reduction
requirements of this subdivision or the sale of mercury credits or
allowances earned under this subdivision is not in the public interest.
                                             
 VIII. The mercury reduction requirements set forth in this
subdivision represent a careful, thoughtful balancing of cost, benefits,
and technological feasibility and therefore the requirements shall be
viewed as an integrated strategy of non-severable components.

**Source.** 2006, 105:1, eff. June 8, 2006.

### Section 125-O:12

 **125-O:12 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Affected sources'' means existing coal-burning power plant units
in this state, specifically Merrimack Units 1 and 2 in Bow and Schiller
Units 4, 5, and 6 in Portsmouth.
                                             
 II. "Baseline mercury emissions'' means the total annual mercury
emissions from all of the affected sources, calculated in accordance
with RSA 125-O:14, II.
                                             
 III. "Baseline mercury input'' means the total annual mercury input
found in the coal used by all of the affected sources, calculated in
accordance with RSA 125-O:14, I.
                                             
 IV. "Owner'' means the owner or owners of the affected sources.
                                             
 V. "Scrubber technology'' means a wet flue gas desulphurization
system.

**Source.** 2006, 105:1, eff. June 8, 2006.

### Section 125-O:13

 **125-O:13 Compliance. –**
                                             
 I. The owner shall install and have operational scrubber technology
to control mercury emissions at Merrimack Units 1 and 2 no later than
July 1, 2013. The achievement of this requirement is contingent upon
obtaining all necessary permits and approvals from federal, state, and
local regulatory agencies and bodies; however, all such regulatory
agencies and bodies are encouraged to give due consideration to the
general court's finding that the installation and operation of scrubber
technology at Merrimack Station is in the public interest. The owner
shall make appropriate initial filings with the department and the
public utilities commission, if applicable, within one year of the
effective date of this section, and with any other applicable regulatory
agency or body in a timely manner.
                                             
 II. Total mercury emissions from the affected sources shall be at
least 80 percent less on an annual basis than the baseline mercury
input, as defined in RSA 125-O:12, III, beginning on July 1, 2013.
                                             
 III. Prior to July 1, 2013, the owner shall test and implement, as
practicable, mercury reduction control technologies or methods to
achieve early reductions in mercury emissions below the baseline mercury
emissions. The owner shall report the results of any testing to the
department and shall submit a plan for department approval before
commencing implementation.
                                             
 IV. If the net power output (as measured in megawatts) from
Merrimack Station is reduced, due to the power consumption requirements
or operational inefficiencies of the installed scrubber technology, the
owner may invest in capital improvements at Merrimack Station that
increase its net capability, within the requirements and regulations of
programs enforceable by the state or federal government, or both.
                                             
 V. Mercury reductions achieved through the operation of the scrubber
technology greater than 80 percent shall be sustained insofar as the
proven operational capability of the system, as installed, allows. The
department, in consultation with the owner, shall determine the maximum
sustainable rate of mercury emissions reductions and incorporate such
rate as a condition of operational permits issued by the department for
Merrimack Units 1 and 2. This requirement in no way affects the ability
of the owner to earn over-compliance credits consistent with RSA
125-O:16, II.
                                             
 VI. The purchase of mercury emissions allowances or credits from any
established emissions allowance or credit program shall not be allowed
for compliance with the mercury reduction requirements of this chapter.
                                             
 VII. If the mercury reduction requirement of paragraph II is not
achieved in any year after the July 1, 2013 implementation date, and
after full operation of the scrubber technology, then the owner may
utilize early emissions reduction credits or over-compliance credits, or
both, to make up any shortfall, and thereby be in compliance.
                                             
 VIII. If the mercury reduction requirement of paragraph II is not
achieved by the owner in any year after the July 1, 2013 implementation
date despite the owner's installation and full operation of scrubber
technology, consistent with good operational practice, and the owner's
exhaustion of any available early emissions reduction or over-compliance
credits, then the owner shall be deemed in violation of this section
unless it submits a plan to the department, within 30 days of such
noncompliance, and subsequently obtains approval of that plan for
achieving compliance within one year from the date of such
noncompliance. The department may impose conditions for approval of such
plan.
                                             
 IX. The owner shall report by June 30, 2007 and annually thereafter,
to the legislative oversight committee on electric utility
restructuring, established under RSA 374-F:5, and the chairpersons of
the house science, technology and energy committee and the senate energy
and economic development committee, on the progress and status of
complying with the requirements of paragraphs I and III, relative to
achieving early reductions in mercury emissions and also installing and
operating the scrubber technology including any updated cost
information. The last report required shall be after the department has
made a determination, under paragraph V, on the maximum sustainable rate
of mercury emissions reductions by the scrubber technology.

**Source.** 2006, 105:1, eff. June 8, 2006.

### Section 125-O:14

 **125-O:14 Measurement of Baseline Mercury Input and Emissions. –**
                                             
 I. Baseline mercury input shall be determined as follows:
                                             
 (a) No later than the first day of the second month following the
effective date of this section, and continuing for 12 months thereafter,
a representative monthly sample of the coal used traditionally (not to
include trial or test coal blends) by each affected source shall be
collected from each of the units identified in subparagraph (b) and
analyzed to determine the average mercury content of the fuel for each
unit expressed in pounds of mercury input per ton of coal combusted at
each affected source. The mercury content of the coal derived from these
analyses for each affected source shall be multiplied by the average
annual throughput of coal for the period 2003, 2004, and 2005 (average
tons of coal combusted per year) for each respective affected source to
yield the average pounds of mercury input per year into each affected
source. The sum of these annual input pound averages from each affected
source shall equal the baseline mercury input.
                                             
 (b) Determination of the mercury content of the coal shall follow
appropriate ASTM testing procedures (ASTM D3684-01). For purposes of
baseline mercury input determination, coal sampling shall occur at
Merrimack Unit 1 and Unit 2, and at either Schiller Unit 4 or Unit 6,
which shall serve to represent all Schiller units. At least 4 of the
samples taken from each of these units shall correspond with the stack
testing done at each of these units under paragraph II.
                                             
 II. Baseline mercury emissions shall be determined as follows:
                                             
 (a) A minimum of 4 stack tests shall be conducted at each of the
units specified in subparagraph (b) using appropriate testing protocols,
to determine a statistically valid average mercury emissions rate for
each unit expressed in pounds of mercury emitted per ton of coal
combusted at each affected source. The rate for each affected source
shall be multiplied by the average annual throughput of coal for the
period 2003, 2004, and 2005 (average tons of coal combusted per year)
for each respective affected source to yield the average pounds of
mercury emitted per year from each affected source. The sum of these
annual emitted pound averages from each affected source shall equal the
baseline mercury emissions.
                                             
 (b) For purposes of the baseline mercury emissions determination,
stack tests shall be conducted at Merrimack Unit 1 and Unit 2, and at
either Schiller Unit 4 or Unit 6, which shall serve to represent all
Schiller units. If mercury emissions improvements are made or are being
made during the testing period, the stack tests shall be conducted
without the improvements running at the time of the tests.
                                             
 III. The owner shall provide its plans to accomplish the testing
requirements under paragraphs I and II to the department for its
approval. The owner shall provide written reports to the department, for
verification and approval, that include the test results and
calculations used to determine:
                                             
 (a) The baseline mercury input. The owner shall submit the report
no later than 15 months following the effective date of this section.
                                             
 (b) The baseline mercury emissions. The owner shall submit the
report no later than 18 months following the effective date of this
section.

**Source.** 2006, 105:1, eff. June 8, 2006.

### Section 125-O:15

 **125-O:15 Monitoring of Mercury Emissions. –** Prior to the
availability and operation of continuous emissions monitoring (CEM)
systems, and subsequent to the baseline emissions testing under RSA
125-O:14, II, stack tests or another methodology approved by the
department shall be conducted twice per year to determine mercury
emissions levels from the affected sources. Any stack tests performed
shall employ a federally recognized and approved methodology, proposed
by the owner and employing a test protocol approved by the department.
When a federal performance specification takes effect, and a mercury CEM
system capable of meeting the federal specifications becomes available,
a mercury CEM system, approved by the department, shall be installed at
Merrimack Units 1 and 2 and at other affected sources as deemed
appropriate by the department.

**Source.** 2006, 105:1, eff. June 8, 2006.

### Section 125-O:16

 **125-O:16 Economic Performance Incentives. –**
                                             
 I. (a) The department shall issue to the owner early emissions
reduction credits in the form of credits or fractions thereof for each
pound of mercury or fraction thereof reduced below the baseline mercury
emissions, on an annual basis, in the period prior to July 1, 2013.
Ratios of early reductions credits to pounds of mercury reduced shall be
as follows: 1.5 credits per pound reduced prior to July 1, 2008; 1.25
credits per pound for reductions between July 1, 2008 and December 31,
2010; and 1.1 credits per pound for reductions between January 1, 2011
and July 1, 2013.
                                             
 (b) Reductions shall be calculated based upon the results of
stack tests conducted, measurement by continuous emission monitoring, or
other methodology approved by the department to confirm emissions during
the time of operation of mercury reduction technology. Early emissions
reduction credits may be banked by the owner or utilized after July 1,
2013 to meet the reduction requirement of RSA 125-O:13, II as allowed
under RSA 125-O:13, VII. Early emissions reduction credits are not
sellable or transferable to non-affected sources; however, upon the July
1, 2013 compliance date, the owner may request a one-for-one conversion
of early emissions reduction credits to over-compliance credits.
                                             
 (c) Should a federal rule applicable to mercury emissions at one
or more of the affected sources be enacted with an implementation date
prior to July 1, 2013, then early reduction credits may only be earned
for emissions reductions that exceed the level required by the federal
rule of the affected sources in aggregate or the baseline mercury
emissions level, whichever is lower, at the same ratios listed in
subparagraph (a).
                                             
 (d) Early emissions reduction credits shall not be used for
compliance with the requirement of RSA 125-O:13, II prior to the
installation of scrubber technology, and shall not be used as a means to
delay the installation of the scrubber technology.
                                             
 II. (a) The department shall issue to the owner over-compliance
credits in the form of credits or fractions thereof for each pound of
mercury or fraction thereof reduced in excess of the emissions reduction
requirement of RSA 125-O:13, II, on an annual basis, following the
compliance date of July 1, 2013. The ratios of over-compliance credits
to excess pounds of mercury reduced shall be as follows: 0.5 credits per
pound reduced for reductions between 80 and 85 percent; 1 credit per
pound reduced for reductions between 85 and 90 percent reduction; and
1.5 credits per pound reduced for reductions of 90 percent or greater.
Over-compliance credits may be banked for future use. The requirements
of RSA 125-O:13, V shall not alter the emissions levels at which
over-compliance credits are earned.
                                             
 (b) Should a federal rule applicable to mercury emissions at one
or more of the affected sources be enacted, then over-compliance credits
may only be earned for emissions reductions that exceed the level
required by the federal rule of the affected sources in aggregate or the
requirement of RSA 125-O:13, II, whichever is lower, at the same ratios
listed in subparagraph (a).
                                             
 (c) At the request of the owner of an affected source,
over-compliance credits may be surrendered by the owner to the
department and SO~2~ allowances shall be transferred to the owner at a
rate of 55 tons SO~2~ allowances for every one over-compliance credit.
Transfer shall be limited to a maximum of 20,000 total tons SO~2~
allowances transferred in a given year, defined as the sum of all SO~2~
allowances received by the affected sources under RSA 125-O:4, IV(a)(2)
and IV(a)(3), and under this subparagraph. SO~2~ allowances shall be
credited to the affected sources' accounts in the following year in
accordance with RSA 125-O:4, IV(a)(4).

**Source.** 2006, 105:1, eff. June 8, 2006.

### Section 125-O:17

 **125-O:17 Variances. –** The owner may request a variance from the
mercury emissions reduction requirements of this subdivision by
submitting a written request to the department. The request shall
provide sufficient information concerning the conditions or special
circumstances on which the variance request is based to demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the department that variance from the applicable
requirements is necessary.
                                             
 I. Where an alternative schedule is sought, the owner shall submit a
proposed schedule which demonstrates reasonable further progress and
contains a date for final compliance as soon as practicable. If the
department deems such a delay is reasonable under the cited
circumstances, it shall grant the requested variance.
                                             
 II. Where an alternative reduction requirement is sought, the owner
shall submit information to substantiate an energy supply crisis, a
major fuel disruption, an unanticipated or unavoidable disruption in the
operations of the affected sources, or technological or economic
infeasibility. The department, after consultation with the public
utilities commission, shall grant or deny the requested variance. If
requested by the owner, the department shall provide the owner with an
opportunity for a hearing on the request.

**Source.** 2006, 105:1, eff. June 8, 2006.

### Section 125-O:18

 **125-O:18 Cost Recovery. –** If the owner is a regulated utility,
the owner shall be allowed to recover all prudent costs of complying
with the requirements of this subdivision in a manner approved by the
public utilities commission. During ownership and operation by the
regulated utility, such costs shall be recovered via the utility's
default service charge. In the event of divestiture of affected sources
by the regulated utility, such divestiture and recovery of costs shall
be governed by the provisions of RSA 369:B:3-a.

**Source.** 2006, 105:1, eff. June 8, 2006.

Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative
----------------------------------

### Section 125-O:19

 **125-O:19 Statement of Purpose and Findings. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012,
281:10, II, eff. Jan. 1, 2013.
                                             ]

### Section 125-O:20


                                             


                                             [RSA 125-O:20 repealed by 2012, 281:11, II, effective as provided by
2012, 281:17.
                                             ]

 **125-O:20 Definitions. –**
                                             
 In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Affected CO~2~ source'' means any source with one or more fossil
fuel-fired electricity generating units having a nameplate rated
capacity equal to or greater than 25 megawatts.
                                             
 II. "Budget allowances'' means those RGGI allowances comprising the
state annual budget for CO~2~ emissions specified in RSA 125-O:21, II.
                                             
 III. "Commission'' means the public utilities commission.
                                             
 IV. "Compliance period'' means a 3 calendar year time period. The
first compliance period is from January 1, 2009 to December 31, 2011.
Each subsequent sequential 3 calendar year period is a separate
compliance period.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 VII. "Early reduction allowances'' means allowances provided to
affected CO~2~ sources for eligible projects undertaken which have the
effect of reducing emissions at the affected CO~2~ source by an absolute
reduction of emissions during calendar years 2006, 2007, and 2008, from
a baseline approved by the department, through emission rate
improvements or permanently reducing utilization of one or more units at
a source.
                                             
 VII-a. "FCPBA'' means "first compliance period banked allowances''
which equals all of the 2009, 2010, and 2011 vintage RGGI allowances
that are banked by any person, excluding any state participating in the
RGGI program, as of January 1, 2014, multiplied by 8,620,460 and divided
by the product of 165,184,246 times 7.
                                             
 VIII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IX. "Market settling period'' means the first 14 months of any
compliance period.
                                             
 X. "Offset allowances'' means allowances issued to projects
determined to be eligible by the department undertaken outside of the
electric power sector to reduce CO~2~ or CO~2~ equivalent emissions.
                                             
 XI. "PSNH'' means Public Service Company of New Hampshire or any
successor to the company's public utility franchise.
                                             
 XII. "Regional greenhouse gas initiative'' or "RGGI'' or "RGGI
program'' means the program to implement the memorandum of understanding
(MOU) between signatory states, dated December 20, 2005, as amended, and
the corresponding model rule as amended February 7, 2013, to establish a
regional CO~2~ emissions budget and allowance trading program for
emissions from fossil fuel-fired electricity generating units.
                                             
 XIII. "Regional organization'' means a non-profit organization
formed by the signatory states to RGGI to provide technical and
administrative assistance for such things as: emissions and allowance
tracking, offsets development and implementation, allowance market
monitoring, and data collection. The organization shall have no
regulatory or enforcement authority.
                                             
 XIV. "Retire'' means submitting a RGGI allowance to the department
for compliance or other purpose or retaining a RGGI allowance by the
department such that the allowance may never be sold or otherwise used
again.
                                             
 XV. "RGGI allowance'' means a limited authorization to emit one ton
of CO~2~ issued by the department or other RGGI signatory state in
accordance with this subdivision or the RGGI program and shall include
budget allowances, offset allowances, and early reduction allowances.
                                             
 XV-a. "SCPBA'' means "second compliance period banked allowances''
which equals all of the 2012 and 2013 vintage RGGI allowances that are
banked by any person, excluding any state participating in the RGGI
program, as of March 15, 2014, minus the total 2012 & 2013 CO~2~
emissions from all regional sources subject to RGGI, multiplied by
8,620,460 and divided by the product of 165,184,246 times 6.
                                             
 XVI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XVII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 2008, 182:2. 2013, 236:2-5, 15, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 125-O:21


                                             


                                             [RSA 125-O:21 repealed by 2012, 281:11, II, effective as provided by
2012, 281:17.
                                             ]

 **125-O:21 Carbon Dioxide Emissions Budget Trading Program. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall establish and enforce a CO~2~ emissions
budget trading program consistent with this subdivision that shall be in
substantial accordance with the RGGI program.
                                             
 II. The program shall include a statewide budget allowance total for
each year calculated as follows:

     2014 4,749,011 minus FCPBA 
     2015 4,630,286 minus FCPBA minus SCPBA 
     2016 4,514,529 minus FCPBA minus SCPBA 
     2017 4,401,665 minus FCPBA minus SCPBA 
     2018 4,291,624 minus FCPBA minus SCPBA 
     2019 4,184,333 minus FCPBA minus SCPBA 
     2020 4,079,725 minus FCPBA minus SCPBA 
     2021 and thereafter 4,079,725 


                                             
 III. The department shall make available for sale at one or more
auctions all of the budget allowances for a given year, except for those
granted or reserved under RSA 125-O:22, VI, 125-O:24, and 125-O:25. The
department may also make available for sale at one or more auctions a
portion of future year budget allowances. Such auctions may be conducted
in coordination with other states. Revenues from the sale of allowances
shall be deposited in the energy efficiency fund established under RSA
125-O:23.
                                             
 III-a. Budget allowances that are required to be made available for
sale at auction under paragraph III, but remain unsold, shall not be
retired by the department, and may be used for cost containment purposes
under RSA 125-O:29.
                                             
 IV. The department shall grant to affected CO~2~ sources early
reduction allowances, at no cost, for projects eligible to receive such
allowances.
                                             
 V. The department shall grant offset allowances to owners of
eligible offset projects located in New Hampshire.
                                             
 VI. The department and the commission shall report on an annual
basis to the air pollution advisory committee under RSA 125-J:11 and the
legislative oversight committee on electric utility restructuring under
RSA 374-F:5, on the status of the implementation of RGGI in New
Hampshire, with emphasis on the prices and availability of RGGI
allowances to affected CO~2~ sources, consumer protection mechanisms,
and the trends in electric rates for New Hampshire businesses and
ratepayers. The report shall include but not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) The number of allowances sold in the RGGI program and the
type of entities purchasing allowances;
                                             
 (b) The number of unsold allowances in the RGGI program;
                                             
 (c) The available price data of allowances from the regional
auction and secondary markets;
                                             
 (d) Market monitoring reports;
                                             
 (e) The CO~2~ emissions by affected source, state, and RGGI
region;
                                             
 (f) The spending of revenues from auction allowances by each RGGI
state; and
                                             
 (g) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (h) The status of any proposed or adopted federal CO~2~ cap and
trade program, the impact on New Hampshire's RGGI program, and
recommendations for any proposed legislation necessary to accommodate
the federal program; and
                                             
 (i) Effectiveness of allowance price control and consumer
protection mechanisms, including, but not limited to, offsets, cost
containment reserves, cost thresholds, and consumer rebates.
                                             
 VII. The department may establish and enforce the CO~2~ emissions
budget trading program in cooperation and coordination with other states
or countries that are participating in regional, national or
international CO~2~ emissions trading programs with the same or similar
purpose including:
                                             
 (a) Entering into any agreement or arrangement with the
representatives of other states, including the formation of a for-profit
or non-profit corporation, any form of association or any other form of
organization, in this or another state; and
                                             
 (b) Participating in any such corporation, association, or
organization, and in any activity in furtherance of the purposes of this
subdivision, in any capacity including, but not limited to, as directors
or officers.
                                             
 VIII. Any actions taken under this subdivision by the department or
the commission shall not constitute a waiver of sovereign immunity and
shall not be deemed consent to suit outside of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 2008, 182:2. 2012, 281:3, 10, III. 2013, 236:6-9, eff. Jan.
1, 2014.

### Section 125-O:22


                                             


                                             [RSA 125-O:22 repealed by 2012, 281:11, II, effective as provided by
2012, 281:17.
                                             ]

 **125-O:22 Compliance; Permit Required. –**
                                             
 I. Each affected CO~2~ source shall obtain and retire a quantity of
RGGI allowances equivalent to its CO~2~ emissions from fossil-fuel fired
generation for each compliance period. Such retirement shall be done in
stages. At the end of both the first and second year of the compliance
period, RGGI allowances equal to 1/2 of the affected source's CO~2~
emissions during each respective year shall be retired. At the end of
the third year of the compliance period, the balance of the total
allowances due shall be retired. The retirement of allowances at the end
of the first and second year shall not apply to the compliance period
ending December 31, 2014.
                                             
 II. An affected CO~2~ source may use offset allowances for up to 3.3
percent of its compliance obligation.
                                             
 III. Purchasers or acquirers of RGGI allowances may retain unused
RGGI allowances without limit. Affected CO~2~ sources may use retained
RGGI allowances in future compliance periods.
                                             
 IV. No person shall operate an affected CO~2~ source without a
temporary or operating permit issued by the department in accordance
with this chapter and RSA 125-C. An affected CO~2~ source that is in
operation upon the effective date of this subdivision, shall submit a
complete application for a permit modification to the department no
later than January 1, 2009. Applications for permits shall be upon such
forms, and shall include such information as the commissioner requires
under rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A. The commissioner shall act
upon a permit application within a reasonable period of time.
                                             
 V. In addition to the provisions set forth in RSA 125-O:7, an
affected CO~2~ source that fails to obtain and retire sufficient RGGI
allowances during a compliance period, in accordance with RSA 125-O:22,
I, shall obtain and surrender 3 RGGI budget or early reduction
allowances in the next compliance period for each RGGI allowance that
the affected CO~2~ source was short in obtaining compliance.
                                             
 VI. Budget allowances shall be provided to affected CO~2~ sources as
needed and upon request for CO~2~ emissions in periods of operation
during which an Operating Procedure 4 capacity deficiency alert is in
force as established by the ISO New England Inc. The department shall
reserve from auction for such emergency conditions a quantity of
allowances equal to one percent of the annual budget allowances which
shall be the maximum made available in a given year under this
paragraph. The department shall directly sell these allowances to the
affected CO~2~ sources at the last regional auction clearing price.
Those allowances reserved but not sold in a given year as provided in
this paragraph shall be auctioned the following calendar year.
                                             
 VII. Upon recommendation of the commission, the governor with
consent of the executive council may declare an emergency supply crisis,
and the governor and council may allow affected CO~2~ sources to forgo
strict compliance with paragraph I for a given compliance period and be
given reprieve from any associated penalties, provided that those
affected CO~2~ sources obtain and retire an additional number of
allowances during the next compliance period equivalent to any shortfall
in allowances that may have occurred for the compliance period during
which the declared emergency was made.
                                             
 VIII. A distribution company may recover the actual, prudent and
reasonable costs of investments in carbon emissions reduction or capture
technologies through its default service charge pursuant to RSA 369-B:3,
IV(b)(1)(A), provided that the commission first determines that the
investment is in the public interest.

**Source.** 2008, 182:2. 2013, 236:10, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 125-O:23


                                             


                                             [RSA 125-O:23 repealed by 2012, 281:11, II, effective as provided by
2012, 281:17.
                                             ]

 **125-O:23 Energy Efficiency Fund and Use of Auction Proceeds. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established an energy efficiency fund. This
nonlapsing, special fund shall be continually appropriated to the
commission to be expended in accordance with this section. The state
treasurer shall invest the moneys deposited therein, as provided by law.
Income received on investments made by the state treasurer shall also be
credited to the fund. All programs supported by these funds shall be
subject to audit by the commission as deemed necessary. A portion of the
fund moneys shall be used to pay for commission and department costs to
administer this subdivision, including contributions for the state's
share of the costs of the RGGI regional organization. No fund moneys
shall be used by the commission or the department to contract with
outside consultants. The commission shall transfer from the fund to the
department such costs as may be budgeted and expended, or otherwise
approved by the fiscal committee of the general court and the governor
and council, for the department's cost of administering this
subdivision.
                                             
 II. All amounts in excess of the threshold price of 
                                             $1 for any
allowance sale shall be rebated to all retail electric ratepayers in the
state on a per-kilowatt-hour basis, in a timely manner to be determined
by the commission.
                                             
 III. All remaining proceeds received by the state from the sale of
allowances, excluding the amount used for commission and department
administration under paragraph I, shall be allocated by the commission
as follows:
                                             
 (a) At least 15 percent to the low-income core energy efficiency
program.
                                             
 (b) Beginning January 1, 2014, up to 
                                             $2,000,000 annually to
utility core programs for municipal and local government energy
efficiency projects, including projects by local governments that have
their own municipal utilities. Funding elements shall include, but not
be limited to, funding for direct technical and project management
assistance to identify and encourage comprehensive projects and
incentives structured to assist municipal and local governments funding
energy efficiency projects. In calendar years 2014, 2015, and 2016, any
unused funds allocated to municipal and local government projects under
this paragraph remaining at the end of the year shall roll over and be
added to the new calendar year program funds and continue to be made
available exclusively for municipal and local government projects.
Beginning in calendar year 2017, and all subsequent years, funds
allocated to municipal and local government projects under this
paragraph shall be offered first to municipal and local governments as
described in this paragraph for no less than 4 full calendar months. If,
at the end of this time, municipal and local governments have not
submitted requests for eligible projects that will expend the funds
allocated to municipal and local government projects under this
paragraph within that program year, the funds shall be offered on a
first-come, first-serve basis to business and municipal customers who
fund the system benefits charge.
                                             
 (c) The remainder to all-fuels, comprehensive energy efficiency
programs administered by qualified parties which may include electric
distribution companies as selected through a competitive bid process.
The funding shall be distributed among residential, commercial, and
industrial customers based upon each customer class's electricity usage
to the greatest extent practicable as determined by the commission. Bids
shall be evaluated based on, but not limited to, the following
criteria:
                                             
 (1) A benefit/cost ratio analysis including all fuels.
                                             
 (2) Demonstrated ability to provide a comprehensive, fuel
neutral program.
                                             
 (3) Demonstrated infrastructure to effectively deliver such
program.
                                             
 (4) Experience of the bidder in administering energy
efficiency programs.
                                             
 (5) Ability to reach out to customers.
                                             
 (6) The validity of the energy saving assumptions described in
the bid.
                                             
 IV. The electric division of the commission shall conduct a
competitive bid process for the selection of programs to be funded under
subparagraph III(c), with such funding to begin January 1, 2015. The
commission may petition the governor and council to extend existing
contracts until such time as the competitive bids are approved by the
governor and council, but in no event later than July 1, 2015. The
competitive bid process shall be repeated every 3 years thereafter.
Before extending any existing program, public comment on the proposed
extension shall be accepted.
                                             
 V. Each entity receiving funding under subparagraph III(c) shall
file an annual report on the performance of the entity's program. The
commission shall establish the format, content, and the methodologies
used to provide the content of the reports. The commission shall make
use of, as applicable and appropriate, the monitoring and verification
requirements used in the natural gas and electric utility core programs.
The annual reports shall be delivered to the governor, the president of
the senate, the speaker of the house of representatives, the chairmen of
the senate and house standing committees with jurisdiction over energy
matters, and the chairman of the public utilities commission. The
reports shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
                                             
 (a) Program expenditures, including direct customer installation
costs.
                                             
 (b) Resulting actual and projected energy savings by fuel type
and associated CO~2~ emissions reductions.
                                             
 (c) Any measurement and verification data that corroborate
projected savings.
                                             
 (d) The number of customers served by the programs.
                                             
 (e) Other data as required by the commission in order to
determine program effectiveness.

**Source.** 2008, 182:2. 2009, 236:2. 2012, 281:4. 2013, 236:11, 240:1;
269:2. 2014, 330:1, 2, eff. Oct. 3, 2014.

### Section 125-O:24


                                             


                                             [RSA 125-O:24 repealed by 2012, 281:11, II, effective as provided by
2012, 281:17.
                                             ]

 **125-O:24 Conversion of Allowances. –**
                                             
 I. PSNH shall receive credit for allowances received prior to the
inception of the RGGI program in the manner described in this section.
                                             
 II. PSNH shall submit all necessary documentation to the department
by January 30, 2009 relative to compliance with RSA 125-O:3, III(d).
                                             
 III. PSNH shall submit all necessary documentation to the department
within 90 days of the effective date of this paragraph relative to RSA
125-O:5, III.
                                             
 IV. As soon as practicable after the start of the program, the
department shall determine the number of allowances previously allocated
to PSNH under RSA 125-O:3, II or awarded to PSNH under RSA 125-O:5, III,
that remain in PSNH's account of CO~2~ allowances held by the department
as banked allowances, after the company has completed compliance with
the emissions cap of RSA 125-O:3, III(d) for the 2007 and 2008 calendar
years.
                                             
 V. At the distribution rate specified in paragraph VI, the
department shall grant to PSNH budget allowances, at no cost, equivalent
to the total of the banked allowances pursuant to paragraph IV minus the
early reduction allowances granted to PSNH under RSA 125-O:21, IV. PSNH
shall be obligated to apply for early reduction allowances for any
eligible projects it has undertaken.
                                             
 VI. The department shall grant budget allowances pursuant to this
section as expeditiously as possible, but in no event shall the amount
of budget allowances granted pursuant to this section total more than
2.5 million allowances per year in years 2009, 2010, and 2011, and 1.5
million allowances in each year thereafter. For each budget allowance
granted, one banked allowance shall be retired.
                                             
 VII. In the event the state no longer participates in the RGGI
program due to legislative action or the RGGI program becomes invalid or
unenforceable as determined by the department and certified to the
secretary of state, the department shall cease granting budget
allowances pursuant to paragraphs V and VI. Notwithstanding the other
provisions of this section, PSNH shall have no right or claim to receive
any additional budget allowances under this section beyond those already
granted to it up to that point in time when participation in the program
has ceased or the program has become invalid or unenforceable. If this
point in time occurs part way through a year, the number of budget
allowances given to PSNH for that year shall be pro-rated based on the
distribution rate in effect for that year, provided the total amount of
allowances calculated pursuant to paragraph IV has not already been
granted to PSNH.
                                             
 VIII. The department shall not grant budget allowances after
December 31, 2014 pursuant to this section without legislative
authorization to continue the granting of allowances. Notwithstanding
the other provisions of this section, PSNH shall have no right or claim
to receive any additional budget allowances under this section beyond
those already granted by December 31, 2014, should the legislature not
authorize continuation of the allowance granting.
                                             
 IX. No remaining banked allowances held by the department
originating from the calculation performed under paragraph IV, shall be
used for RGGI compliance purposes after the department ceases to grant
budget allowances in accordance with paragraph VII or VIII. These
remaining banked allowances shall not be used for compliance or
exchanged for value in any existing or future federal program. When
developing future state programs, the legislature may recognize the
existence of these remaining banked allowances when determining the
future compliance obligations of PSNH.

**Source.** 2008, 182:2, eff. June 11, 2008.

### Section 125-O:25


                                             


                                             [RSA 125-O:25 repealed by 2012, 281:11, II, effective as provided by
2012, 281:17.
                                             ]

 **125-O:25 Set Aside for Voluntary Purchase of Renewable Energy
Certificates. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall reserve from auction, for retirement
purposes, a quantity of budget allowances, not to exceed one percent of
the annual budget, equivalent to the CO~2~ emissions reductions
associated with renewable energy certificates recognized under RSA 362-F
and purchased voluntarily by electricity customers and not resold.
                                             
 II. Budgeted allowances reserved under paragraph I not retired at
the end of each year shall be auctioned the following calendar year.

**Source.** 2008, 182:2, eff. June 11, 2008.

### Section 125-O:26


                                             


                                             [RSA 125-O:26 repealed by 2012, 281:11, II, effective as provided by
2012, 281:17.
                                             ]

 **125-O:26 Auction of Budget Allowances. –**
                                             
 Any rules adopted by the department relative to auctions, pursuant
to RSA 125-O:8, I(d), shall provide that they:
                                             
 I. Shall be conducted based on the schedule and frequency adopted by
the department in consultation with other entities participating in the
RGGI program;
                                             
 II. Shall include the sale of allowances for current years and may
include the sale of allowances for future years to promote transparency
and price stability in a manner to be determined by the department in
coordination with the regional organization;
                                             
 III. Shall include auction design elements that minimize allowance
price volatility, guard against bidder collusion, and mitigate the
potential for market manipulation;
                                             
 IV. Shall include provisions to address, and to the extent
practicable minimize, the potential for allowance market price
volatility during the initial control period of the RGGI program;
                                             
 V. Shall include provisions to ensure the continued market
availability of allowances to entities regulated under a greenhouse gas
emissions allowance trading program, taking into account the outcomes of
auctions and monitoring of the allowance market, which may include the
adoption of a flexible process that allows for ongoing modification of
auction design and procedures in response to allowance market conditions
and allowance market monitoring data, provided that the process allows
for public comment and input; and
                                             
 VI. May be open to all qualified participants, and all qualified
participants may sell or otherwise agree to transfer any or all
allowances to any eligible entity.

**Source.** 2008, 182:2. 2013, 236:12, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 125-O:27


                                             


                                             [RSA 125-O:27 is repealed by 2012, 281:11, II, effective as provided by
2012, 281:17.
                                             ]

 **125-O:27 Review of the New Hampshire RGGI Program. –**
                                             
 At the time of the 2016 comprehensive review by the participating
states, the commission and the department shall concurrently review New
Hampshire specific elements of the RGGI program, and include the results
of such review and any recommendations for revisions to the New
Hampshire regional greenhouse gas initiative program under RSA
125-O:19-29, resulting from this review in the agencies' annual report
under RSA 125-O:21, VI.

**Source.** 2008, 182:2. 2012, 281:5. 2013, 236:13, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 125-O:28


                                             


                                             [RSA 125-O:28 repealed by 2012, 281:11, II, effective as provided by
2012, 281:17.
                                             ]

 **125-O:28 Cost Recovery. –**
                                             
 If the owner of an affected CO~2~ source is a public utility
pursuant to RSA 362:2 that provides electric distribution service
pursuant to RSA 374-F, the owner may recover through the utility's
default service charge all prudently incurred costs of complying with
the requirements of this subdivision in a manner approved by the
commission. In the event PSNH sells an affected CO~2~ source, any cost
recovery associated with this chapter shall be governed by RSA
369-B:3-a.

**Source.** 2008, 182:2, eff. June 11, 2008.

### Section 125-O:29

 **125-O:29 Cost Containment Allowances in Addition to the Budget.
–**
                                             
 I. For the purposes of cost containment, the department shall make
available for sale at one or more auctions up to 260,935 allowances for
2014 or, for any year thereafter, up to 521,869 allowances, that shall
be in addition to the budget allowance total for the given year under
RSA 125-O:21, II, if:
                                             
 (a) The CO~2~ allowance auction price equals or exceeds 
                                             $4 in
2014;
                                             
 (b) The CO~2~ allowance auction price equals or exceeds 
                                             $6 in
2015;
                                             
 (c) The CO~2~ allowance auction price equals or exceeds 
                                             $8 in
2016;
                                             
 (d) The CO~2~ allowance auction price equals or exceeds 
                                             $10 in
2017;
                                             
 (e) The CO~2~ allowance auction price equals or exceeds 
                                             $10.25
in 2018;
                                             
 (f) The CO~2~ allowance auction price equals or exceeds 
                                             $10.51
in 2019;
                                             
 (g) The CO~2~ allowance auction price equals or exceeds 
                                             $10.77
in 2020; or
                                             
 (h) In any year thereafter, the CO~2~ allowance auction price
equals or exceeds 1.025 multiplied by the auction price at which cost
containment allowances were required to be made available in the
previous calendar year rounded to the nearest whole cent, until further
legislative action.
                                             
 II. The allowances sold pursuant to paragraph I shall be
replenished, such that the full 521,869 allowances, if needed, are
available the following calendar year.

**Source.** 2013, 236:14, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.
