---
title: CHAPTER 125 GENERAL PROVISIONS
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 125
                                             
GENERAL PROVISIONS
------------------

### Section 125:1

 **125:1 Composition of Health Department. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986,
198:23, I, eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:2

 **125:2 Powers and Duties of Health Department. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986,
198:23, II, eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:3

 **125:3 Assistance to Cancer Commission. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1959, 106:2,
eff. July 1, 1959.
                                             ]

### Section 125:4

 **125:4 Division on Alcoholism. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, IV,
eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:5

 **125:5 Registration and Examining Boards. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986,
198:23, V, eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

Department of Health and Human Services
---------------------------------------

### Section 125:6-8

 **125:6 to 125:8 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1961, 222:6, I, eff. July
1, 1962.
                                             ]

### Section 125:8-a

 **125:8-a Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to provide
measures to improve and preserve the health of the citizens of this
state.

**Source.** 1986, 198:1, eff. Aug. 2, 1986.

### Section 125:9

 **125:9 Duties. –** The commissioner of the department of health and
human services shall:
                                             
 I. Take cognizance of the interests of health and life among the
people.
                                             
 II. Make investigations and inquiries concerning the causes of
epidemics and other diseases, the sources of morbidity and mortality,
and the effects of localities, employments, conditions, circumstances,
and the environment on the public health. Investigations authorized
under this paragraph shall also include an extended rabies surveillance
effort which shall be conducted with assistance from the department of
agriculture, markets, and food and the fish and game department.
                                             
 III. Advise and assist town health officers in making investigations
into sanitary matters in their towns.
                                             
 IV. Take measures to communicate such information as necessary on
the improvement and preservation of health.
                                             
 V. Recommend to the director of motor vehicles the procedures
necessary under RSA 125:9-a.
                                             
 VI. Recognize the public health aspects relating to drugs and food
under RSA 125:10.
                                             
 VII. Verify sanitary conditions of public buildings under RSA
125:11.
                                             
 VIII. Equip and maintain a first-aid room under RSA 125:13-a.
                                             
 IX. Develop or designate a statewide program for poison information
and treatment under RSA 126-A:49.
                                             
 X. Investigate complaints of poor indoor air quality and conduct
inspections of buildings and dwellings, upon request, for the presence
of radon or other health hazards present in indoor air; and provide
education, technical consultation, and recommendations for abatement of
such health hazards in conjunction with the University of New Hampshire
cooperative extension.
                                             
 XI. Consult with and assist the executive director, department of
fish and game in the review and approval of off highway recreational
vehicle safety training courses.
                                             
 XII. Nominate a person duly qualified by training and experience for
appointment by the governor and council to serve as the state physician
epidemiologist who shall receive a salary in accordance with RSA 94:1-a.
Upon appointment, the physician epidemiologist shall serve for a term of
4 years and until a successor is appointed. Any vacancy shall be filled
for the full 4-year term in the same manner as the original appointment.
The provisions of RSA 21:33-a shall not apply to appointments made under
this paragraph.
                                             
 XIII. Nominate a person duly qualified by training and experience
for appointment by the governor and council to serve as the state senior
physician/dentist who shall receive a salary in accordance with RSA
94:1-a. Upon appointment, the senior physician/dentist shall serve for a
term of 4 years and until a successor is appointed. Any vacancy shall be
filled for the full 4-year term in the same manner as the original
appointment. The provisions of RSA 21:33-a shall not apply to
appointments made under this paragraph.
                                             
 XIV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1881, 64:6. PS 107:3. PL 125:5. RL 147:5. RSA 125:9. 1983,
291:1, I. 1986, 198:2. 1988, 118:1; 264:9. 1992, 206:2. 1994, 284:2;
403:3. 1995, 130:4; 134:23; 310:7, 182, 197. 2003, 319:97, II, eff. Jan.
1, 2004.

### Section 125:9-a

 **125:9-a Medical Advice to Director of Motor Vehicles. –** It shall
be the duty of the department of health and human services to recommend
to the director of motor vehicles the policies and procedures to be
followed by the state with respect to all medical aspects of licensing
drivers, enforcement, including but not limited to differentiating
between ill and intoxicated drivers, and accident investigation,
including but not limited to examination of the dead for alcohol and
drugs.

**Source.** 1967, 282:1. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125:10

 **125:10 Drugs; Foods. –** The commissioner of the department of
health and human services shall take cognizance of the interests of the
public health, relating to the sale of drugs and foods and the
adulteration of such drugs and foods and shall make all necessary
investigations and inquiries in reference to them. For these purposes he
may appoint, within available appropriations and subject to rules
adopted by the director of personnel, inspectors, analysts, and
chemists, who shall be subject to his supervision and removal.

**Source.** 1891, 39:5. PS 107:4. PL 125:6. RL 147:6. 1950, 9:2. RSA
125:10. 1986, 198:3. 1995, 310:182, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125:11

 **125:11 Public Buildings. –** The commissioner of the department of
health and human services shall take cognizance of the sanitary
condition of all public buildings, hospitals, penal institutions, and
facilities for the detention of minors, whether state or county.

**Source.** 1881, 64:3. 1889, 18:4. PS 107:5. PL 125:7. RL 147:7. RSA
125:11. 1986, 198:4. 1995, 310:182, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125:12

 **125:12 Destruction of Certain Records. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986,
198:23, VI, eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:12-a

 **125:12-a Destruction of Records. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, VII,
eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:13

 **125:13 Office; Information. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, VIII,
eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:13-a

 **125:13-a Health Service Room. –** The legislative facilities
committee shall equip and maintain a health service room in such
location in the state house as may be assigned for such purpose. Said
room shall be staffed by a licensed registered nurse employed by the
legislative facilities committee, and the room shall be kept open at all
times when the state house is open for business. The expense of the
health service room, including a contract nurse, shall be a charge upon
the joint expenses appropriation to the general court. The department of
health and human services may, in the event of the absence of the
employed nurse, provide from its staff a licensed registered nurse on a
temporary basis. The department of health and human services is further
authorized, in the event the department cannot provide a licensed
registered nurse, to negotiate a contract for the legislative facilities
committee with a nursing service for the purpose of staffing the health
service room in the event of an absence of the employed nurse. The daily
coordination of the contract nurse shall be accomplished jointly with
the house chief of staff and the department of health and human
services. The commissioner of the department of health and human
services shall provide medical supervision for the employed nurse, for
any temporarily assigned nurse and, if necessary, for any contracted
nursing service.

**Source.** 1957, 245:1. RSA 125:13-a. 1983, 291:1, I. 1992, 289:31.
1994, 82:1. 1995, 310:175, 181, 182, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125:14

 **125:14 Reports. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, IX, eff. Aug. 2,
1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:15

 **125:15 Powers Generally. –** The commissioner of the department of
health and human services shall have authority:
                                             
 I. To receive and expend all funds made available to the department
by the federal government, the state or its political subdivisions, or
from other sources for general activities for health promotion,
providing adequate facilities for promotion and administrative guidance
of local health services, and the training of personnel employed or to
be employed in the department or local health departments.
                                             
 II. To receive and expend any reimbursements for expenditures
previously made for such purposes.
                                             
 III. To cooperate with the federal government, through its
appropriate agencies or instrumentalities, and with other state and
local agencies and organizations in developing and administering public
health activities as provided for in this section.

**Source.** 1939, 92:1. RL 147:12. RSA 125:15. 1983, 291:1, I. 1985,
190:20. 1986, 198:5. 1995, 310:68, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125:15-a

 **125:15-a Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of the department of
health and human services shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A relative
to:
                                             
 I. The administration of the provisions of RSA 125:9 through
125:15.
                                             
 II. The administration of occupational health programs under RSA
140.
                                             
 III. The qualifications of the district health officer under RSA
127:6.
                                             
 IV. The definition of a toxic substance under RSA 277-A:3, V.
                                             
 V. The laboratory services to be provided and fees to be charged
under RSA 131:4.
                                             
 VI. The methods and procedures for requesting and conducting
inspections pursuant to RSA 125:9, X, and the provision of technical
consultation and recommendations that may result from such inspections.
                                             
 VII. The methods and procedures necessary to conduct the rabies
surveillance effort with the assistance of the department of
agriculture, markets, and food and the fish and game department, as
required under RSA 125:9, II.
                                             
 VIII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1985, 190:19. 1986, 198:6. 1988, 118:2. 1989, 353:2. 1992,
206:3. 1993, 334:1. 1995, 130:4; 310:182. 2000, 77:1. 2003, 319:88.
2006, 226:2, eff. July 1, 2006.

### Section 125:15-b

 **125:15-b Access to Laboratory Data and Results. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2011, 224:97, eff. July 1, 2011.
                                             ]

Occupational and Health Safety Programs
---------------------------------------

### Section 125:16

 **125:16 Public Policy. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, X, eff. Aug. 2,
1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:16-a

 **125:16-a Purpose. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XI, eff. Aug. 2,
1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:16-b

 **125:16-b Definitions. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XII, eff. Aug.
2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:16-c

 **125:16-c Occupational Health Unit. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23,
XIII, eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:16-d

 **125:16-d Conflicting Laws. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XIV, eff.
Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:17

 **125:17 Duties of Commissioner of Labor. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983,
410:3, I, eff. Aug. 22, 1983.
                                             ]

### Section 125:18

 **125:18 Penalty on Noncomplying Employer. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983,
410:3, II, eff. Aug. 22, 1983.
                                             ]

State Health Officer
--------------------

### Section 125:19-21

 **125:19 to 125:21 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 190:15, eff. May
29, 1985.
                                             ]

Licensing and Registering Boards
--------------------------------

### Section 125:22

 **125:22 Prescribing Uniform Records. –** As far as practicable and
after consultation with the professional and trade licensing and
registering boards within the department of health and human services
the commissioner shall prescribe uniform procedures for all secretarial
and recording activities of the boards.

**Source.** 1950, 5, part 22:1, par. 30. RSA 125:22. 1983, 291:1, I.
1986, 198:7. 1995, 310:69, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125:23

 **125:23 Supervisory Powers. –** The commissioner of the department
of health and human services shall exercise general supervision over
such clerical personnel of the professional and trade licensing and
registering boards within the department of health and human services as
work within his office. All boards within the department, unless
otherwise stipulated in this chapter, shall reimburse the department for
all administrative support furnished them by the department.

**Source.** 1950, 5, part 22:1, par. 31. RSA 125:23. 1983, 291:1, I.
1985, 190:17. 1995, 310:70, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125:24

 **125:24 Assigning Office Space. –** The commissioner shall provide
necessary office space for each professional and trade licensing and
registering board within the department of health and human services.

**Source.** 1950, 5, part 22:1, par. 32. RSA 125:24. 1983, 291:1, I.
1986, 198:8. 1995, 310:71, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 125:25

 **125:25 Salary of Director of Division of Public Health Services.
–** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 310:170, II, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.
                                             ]

Disclosure of Ownership Interests by Health Care Practitioners
--------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 125:25-a

 **125:25-a Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Diagnostic service'' means providing any test to determine or
identify the nature of a disease, including laboratory and exploratory
tests.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 III. "Health care practitioner'' means any person licensed or
registered as a health care provider in the state of New Hampshire.
"Health care practitioner'' shall not include any person who has retired
from the practice of health care, or any person who does not hold a
current license or certificate to practice health care.
                                             
 IV. "Ownership interest'' means any and all ownership interest by a
health care practitioner or such person's spouse or child, including,
but not limited to, any membership, proprietary interest, stock
interest, partnership interest, co-ownership in any form, or any
profit-sharing arrangement. It shall not include ownership of investment
securities purchased by the practitioner on terms available to the
general public and which are publicly traded.
                                             
 V. "Therapeutic services'' means physical therapy, radiation
therapy, intravenous therapy and rehabilitation services including
physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech pathology or any
combination thereof.

**Source.** 1993, 334:2. 1995, 310:72. 2000, 77:2, eff. June 20, 2000.

### Section 125:25-b

 **125:25-b Disclosure of Ownership Interest to Patient. –**
                                             
 I. Any health care practitioner who has an ownership interest in an
entity which provides diagnostic or therapeutic services, or receives
compensation or remuneration for referral of such patient to an entity
which provides diagnostic or therapeutic services, shall disclose such
interest to any patient prior to referring the patient to such entity
for diagnostic or therapeutic services.
                                             
 II. Such information shall be disclosed on a written referral to
each patient at the time of referral; or, if referred by phone, verbal
disclosure shall be made at the time of referral and a written referral
shall be promptly sent to the patient.
                                             
 III. The referral shall contain the following written conspicuously
on its face:
                                             
 "The referring health care practitioner maintains an ownership
interest in the facility to which you are being referred. You are not
required to utilize the facility to which you are being referred for
these services. These services may be available elsewhere in the
community. This office will provide an alternative referral upon your
request.''
                                             
 IV. An entity which provides diagnostic and therapeutic services
shall include services provided by an entity within a hospital, but
which is not owned by the hospital.
                                             
 V. This section shall not apply to in-office diagnostic services.
                                             
 VI. Failure to provide written disclosure of an ownership interest
may result in suspension of one's professional license or registration.

**Source.** 1993, 334:2, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 125:25-c

 **125:25-c Disclosure to the Licensing Authority. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any health care
practitioner who has an ownership interest in an entity which provides
diagnostic or therapeutic services shall disclose such interest to the
appropriate licensing authority regardless of whether any referrals are
provided to the health care practitioner's entity or any other entity.
In the disclosure to the appropriate licensing authority, the health
care practitioner shall list all diagnostic and therapeutic services
provided by any entity in which the health care practitioner has an
ownership interest. Disclosure of ownership shall be made upon
application for and renewal of the health care practitioner's license,
on the application and renewal form.
                                             
 II. An entity which provides diagnostic and therapeutic services
shall include services provided by an entity within a hospital, but
which is not owned by the hospital.
                                             
 III. This section shall not apply to in-office ancillary services.
                                             
 IV. Failure to report such ownership interest may result in
disciplinary action by the licensing authority.

**Source.** 1993, 334:2. 1995, 310:73, 175, 181. 2000, 77:3. 2006,
226:1, eff. July 1, 2006.

Communicable Diseases in Unorganized Localities
-----------------------------------------------

### Section 125:26

 **125:26 Notice to Division. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XV, eff.
Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:27

 **125:27 Duties of Division. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XVI, eff.
Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:28

 **125:28 Sanitary Officer. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XVII, eff.
Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:29

 **125:29 Penalty. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XVIII, eff. Aug. 2,
1986.
                                             ]

Biologicals
-----------

### Section 125:30

 **125:30 Purchase, Distribution. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XIX,
eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:31

 **125:31 Rulemaking. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XX, eff. Aug. 2,
1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:32

 **125:32 Penalty for Sale or Use for Personal Gain. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1986, 198:23, XXI, eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

Recreation Camps
----------------

### Section 125:33-36

 **125:33 to 125:36 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1971, 254:2, eff. Aug.
22, 1971.
                                             ]

Private Nursery Schools and Private Kindergartens
-------------------------------------------------

### Section 125:37-41

 **125:37 to 125:41 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1969, 217:2, eff. Aug.
4, 1969.
                                             ]

Radiation Protection
--------------------

### Section 125:42-55.

 **125:42 to 125:55 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1963, 229:2, eff. July
2, 1963.
                                             ]

Radiation Protection and Radiation Control Program
--------------------------------------------------

### Section 125:56-77

 **125:56 to 125:77 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 169:4, eff. July
27, 1986.
                                             ]

Radioactive Waste Consultation
------------------------------

### Section 125:77-a

 **125:77-a Definitions. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1982, 30:6, eff. April 30,
1982.
                                             ]

### Section 125:77-b

 **125:77-b Prohibition. –** No person shall receive, store, or
dispose of radioactive waste or spent nuclear fuel in the state or
within the coastal jurisdiction of the state. Nothing in this
subdivision shall be construed to prohibit the use or interim on-site
storage of nuclear fuel or spent fuel, or in any way to abrogate or
amend an agreement entered into between the state and the United States
Atomic Energy Commission, or its successor, pursuant to section 274 of
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 as amended. Under no circumstances shall
spent nuclear fuel, originating from any location other than Seabrook
Station, be received for on-site storage within the state.

**Source.** 1979, 350:3. 1982, 30:5. 2001, 193:2, eff. Sept. 3, 2001.

### Section 125:77-c-77-f

 **125:77-c to 125:77-f Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1982, 30:6, eff.
April 30, 1982.
                                             ]

Task Force on Low-Level Radioactive Waste Management
----------------------------------------------------

### Section 125:77-g

 **125:77-g Definitions. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 78:1, I, eff. July 12,
1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:77-h

 **125:77-h Task Force Established. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 78:1, II,
eff. July 12, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:77-i

 **125:77-i Powers and Duties of the Task Force. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986,
78:1, III, eff. July 12, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:77-j

 **125:77-j Staff; Expenses. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 78:1, IV, eff. July
12, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 125:77-k

 **125:77-k Grants. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 78:1, V, eff. July 12,
1986.
                                             ]

Air Pollution Control
---------------------

### Section 125:78-89

 **125:78 to 125:89 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1979, 359:1, eff. July
1, 1979.
                                             ]

Permits
-------

### Section 125:90-94

 **125:90 to 125:94 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1979, 359:1, eff. July
1, 1979.
                                             ]

Hazardous Waste
---------------

### Section 125:95

 **125:95 Hazardous Waste. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XXII, eff.
Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]
