---
title: 'CHAPTER 126-J COUNCIL FOR YOUTHS WITH CHRONIC CONDITIONS'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 126-J
                                             
COUNCIL FOR YOUTHS WITH CHRONIC CONDITIONS
------------------------------------------

### Section 126-J:1

 **126-J:1 Council Established; Membership; Terms. –**
                                             
 I. There is established the council for youths with chronic
conditions and their families which shall consist of the following
members:
                                             
 (a) One member of the senate, appointed by the senate president.
                                             
 (b) One member of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house.
                                             
 (c) One representative of the department of health and human
services, appointed by the commissioner.
                                             
 (d) One representative of the department of education, appointed
by the commissioner.
                                             
 (e) One representative of the insurance department, appointed by
the commissioner.
                                             
 (f) A director from a community-based agency which has been
charged by the council with providing support and services to youths
with chronic conditions and their families.
                                             
 (g) Up to 6 representatives of professional and community
organizations, which shall represent a cross-section of disciplines and
constituencies such as, but not limited to, physicians, nurses, and
educators, appointed by the council in accordance with its bylaws.
                                             
 (h) Up to 13 members who are the parent or guardian of a youth
with a chronic condition, appointed by the council in accordance with
its bylaws.
                                             
 (i) One parent or guardian of a youth with a chronic condition,
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (j) One member, who is less than 30 years of age and who has a
chronic condition, appointed by the chairperson of the council.
                                             
 II. Terms of office shall be for 3 years, except that legislative
members shall serve the terms of their office. No member shall serve
more than 2 full consecutive terms. One third of the total members'
terms shall expire annually as established in the bylaws.
                                             
 III. Members shall elect annually from among their number a
chairperson and such other officers as they may determine.
                                             
 IV. Legislative members shall receive mileage at the legislative
rate.

**Source.** 1997, 293:2. 2013, 113:2, 3, eff. Aug. 24, 2013.

### Section 126-J:2

 **126-J:2 Committees. –** The council may establish such standing
committees, ad hoc committees, or task forces as it deems appropriate to
carry out the mission of the council.

**Source.** 1997, 293:2, eff. Aug. 19, 1997.

### Section 126-J:3

 **126-J:3 Duties. –** The council shall:
                                             
 I. Promote the organized assessment of the needs of youths with
chronic conditions and their families.
                                             
 II. Serve in an advisory capacity to the department of health and
human services, department of education, and insurance department for
policy and program development.
                                             
 III. Collaborate with the department of health and human services,
the department of education, and other public and private organizations
statewide to enhance community-based family supports that meet the
unique needs of youths with chronic conditions and their families.
                                             
 IV. Increase awareness in the public and private sector of the
medical, social, and educational issues which impact youths with chronic
conditions and their families.

**Source.** 1997, 293:2. 2013, 113:4, eff. Aug. 24, 2013.

### Section 126-J:4

 **126-J:4 Technical Assistance. –** The department of health and
human services, department of education, and the insurance department
shall provide to the council available data, consistent with
confidentiality requirements, relevant to the needs of this population.

**Source.** 1997, 293:2, eff. Aug. 19, 1997.

### Section 126-J:5

 **126-J:5 Report. –** The council shall report annually on or before
December 1 to the governor and the general court regarding the progress
being made to provide services and support to youths with chronic
conditions and their families in regular educational and medical
environments allowing them to remain in or near their own homes and
communities.

**Source.** 1997, 293:2. 2013, 113:5, eff. Aug. 24, 2013.

### Section 126-J:6

 **126-J:6 Funding. –** The council may solicit, expend, and disburse
funds from the state and federal government, as well as private grants
and funds, for the purposes of this chapter. It may also enter into
contracts as necessary to carry out its purpose.

**Source.** 1997, 293:2, eff. Aug. 19, 1997.
