---
title: 'CHAPTER 126-V HEALTH CARE SHARING ORGANIZATIONS'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 126-V
                                             
HEALTH CARE SHARING ORGANIZATIONS
---------------------------------

### Section 126-V:1

 **126-V:1 Health Care Sharing Organizations. –**
                                             
 I. The provisions of Title XXXVII relating to health insurance shall
not apply to health care sharing organizations as established under this
chapter. A health care sharing organization which, through its
publication to participants, solicits funds for the payment of medical
expenses of other participants, shall not be considered to be engaging
in the business of insurance for purposes of any provision of Title
XXXVII and shall not be subject to the jurisdiction of the insurance
commissioner if the requirements of this section are met.
                                             
 II. In this section, a "health care sharing organization'' means a
faith-based nonprofit organization which, or a predecessor of which, has
been in existence continuously and has facilitated the sharing of
medical expenses of participants without interruption since December 31,
1999, that is tax-exempt pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code, which limits its participants to individuals who share a
common set of ethical or religious beliefs, and whose participants share
medical expenses in accordance with those beliefs.
                                             
 III. A health care sharing organization:
                                             
 (a) Acts as a facilitator among participants who have financial
and medical needs and matches those participants with other participants
with the present ability to assist those with financial and medical
needs in accordance with criteria established by the health care sharing
organization based on the shared ethical or religious beliefs of its
participants.
                                             
 (b) Provides for the financial and medical needs of participants
through monetary contributions from one participant to another.
                                             
 (c) Allows its participants to continue participation even after
they develop a medical condition.
                                             
 (d) Provides amounts that participants may contribute without any
assumption of risk or promise to pay among the participants and requires
no assumption of risk or promise to pay by the health care sharing
organization to the participant.
                                             
 (e) Provides a written monthly statement to all participants that
lists the total dollar amount of qualified needs submitted to the health
care sharing organization, as well as the amount actually published or
assigned to participants for their contribution.
                                             
 (f) Conducts an annual audit that is performed by an independent
certified public accountant in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles and that is made available to the public upon
request.
                                             
 (g) Provides the following written disclaimer prominently on or
accompanying all applications and guideline materials distributed by or
on behalf of the organization that reads, in substance:

"IMPORTANT NOTICE


                                             
 This organization is not an insurance company, and its product
should never be considered insurance. If you join this organization
instead of purchasing health insurance, you will be considered
uninsured. By the terms of this agreement, whether anyone chooses to
assist you with your medical bills as a participant of this organization
will be totally voluntary, and neither the organization nor any
participant can be compelled by law to contribute toward your medical
bills. Regardless of whether you receive payment for medical expenses or
whether this organization continues to operate, you are always
personally responsible for the payment of your own medical bills. This
organization is not regulated by the New Hampshire Insurance Department.
You should review this organization's guidelines carefully to be sure
you understand any limitations that may affect your personal medical and
financial needs.''

**Source.** 2012, 165:1, eff. Aug. 6, 2012.
