---
title: 'CHAPTER 126-T COMMISSION ON PRIMARY CARE WORKFORCE ISSUES'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 126-T
                                             
COMMISSION ON PRIMARY CARE WORKFORCE ISSUES
-------------------------------------------

### Section 126-T:1


                                             


                                             [RSA 126-T:1 repealed by 2010, 114:3, effective November 1, 2019.
                                             ]

 **126-T:1 Commission Established; Membership. –**
                                             
 There is hereby established a commission on primary care workforce
issues. The members of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 I. One member of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of the department of health and human services,
or designee.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of the department of labor, or designee.
                                             
 IV. The insurance commissioner, or designee.
                                             
 V. The dean, or designee, from a public institution with a health
science school, appointed by the president of the institution.
                                             
 VI. The dean, or designee, from a private institution with a health
science school, appointed by the president of the institution.
                                             
 VII. A representative of the New Hampshire Medical Society,
appointed by the society.
                                             
 VIII. A representative of the New Hampshire Dental Society,
appointed by the society.
                                             
 IX. A representative of the New Hampshire Mental Health Coalition,
appointed by the coalition.
                                             
 X. Three representatives from the state's rural and underserved
health care facilities, including 2 practitioners and one administrator,
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 XI. A representative of the New Hampshire Citizens Health
Initiative, appointed by such organization.
                                             
 XII. A representative of the New Hampshire Area Health Education
Center, appointed by the organization.
                                             
 XIII. A representative of the Bi-State Primary Care Association,
appointed by the association.
                                             
 XIV. Three at large members, nominated by the commission and
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 XV. A representative of the New Hampshire Nurse Practitioner
Association, appointed by the association.
                                             
 XVI. A representative of the New Hampshire Society of Physician
Assistants Association, appointed by the association.
                                             
 XVII. A representative of the New Hampshire Hospital Association,
appointed by the association.
                                             
 XVIII. A pharmacist, appointed by the board of pharmacy.

**Source.** 2010, 114:1. 2012, 57:1, eff. May 14, 2012. 2015, 238:1,
eff. July 13, 2015.

### Section 126-T:2


                                             


                                             [RSA 126-T:2 repealed by 2010, 114:3, effective November 1, 2019.
                                             ]

 **126-T:2 Compensation; Chairperson. –**
                                             
 The members of the commission shall receive no compensation and
shall not be entitled to reimbursement for expenses, but the legislative
member of the commission shall receive mileage at the legislative rate
when attending to the duties of the commission. The members of the
commission shall choose a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among
the members.

**Source.** 2010, 114:1, eff. June 1, 2010.

### Section 126-T:3


                                             


                                             [RSA 126-T:3 repealed by 2010, 114:3, effective November 1, 2019.
                                             ]

 **126-T:3 Duties. –**
                                             
 The commission shall plan and advocate for policy changes related to
maintaining and strengthening an effective primary care workforce in New
Hampshire, with special concern for rural and other underserved areas.
The committee's duties shall include, but not be limited to:
                                             
 I. Reviewing the impact of existing policies related to
strengthening New Hampshire's primary care workforce and making
recommendations relative to appropriate use of funds for training,
education, and recruitment.
                                             
 II. Assessing the degree to which insurers, managed care
organizations, and state and federal payment sources may present
inequities and problems regarding payment for primary care services
which may serve as a barrier for attracting and retaining the providers
necessary for network adequacy.
                                             
 III. Collecting and reviewing data and information that informs
decisions and planning for the primary care workforce and looking for
innovative ways for expanding New Hampshire's primary care resources
including, but not limited to, interstate collaboration.
                                             
 IV. Assembling and including in its reports, required under RSA
126-T:4, data on the availability, accessibility, and effectiveness of
primary care in New Hampshire, with special attention to such data in
rural and underserved areas of the state.

**Source.** 2010, 114:1, eff. June 1, 2010. 2015, 238:2, eff. July 13,
2015.

### Section 126-T:4


                                             


                                             [RSA 126-T:4 repealed by 2010, 114:3, effective November 1, 2019.
                                             ]

 **126-T:4 Reports. –**
                                             
 The commission shall make an interim report on November 1, 2015, and
a final report on November 1, 2019, including its findings and any
recommendations for proposed legislation, to the speaker of the house of
representatives, the president of the senate, and the governor.

**Source.** 2010, 114:1, eff. June 1, 2010. 2015, 238:3, eff. July 13,
2015.

### Section 126-T:5


                                             


                                             [RSA 126-T:5 repealed by 2010, 114:3, effective November 1, 2019.
                                             ]

 **126-T:5 Authority to Accept Gifts. –**
                                             
 The commission may accept any gifts, donations, or grants from any
source whatsoever provided such gifts, donations, or grants shall be
used exclusively in the furtherance of the duties of the commission.

**Source.** 2010, 114:1, eff. June 1, 2010.
