---
title: 'CHAPTER 126-K YOUTH ACCESS TO AND USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 126-K
                                             
YOUTH ACCESS TO AND USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
-------------------------------------------

### Section 126-K:1

 **126-K:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to protect the
children of New Hampshire from the possibility of addiction, disability,
and death resulting from the use of tobacco products by ensuring that
tobacco products will not be supplied to minors.

**Source.** 1997, 338:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 126-K:2

 **126-K:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Cigarette'' means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of
tobacco, and wrapped in any material except tobacco.
                                             
 II. "Commission'' means the liquor commission.
                                             
 II-a. "E-cigarette'' means any electronic smoking device composed of
a mouthpiece, a heating element, a battery, and electronic circuits that
provides a vapor of pure nicotine mixed with propylene glycol to the
user as the user simulates smoking. This term shall include such devices
whether they are manufactured as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, or e-pipes, or
under any other product name.
                                             
 III. "Licensee'' means the person in whose name a license issued
pursuant to RSA 78:2 was granted.
                                             
 III-a. "Liquid nicotine'' means any liquid product composed either
in whole or in part of pure nicotine and propylene glycol and
manufactured for use with e-cigarettes.
                                             
 IV. "Manufacturer'' means any person engaged in the business of
importing, exporting, producing, or manufacturing tobacco products who
sells the product only to licensed wholesalers.
                                             
 V. "Minor'' means a person under the age of 18.
                                             
 VI. "Person'' means any individual, firm, fiduciary partnership,
corporation, trust, or association, however formed.
                                             
 VII. "Public educational facility'' means any enclosed place or
portion of such place, which is supported by public funds and which is
used for the instruction of students enrolled in preschool programs and
in grades kindergarten through 12. This definition shall include all
administrative buildings and offices and areas within facilities
supportive of instruction and subject to educational administration
including, but not limited to, lounge areas, passageways, rest rooms,
laboratories, study areas, cafeterias, gymnasiums, libraries,
maintenance rooms, and storage areas.
                                             
 VIII. "Retailer'' means any person who sells tobacco products to
consumers.
                                             
 VIII-a. "Rolling paper'' means any paper product that is designed to
encase or wrap tobacco or similar products and marketed for the purpose
of smoking or manufacturing hand-rolled cigarettes.
                                             
 IX. "Sampler'' means any person who distributes free tobacco
products to consumers for promotional purposes.
                                             
 X. "Sub-jobber'' means any person doing business in this state who
buys stamped tobacco products from a licensed wholesaler and who sells
all the sub-jobber's tobacco products to other licensed sub-jobbers,
vending machine operators, and retailers.
                                             
 XI. "Tobacco product'' means any product containing tobacco
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, smoking tobacco, cigars,
chewing tobacco, snuff, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, and smokeless
cigarettes.
                                             
 XII. "Vending machine'' means any self-service device which, upon
insertion of money, tokens, or any other form of payment, dispenses
tobacco, cigarettes, or any other tobacco product.
                                             
 XIII. "Vending machine operator'' means any person operating one or
more tobacco product vending machines on property or premises other than
the operator's own.
                                             
 XIV. "Wholesaler'' means any person doing business in this state who
shall purchase all the wholesaler's unstamped tobacco products directly
from a licensed manufacturer and who shall sell all of the wholesaler's
products to licensed wholesalers, sub-jobbers, vending machine
operators, retailers, samplers, and those persons exempted from the
tobacco tax under RSA 78:7-b.

**Source.** 1997, 338:8. 2001, 171:1. 2010, 113:1, 2, eff. July 31,
2010.

### Section 126-K:3

 **126-K:3 Proof of Age of Purchaser. –**
                                             
 I. For the purposes of this chapter, any person responsible for
monitoring sales from a tobacco vending machine or any person making the
sale of tobacco products, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine which vending
machine or other sale is to be made to any person who does not appear to
be at least 18 years of age, shall require the purchaser to furnish any
of the following documentation that such person is 18 years of age or
over:
                                             
 (a) A motor vehicle driver's license issued by the state of New
Hampshire, or a valid driver's license issued by another state, the
District of Columbia, a United States territory, or a province of
Canada, which bears the date of birth, name, address, and picture of the
individual.
                                             
 (b) An identification card issued by the director of motor
vehicles under the provisions of RSA 260:21, RSA 260:21-a, or RSA
260:21-b, or any picture identification card issued by another state
which bears the date of birth, name, and address of the individual.
                                             
 (c) An armed services identification card.
                                             
 (d) A valid passport from a country with whom the United States
maintains diplomatic relations.
                                             
 II. Photographic identification presented under this section shall
be consistent with the appearance of the person, and shall be correct
and free of alteration, erasure, blemish, or other impairment.
                                             
 III. The establishment of all of the following facts by a person
responsible for monitoring sales from a vending machine or a person or
sampler making a sale or distribution of tobacco products, e-cigarettes,
or liquid nicotine to a person under 18 years of age shall constitute
prima facie evidence of innocence and a defense to any prosecution for
such sale:
                                             
 (a) That the person falsely represented in writing and supported
by some official documents that the person was 18 years of age or
older;
                                             
 (b) That the appearance of the person was such that an ordinary
and prudent person would believe such person to be at least 18 years of
age or older; and
                                             
 (c) That the sale was made in good faith relying on such written
representation and appearance in the reasonable belief that the person
was actually 18 years of age or over.

**Source.** 1997, 338:8. 2010, 113:3, 4, eff. July 31, 2010. 2015,
179:2, eff. June 26, 2015. 2016, 71:2, eff. May 10, 2016.

### Section 126-K:4

 **126-K:4 Sale and Distribution of Tobacco Products, E-cigarettes,
or Liquid Nicotine to Minors Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall sell, give, or furnish or cause or allow or
procure to be sold, given, or furnished tobacco products, e-cigarettes,
or liquid nicotine to a minor. The prohibition established by this
paragraph shall not be deemed to prohibit minors employed by any
manufacturer, wholesaler, sub-jobber, vending machine operator, sampler,
or retailer from performing the necessary handling of tobacco products,
e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine during the duration of their
employment.
                                             
 II. Violations of this section shall be civil infractions punishable
by administrative action of the commission against the licensee. The
fines for violations of this section shall not exceed 
                                             $250 for the
first offense and 
                                             $500 for the second offense. For the third offense,
the commission shall issue a letter of warning detailing necessary
corrective actions and an administrative fine ranging from 
                                             $500 to

                                             $1500. In addition, the license to sell tobacco products of the
manufacturer, wholesaler, sub-jobber, vending machine operator, or
retailer where the offense occurred shall be suspended for a period of
10 consecutive days and not exceeding 30 consecutive days. For the
fourth offense, the commission shall issue either an administrative fine
and a suspension of a minimum of 10 consecutive days not to exceed 40
consecutive days, or a suspension. The administrative fine shall range
from 
                                             $750 to 
                                             $3,000 while any suspension without a fine shall be 40
consecutive days. For any violation beyond the fourth, the commission
shall revoke any license for the business or business entity at the
location where the infraction occurred or any principal thereof for a
period of one year from the date of revocation. The commission shall
determine the level of the violation by reviewing the licensee's record
and counting violations that have occurred within 3 years of the date of
the violation being considered.
                                             
 III. In addition to the civil penalty described in paragraph II, a
person who violates this section shall be guilty of a violation for a
first offense and a misdemeanor for each subsequent offense.

**Source.** 1997, 338:8. 2000, 303:1. 2001, 280:1. 2010, 113:5, eff.
July 31, 2010.

### Section 126-K:4-a

 **126-K:4-a Rolling Papers. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall sell, give, or furnish rolling papers to a minor.
Violations of this paragraph shall be civil infractions punishable by
administrative action of the commission against the licensee. The fines
for violations of this paragraph shall not exceed 
                                             $250 for the first
offense, 
                                             $500 for the second offense, and 
                                             $750 for the third and
subsequent offenses.
                                             
 II. No person under 18 years of age shall purchase, attempt to
purchase, possess, or use any rolling paper. Any minor who violates this
section shall be guilty of a violation and shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed 
                                             $100 for each offense.

**Source.** 2001, 171:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2002.

### Section 126-K:5

 **126-K:5 Distribution of Free Samples. –**
                                             
 I. No person may distribute or offer to distribute samples of
tobacco products, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine in a public place.
This prohibition shall not apply to sampling:
                                             
 (a) In an area to which minors are denied access.
                                             
 (b) In a store to which a retailer's license has been issued.
                                             
 (c) At factory sites, construction sites, conventions, trade
shows, fairs, or motorsport facilities in areas to which minors are
denied access.
                                             
 II. The commission shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
concerning the distribution of free samples of tobacco products,
e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine to prevent their distribution to
minors.
                                             
 III. Violations of this section shall be civil infractions
punishable by administrative action of the commission against the
licensee. The fines for the violations of this section shall not exceed

                                             $250 for the first offense and 
                                             $500 for the second offense. For the
third offense, the commission shall issue a letter of warning detailing
necessary corrective actions and an administrative fine ranging from

                                             $500 to 
                                             $1,500. In addition, the sampler's license shall be suspended
for a period of 10 consecutive days and not exceeding 30 consecutive
days. For the fourth offense, the commission shall issue either an
administrative fine and a suspension of a minimum of 10 consecutive days
not to exceed 40 consecutive days, or a suspension. The administrative
fine shall range from 
                                             $750 to 
                                             $3,000 while any suspension without a
fine shall be 40 consecutive days. For any violation beyond the fourth,
the commission shall revoke any license for the business or business
entity at the location where the infraction occurred or any principal
thereof for a period of one year from the date of revocation. The
commission shall determine the level of the violation by reviewing the
licensee's record and counting violations that have occurred within 3
years of the date of the violation being considered.

**Source.** 1997, 338:8. 2000, 303:2. 2001, 280:2. 2010, 113:6, eff.
July 31, 2010.

### Section 126-K:6

 **126-K:6 Possession and Use of Tobacco Products, E-cigarettes, or
Liquid Nicotine by Minors. –**
                                             
 I. No person under 18 years of age shall purchase, attempt to
purchase, possess, or use any tobacco product, e-cigarette, or liquid
nicotine.
                                             
 II. The prohibition on possession of tobacco products, e-cigarettes,
or liquid nicotine shall not be deemed to prohibit minors employed by
any manufacturer, wholesaler, sub-jobber, vending machine operator,
sampler, or retailer from performing the necessary handling of tobacco
products, e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine during the duration of their
employment.
                                             
 III. A minor shall not misrepresent his or her age for the purpose
of purchasing tobacco products.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding RSA 169-B and RSA 169-D, a person 12 years of
age and older who violates this section shall not be considered a
delinquent or a child in need of services.
                                             
 V. Any minor who violates this section shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed 
                                             $100 for each
offense or shall be required to complete up to 20 hours of community
service for each offense, or both. Where available, punishment may also
include participation in an education program.

**Source.** 1997, 338:8. 2010, 113:7, eff. July 31, 2010.

### Section 126-K:7

 **126-K:7 Use of Tobacco Products, E-cigarettes, or Liquid Nicotine
on Public Educational Facility Grounds Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall use any tobacco product, e-cigarette, or liquid
nicotine in any public educational facility or on the grounds of any
public educational facility.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
violation and, notwithstanding RSA 651:2, shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed 
                                             $100 for each offense.

**Source.** 1997, 338:8. 2010, 113:8, eff. July 31, 2010.

### Section 126-K:8

 **126-K:8 Special Provisions. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall sell, give, or furnish tobacco products,
e-cigarettes, or liquid nicotine to a minor who has a note from an adult
requesting such sale, gift, or delivery.
                                             
 II. All tobacco products shall be sold in their original packaging
bearing the Surgeon General's warning.
                                             
 III. The sale of single cigarettes is prohibited.
                                             
 IV. Violations of this section shall be civil infractions punishable
by administrative action of the commission against the licensee. The
fines for violations of this section shall not exceed 
                                             $250 for the
first offense and 
                                             $500 for the second offense. For the third offense,
the commission shall issue a letter of warning detailing necessary
corrective actions and an administrative fine ranging from 
                                             $500 to

                                             $1,500. In addition, the license to sell tobacco products of the
manufacturer, wholesaler, sub-jobber, vending machine operator, or
retailer where the offense occurred shall be suspended for a period of
10 consecutive days and not exceeding 30 consecutive days. For the
fourth offense, the commission shall issue either an administrative fine
and a suspension of a minimum of 10 consecutive days not to exceed 40
consecutive days, or a suspension. The administrative fine shall range
from 
                                             $750 to 
                                             $3,000 while any suspension without a fine shall be 40
consecutive days. For any violation beyond the fourth, the commission
shall revoke any license for the business or business entity at the
location where the infraction occurred or any principal thereof for a
period of one year from the date of revocation. The commission shall
determine the level of the violation by reviewing the licensee's record
and counting violations that have occurred within 3 years of the date of
the violation being considered.
                                             
 V. In addition to the civil penalty described in paragraph IV, a
person who violates this section shall be guilty of a violation for the
first offense and a misdemeanor for each subsequent offense.

**Source.** 1997, 338:8. 2000, 303:3. 2001, 280:3. 2010, 113:9, eff.
July 31, 2010.

### Section 126-K:9

 **126-K:9 Enforcement Authority. –** The commission shall have the
primary responsibility for enforcing this chapter. Local, county, and
state law enforcement officers shall also have jurisdiction to enforce
this chapter. Such authority may be delegated to agents working under
their authority.

**Source.** 1997, 338:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 126-K:10

 **126-K:10 Rulemaking. –** The commission shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the hearings and appeals process and
relative to the proper administration of this chapter.

**Source.** 1997, 338:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 126-K:11

 **126-K:11 Fines. –**
                                             
 I. All fines imposed by any court and collected for the violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall be paid to the state, county, or
town, the officials of which instituted the prosecution.
                                             
 II. All fines imposed by the commission shall be deposited into the
general fund.

**Source.** 1997, 338:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 126-K:12

 **126-K:12 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Violations of this chapter may be prosecuted by local, county, or
state law enforcement officials.
                                             
 II. The commission may issue administrative warnings and assess
fines and may order the commissioner of revenue administration to
suspend or revoke a license issued pursuant to RSA 78 for a specified
period of time for violations of this chapter.
                                             
 III. The commission may issue administrative warnings, assess fines,
and suspend or revoke a license issued pursuant to RSA 178 for a
specified period of time for violations of this chapter.

**Source.** 1997, 338:8. 2008, 341:18, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 126-K:13

 **126-K:13 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the
chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or
applications, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.

**Source.** 1997, 338:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

### Section 126-K:14

 **126-K:14 Preemption. –** Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to restrict the power of any county, city, town, village, or
other subdivision of the state to adopt local laws, ordinances, and
regulations that are more stringent than this chapter and RSA 78.

**Source.** 1997, 338:8, eff. Jan. 1, 1998.

Tobacco Use Prevention and Cessation Program
--------------------------------------------

### Section 126-K:15

 **126-K:15 Tobacco Use Prevention and Cessation Program. –** There
is hereby established in the department of health and human services the
tobacco use prevention and cessation program, which shall be
administered with funds appropriated to the department for such purpose,
and which shall include but not be limited to:
                                             
 I. Tobacco use prevention community programs and grants.
                                             
 II. Tobacco use prevention school programs and grants.
                                             
 III. Tobacco use prevention state-wide programs and grants.
                                             
 IV. Tobacco use cessation programs.
                                             
 V. Tobacco use prevention and cessation counter marketing.
                                             
 VI. Evaluation of tobacco control initiatives.
                                             
 VII. Administration and enforcement.

**Source.** 1999, 183:3. 2000, 62:2. 2007, 263:113, eff. June 30, 2007.

### Section 126-K:16

 **126-K:16 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 2000, 62:3. 2007, 263:116, II, eff. June 30, 2007.

### Section 126-K:17

 **126-K:17 Purpose of Grants; Grants Process. –** Grants shall be
available in accordance with the following procedures:
                                             
 I. Requests for funding consideration in any given year shall be
forwarded to the commissioner by January 1 to be reviewed for a grant
beginning in the following fiscal year.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall review all requests and recommend awards,
including amounts and duration. The commissioner shall submit
recommendations to the governor and executive council for approval.
                                             
 III. Additional requests may be considered throughout the year if
funds are available. The commissioner shall forward recommendations to
the governor and council for approval.

**Source.** 2000, 62:3, eff. June 16, 2000.

### Section 126-K:18

 **126-K:18 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, necessary for the administration of this
subdivision.

**Source.** 2000, 62:3, eff. June 16, 2000.

### Section 126-K:19

 **126-K:19 Advisory Committee. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008, 144:1, II, eff.
Aug. 5, 2008.
                                             ]
