---
title: |
    CHAPTER 126-Y PALLIATIVE CARE CENTER FOR HEALTH CARE CONSUMERS AND
    PROVIDERS
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 126-Y
                                             
PALLIATIVE CARE CENTER FOR HEALTH CARE CONSUMERS AND PROVIDERS
--------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 126-Y:1

 **126-Y:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Center'' means the palliative care center for health care
consumers and providers, established in RSA 126-Y:2.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 III. "Fund'' means the palliative care center for health care
consumers and providers fund established in RSA 126-Y:4.
                                             
 IV. "Palliative care'' means care that focuses on the quality of
life for patients and may include, but not be limited to, relief from
pain and other distressing symptoms, a support system to both the
patient and the patient's family, and a team approach to address the
physical, emotional, spiritual, and social concerns that arise with
serious illness.

**Source.** 2014, 228:1, eff. Sept. 12, 2014.

### Section 126-Y:2

 **126-Y:2 Palliative Care Center for Health Care Consumers and
Providers Established. –** There is hereby established the palliative
care center for health care consumers and providers. The center shall
monitor the state of palliative care in New Hampshire and promote
education of health care consumers and health care providers.
                                             
 I. The center shall be governed by a board of directors consisting
of 13 members as follows:
                                             
 (a) One member of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (b) One member of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of the department of health and human and
services, or designee.
                                             
 (d) The insurance commissioner, or designee.
                                             
 (e) A licensed palliative care physician, appointed by the New
Hampshire Medical Society.
                                             
 (f) A licensed advanced practice registered nurse specializing in
palliative care, appointed by New Hampshire Nurse Practitioner
Association.
                                             
 (g) A licensed hospice and palliative care nurse, appointed by
the New Hampshire Nurses' Association.
                                             
 (h) A representative of the New Hampshire Hospital Association,
appointed by the association.
                                             
 (i) A representative of the New Hampshire Hospice and Palliative
Care Organization, appointed by the organization.
                                             
 (j) An attorney specializing in end-of-life decision making,
appointed by the New Hampshire Bar Association.
                                             
 (k) A representative of the New Hampshire Pastoral
Psychotherapist Association, appointed by the president of the
association.
                                             
 (l) A representative of the Home Care Association of New
Hampshire, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (m) A representative of the New Hampshire Health Care
Association, appointed by the association.
                                             
 II. Legislative members of the board shall receive mileage at the
legislative rate when attending to the duties of the board.
                                             
 III. The members appointed under subparagraphs (e)-(m) shall be
appointed to a term of 3 years; provided that the initial terms shall be
staggered. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of office in
the same manner as the original appointment. Members may serve
successive terms.
                                             
 IV. The center shall be an administratively attached agency, under
RSA 21-G:10, to the department of health and human services. In addition
the board shall be subject to the provisions of RSA 126-A:10-a.
                                             
 V. The members of the center shall elect a president,
vice-president, treasurer, and secretary of the board. Five members of
the board shall constitute a quorum. The board shall meet as often as
necessary to carry out its duties, but at least 4 times per year. The
first meeting of the board shall be called by the senate member.

**Source.** 2014, 228:1, eff. Sept. 12, 2014.

### Section 126-Y:3

 **126-Y:3 Duties. –** The center shall:
                                             
 I. Monitor the state of palliative care in New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. Educate health care consumers and health care providers about
palliative care.
                                             
 III. Accept gifts, grants, donations, bequests, or other moneys from
any public or private source for deposit in the fund established in RSA
126-Y:4.
                                             
 IV. Make an annual report commencing on November 1, 2014 regarding
its activities and any recommendations for legislation to the president
of the senate, the speaker of the house of representatives, the
governor, and the house and senate committees having jurisdiction over
health and human services issues.
                                             
 V. Perform such other duties the center deems necessary to carry out
its duties under this chapter.

**Source.** 2014, 228:1, eff. Sept. 12, 2014.

### Section 126-Y:4

 **126-Y:4 Palliative Care Center for Health Care Consumers and
Providers Fund. –** There is hereby established the palliative care
center for health care consumers and providers fund to be used to carry
out the provisions of this chapter. The fund shall be composed of gifts,
grants, donations, bequests, or other moneys from any public or private
source and shall be used to monitor the state of palliative care in New
Hampshire and to educate health care consumers and health care providers
about palliative care. The fund shall be nonlapsing and shall be
continually appropriated to the commissioner of the department of health
and human services for the purposes of this chapter.

**Source.** 2014, 228:1, eff. Sept. 12, 2014.

### Section 126-Y:5

 **126-Y:5 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Procedures to educate health care consumers and health care
providers about palliative care.
                                             
 II. Any fees required under this chapter for educational materials
and distribution costs.
                                             
 III. Procedures for accepting moneys for and administering the fund
established in RSA 126-Y:4.
                                             
 IV. Further definition of "palliative care.''

**Source.** 2014, 228:1, eff. Sept. 12, 2014.
