---
title: 'CHAPTER 126-G FAMILY SUPPORT SERVICES'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 126-G
                                             
FAMILY SUPPORT SERVICES
-----------------------

### Section 126-G:1

 **126-G:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to provide
support to families in their role as primary caregivers for disabled
family members.

**Source.** 1989, 255:2, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 126-G:2

 **126-G:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Area'' means "area'' as defined in RSA 171-A:2, I-a.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 IV. "Family support services'' includes, but is not limited to,
family services coordination, individual and family centered assistance,
information and referral, educational materials, and emergency and
outreach services.

**Source.** 1989, 255:2. 1995, 310:79, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-G:3

 **126-G:3 Administration; Services. –** The department shall
administer this chapter and shall coordinate family support services
with existing services to families and individuals. Family support
services shall be provided in a manner which develops comprehensive,
responsive and flexible support to families in their role as the primary
caregivers for disabled family members.

**Source.** 1989, 255:2. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-G:4

 **126-G:4 Regional Family Support Councils; Coordinators. –** The
department shall establish a family support council in each area which
shall consist of persons who have a developmentally disabled family
member. The family support council shall provide advice to the area
agency in the development of a family support plan for the area and
shall monitor the services provided pursuant to the plan. A family
support coordinator shall be available within each region to assist
families in acquiring the support and services outlined in the family
support plan. The family support coordinator shall work closely with the
regional family support council to monitor the services provided to
families.

**Source.** 1989, 255:2. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-G:5

 **126-G:5 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules under
RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 I. Further definition of services to be provided under this
chapter.
                                             
 II. Requirements for eligibility for services.
                                             
 III. Manner of providing services under RSA 126-G:3.
                                             
 IV. Size of regional family support councils and assignment of
family support coordinators pursuant to RSA 126-G:4.

**Source.** 1989, 255:2. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.
