---
title: 'CHAPTER 126-A DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 126-A
                                             
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
---------------------------------------

### Section 126-A:1

 **126-A:1 Declaration of Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is
to provide an integrated, administrative structure for the design and
delivery of a comprehensive and coordinated system of health and human
services which is family-centered and community-based for the citizens
of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:2

 **126-A:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of health and human services.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:3

 **126-A:3 General Provisions. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the
commissioner is hereby authorized to:
                                             
 (a) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (b) Transfer or reassign personnel within and between any
division, office, unit, or other component of the department. Upon
written notice to the commissioner of administrative services, such
changes shall be reflected in the state's payroll and financial systems
accounts.
                                             
 (c) Delegate, transfer or assign the authority to administer and
operate any program or service of the department to any employee,
division, office, bureau, or other component of the department. Such
delegation, transfer or assignment shall include the authority to
conduct or perform any act necessary to administer the program or
service so assigned.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the
department shall have no obligation to pay and no cause of action for
payment shall be maintained against the department for payment for any
product or service, sold, furnished, or leased to the department or any
other person on behalf of the department unless an invoice for such
product or service has been submitted to the department for payment
within 12 months of the date of delivery or provision of the product or
service.
                                             
 II-a. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the
department shall not require payment and counties shall have no
obligation to pay and no cause of action for payment shall be maintained
against the counties, for payment for any product or service sold,
furnished, or leased to the department or any other person on behalf of
the department, unless an invoice for such product or service has been
submitted to the counties for payment within 18 months of the date of
delivery or provision of the product or service.
                                             
 III. (a) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, and
notwithstanding any fee, rate, or payment schedule established under the
medical assistance program pursuant to RSA 161 and RSA 167 or any other
fee, rate, or payment schedule for any other program of the department,
no provider shall bill or charge the department more than the provider's
usual and customary charge, as defined in this paragraph.
                                             
 (b) Except as specified in subparagraph III(c), the term "usual
and customary'' means the lowest charge, fee, or rate charged by a
provider for any product or service at the time such product or service
was provided. For the purpose of determining the lowest charge, fee, or
rate:
                                             
 (1) If the provider offers discounts or rebates, then the
amount after applying discounts or rebates shall be utilized;
                                             
 (2) If the provider offers a sale for a limited period of time
on any good or service, then the sale price shall be utilized during the
sale period;
                                             
 (3) If the provider regularly accepts less than its full
charge from any customer, then the amount accepted shall be utilized;
                                             
 (4) If any good or service is offered free of charge by the
provider, then no charge shall be made to the department for the
provision of the product or service to the department or a client of the
department who satisfies the terms of the offer;
                                             
 (5) If any good or service is covered under any warranty or
guarantee offered by the provider, then the amount charged to the
department shall not exceed the amount which would otherwise be payable
solely by the customer; and
                                             
 (6) If a provider structures or packages its goods or services
in a manner which is exclusively or primarily used for medicaid,
medicare, or other third-party payors, then the charge for the most
similar good or service offered to any other consumer shall be
utilized.
                                             
 (c) The following items shall not be utilized in determining the
"usual and customary'' or lowest charge, fee, or rate:
                                             
 (1) Discounts offered solely to bona fide employees or family
members of employees;
                                             
 (2) Discounts offered solely on the basis of age shall be
utilized in determining the usual and customary charge only when the
client of the department satisfies the age requirement;
                                             
 (3) Free goods or services or discounts provided to a limited
number of persons on the basis of financial hardship;
                                             
 (4) Charges by an organization on a sliding fee scale for a
good or service where the organization's charge is based on ability to
pay;
                                             
 (5) Charges not collected as a result of bad debts incurred by
the provider. A bad debt exists where sound business judgment indicates
that there is no reasonable likelihood of recovery of the amount owed;
and
                                             
 (6) Charges for educational-related services governed by 42
U.S.C. 1396b(c).
                                             
 (d) The commissioner may waive the application of RSA 126-A:3,
III if the commissioner determines such action is necessary to ensure a
continuum of care and service to persons served by community mental
health centers, to avert serious economic hardships to mental health
centers, or to ensure that hospitals may contract for wholesale
hospital-to-hospital laboratory and testing services.
                                             
 (e) When a person is being assisted by a city, town, or county in
the purchase of a drug product, pursuant to RSA 165 or RSA 166, no
provider of pharmaceutical services shall bill or charge the person,
city, town, or county for the drug product at a rate in excess of the
rate that would be billed or charged the department of health and human
services for that product.
                                             
 IV. If the commissioner determines that the department has been
charged more than the usual or customary fee, charge or rate as set
forth in this section, the commissioner may levy a penalty against the
provider of the good or service in the amount of 10 percent of the
overcharge or 
                                             $100, whichever is greater. Moneys received under this
paragraph shall be deposited into the general fund.
                                             
 V. Pharmacists shall substitute generically equivalent drug products
for all legend and non-legend prescriptions paid for by the department
of health and human services, including the Medicaid program, unless the
prescribing practitioner specifies that the brand name drug product is
medically necessary. Such notification shall be in the practitioner's
own handwriting and shall be retained in the pharmacist's file. The
provisions of paragraph III shall not apply to the dispensing by a
pharmacy for medical assistance reimbursement for legend and non-legend
drugs. The commissioner, in consultation with pharmacy providers, shall
establish medical assistance reimbursement for legend and non-legend
drugs. For Medicaid fee for service clients, no prior authorization for
generically equivalent drugs shall be required.
                                             
 VI. The department shall provide information to the citizens of New
Hampshire, within its existing resources, about the risks and benefits
of dental restorative materials including the use of amalgam in children
under the age of 6.
                                             
 VII. Medicaid Hospital Outpatient Services; Designation in Operating
Budget.
                                             
 (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
beginning with the biennium beginning July 1, 2005 and continuing
thereafter, the department shall designate in its operating budget
requests specific class lines for hospital outpatient services. The
department shall not increase expenditures in approved budgets for such
outpatient services without prior approval. If expenditures are
projected to exceed the annual appropriation, the department may
recommend rate reduction for providers to offset the amount of any such
deficit. The department of health and human services shall submit to the
legislative fiscal committee and to the finance committees of the house
and the senate, the rates that it proposes to pay for hospital
outpatient services. The rates shall be subject to the prior approval of
the legislative fiscal committee.
                                             
 (b) For the purpose of Medicaid reimbursement for outpatient
hospital services, the only outpatient hospital services for which
Medicaid reimbursement shall be provided are those outpatient hospital
services which are:
                                             
 (1) Preventive, diagnostic, therapeutic, rehabilitative, or
palliative services that are furnished to outpatients;
                                             
 (2) Furnished by or under the direction of a physician or
dentist;
                                             
 (3) Furnished in a facility that:
                                             
 (A) Is licensed or formally approved as a hospital by an
officially designated authority for state standard setting; and
                                             
 (B) Meets the requirements for participation in Medicare as
a hospital; CMS-2213-F 62; and
                                             
 (4) Limited to the scope of facility services that:
                                             
 (A) Would be included, in the setting delivered, in the
Medicare outpatient prospective payment system (OPPS) as defined under
42 C.F.R. section 419.2(b) or are paid by Medicare as an outpatient
hospital service under an alternate payment methodology;
                                             
 (B) Are furnished by an outpatient hospital facility,
including an entity that meets the standards for provider based status
as a department of a provider set forth in 42 C.F.R. section 413.65;
and
                                             
 (C) Are not covered under the scope of another medical
assistance service category under the state plan.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner may exclude from the definition of
outpatient hospital services under subparagraph (b) those types of items
and services that are not generally furnished by most hospitals in the
state.
                                             
 VIII. The commissioner shall submit a Title XXI state plan
amendment, subject to approval by the fiscal committee of the general
court and the oversight committee on health and human services, to
administer the children's health insurance program within the department
commencing upon implementation of Medicaid managed care. The
commissioner shall operate the children's health insurance program
utilizing the program model that demonstrates the greatest efficiency
and value which includes, but is not limited to, Medicaid expansion,
accountable care organization, or risk-based managed care models.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, 3, I. 1999, 324:2. 2001, 93:6. 2002, 96:2.
2005, 177:116. 2007, 297:8. 2009, 1:6; 144:25. 2011, 224:26, 43, eff.
July 1, 2011. 2015, 213:1, eff. July 6, 2015; 276:207, eff. July 1, 2015

### Section 126-A:4

 **126-A:4 Department Established. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a department of health and human services under
the executive direction of a commissioner of health and human services,
which department shall be organized to provide a comprehensive and
coordinated system of health and human services as needed to promote and
protect the health, safety, and well-being of the citizens of New
Hampshire. Such services shall be directed at supporting families,
strengthening communities, and developing the independence and
self-sufficiency of New Hampshire citizens to the extent possible.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall have authority to establish, reorganize,
or abolish such divisions, offices, bureaus, or other components of the
department as may from time to time be necessary to carry out the
mission and duties of the department. The commissioner shall make a
quarterly report on the progress of the reorganization to the governor
and the fiscal committee beginning with the quarter ending March 31,
1996.
                                             
 II-a. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II-b. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. The department shall establish an office of the ombudsman to
provide assistance to clients and employees of the department by
investigating and resolving complaints regarding any matter within the
jurisdiction of the department including services or assistance provided
by the department or its contractors. The ombudsman's office may provide
mediation or other means for informally resolving complaints. The
records of the ombudsman's office shall be confidential and shall not be
disclosed without the consent of the client or employee on whose behalf
the complaint is made, except as may be necessary to assist the service
provider or the employee's supervisor to resolve the complaint, or as
required by law.
                                             
 IV. The department may establish a quality assurance program.
                                             
 (a) Any quality assurance program may consist of a comprehensive
ongoing system of mechanisms for monitoring and evaluating the
appropriateness of services provided to individuals served by the
department or any of its contract service providers so that problems or
trends in the delivery of services are identified and steps to correct
problems can be taken.
                                             
 (b) Records of the department's quality assurance program
including records of interviews, internal reviews or investigations,
reports, statements, minutes, and other documentation except for
individual client medical records, shall be confidential and privileged
and shall be protected from direct or indirect discovery, subpoena, or
admission into evidence in any judicial or administrative proceeding,
except as provided in subparagraphs IV(c) or (d).
                                             
 (c) In a case of legal action brought by the department against a
contract service provider or in a proceeding alleging repetitive
malicious action and personal injury brought against a contract service
provider, the quality assurance program's records may be discoverable.
                                             
 (d) The department may refer any evidence of fraudulent or other
criminal behavior gathered by the quality assurance program to the
appropriate law enforcement authority.
                                             
 (e) No employees of the department or employees of a contract
service provider or vendor shall be held liable in any action for
damages or other relief arising from the providing of information to a
quality assurance program or in any judicial or administrative procedure
relating to the department's quality assurance program.
                                             
 V. (a) The department shall collect relevant demographic data
concerning the projected increase in the population of New Hampshire
that is 65 years of age or older and analyze the impact of such data and
projections over the period through 2025 on the economic, social, and
governmental systems within New Hampshire, including health care,
housing, transportation, business, employment, the economy, and the
state budget.
                                             
 (b) In the development and analysis of the demographic data and
projections, the department:
                                             
 (1) May request and shall receive the assistance of all other
state agencies, including the office of energy and planning, and the
departments of transportation, administrative services, and resources
and economic development.
                                             
 (2) Shall solicit assistance and input from representatives
from the general court, business and industry, service providers,
consumer and advocacy groups, and members of the general public.
                                             
 (c) The department shall report on or before November 1, 2001 and
thereafter on or before November 1 in odd-numbered years to the
governor, the president of the senate, and the speaker of the house
relative to the progress of its efforts under this paragraph and such
report shall include recommendations for legislation. The final report
shall be submitted on or before November 1, 2007.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 2001, 152:2, 286:3. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44.
2012, 110:1, I, eff. May 29, 2012.

### Section 126-A:4-a

 **126-A:4-a Health Care Plan Report Required. –** The department of
health and human services is responsible for activities to improve and
protect the health and well-being of citizens of the state of New
Hampshire. A part of such activities is an assessment of the health
status of the residents of New Hampshire. The department shall
continually conduct such an assessment and shall issue a report thereon
to the governor, the president of the senate, and the speaker of the
house every 2 years commencing on December 31, 2000.

**Source.** 1999, 324:1, eff. Sept. 14, 1999.

### Section 126-A:4-b

 **126-A:4-b Medicaid Waivers. –** The state shall enter into
medicaid waivers from the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services, subject in each case to a review by the oversight committee on
health and human services, established in RSA 126-A:13, which shall make
a report to the legislative fiscal committee which shall have final
approval authority. The waivers shall:
                                             
 (a) Allow the state to begin the penalty period of ineligibility
for medicaid services due to transfers of assets for less than fair
market value as of the date of application for medical assistance or as
of the date that the applicant, but for the transfer of assets for less
than fair market value, meets all of the criteria for eligibility for
medical assistance, whichever is later.
                                             
 (b) Allow the state to eliminate the resource ceiling for
applicants for medical assistance and to exempt them from actions for
recovery against their estates for the cost of medical assistance they
receive when they have a long-term care insurance policy that meets the
standards established by the legislature and the state.

**Source.** 2005, 175:12, eff. Aug. 29, 2005.

### Section 126-A:4-c

 **126-A:4-c Family Planning Waiver. –** The department shall develop
a Medicaid waiver to support the extension of Medicaid-allowable family
planning services, as defined in the state's Medicaid plan, to
Medicaid-eligible clients. The department shall present the proposed
waiver design, including proposed coverage groups and budget neutrality
calculation, to the fiscal committee of the general court prior to
submission of a final concept paper to the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) for federal approval. The department shall
provide periodic reports to the fiscal committee of the general court
and the standing committees of the house of representatives and state
senate with authority over health and human services issues throughout
the waiver development, approval, and implementation processes. The
department shall seek input from health care providers and the public in
the course of developing the waiver. The department shall ensure that
the state realizes the enhanced 90 percent federal Medicaid match
available for these services and ensure that budget neutrality is
maintained or exceeded through the 5-year life of the waiver. The
department may contract with an independent third party on an annual
basis for the life of the waiver to evaluate the clinical and financial
outcomes of the waiver. A report shall be made to the fiscal committee
of the general court and the standing committees within 6 months of the
end of the first full year of waiver implementation and subsequently on
an annual basis.

**Source.** 2007, 247:1. 2012, 247:18, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.

### Section 126-A:4-d

 **126-A:4-d HIV/AIDS Waiver. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2009, 144:28, eff. July
1, 2009.
                                             ]

### Section 126-A:4-e

 **126-A:4-e Medicaid Hospice Benefit. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department of health and human services
shall submit a Title XIX Medicaid state plan amendment to the federal
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services for the purpose of
establishing a Medicaid hospice benefit. The hospice benefit shall
incorporate, to the greatest extent permissible under federal law,
hospice provisions pursuant to Title XVIII of the Social Security Act,
Medicare.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of the department of health and human services
shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A relative to hospice services provided
under Medicaid. The rules shall incorporate, to the greatest extent
permissible under federal law, hospice provisions pursuant to Title
XVIII of the Social Security Act, Medicare.
                                             
 III. Beginning October 1, 2009, the department shall submit
quarterly reports to the oversight committee on health and human
services, established in RSA 126-A:13, relative to the status of the
state plan amendment and implementation of the Medicaid hospice benefit.
The department shall make best efforts to implement the benefit on or
before July 1, 2010.

**Source.** 2009, 166:1, eff. July 8, 2009.

### Section 126-A:4-f

 **126-A:4-f Transitional Healthy Kids Silver Program Waiver. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall develop and submit to the federal Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services for approval a limited Medicaid
expansion to provide for transitional Medicaid eligibility for children
whose eligibility for Healthy Kids Gold terminates mid-month and who are
eligible for Healthy Kids Silver but will not receive Healthy Kids
Silver coverage until the first of the month following Healthy Kids Gold
ineligibility. Coverage of Medicaid services during the transition
period shall be funded using State Children's Health Insurance Program
(SCHIP) funds. The commissioner shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A
to implement the provisions of this section.
                                             
 II. On or before January 10, 2010, the department of health and
human services shall submit a report to the speaker of the house of
representatives, the president of the senate, and the governor verifying
the steps the department has taken to implement the transitional program
and ensure that there is no gap in coverage for children transferring
from healthy kids gold to silver.

**Source.** 2009, 317:1, eff. Oct. 6, 2009.

### Section 126-A:4-g

 **126-A:4-g Children's Oral Health Initiative. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall seek funding for a Medicaid children's oral
health initiative program as part of the department's budget for the
biennium ending June 30, 2013, and each biennium thereafter. The program
shall provide reimbursement to primary care providers who deliver
preventative oral health services, such as dental screenings and
fluoride varnish treatments, to children between 0 and 3 years of age
enrolled in the state Medicaid program. Primary care providers who
choose to participate in the program shall complete training approved by
the department and submit evidence of program completion to the
department, which shall maintain a list of trained providers. Program
implementation, including adoption of rules required by paragraph II,
and submission of a Medicaid state plan amendment as required by
paragraph III, shall be contingent upon sufficient funding.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A relative to
administration of the children's oral health initiative, including
eligibility criteria, the type and frequency of services covered,
reimbursement rates, and provider training requirements. The department
also shall develop a list of approved training programs, which shall
include, but may not be limited to, those offered by the American
Academy of Pediatrics and the Southern New Hampshire Area Health
Education Center. Upon implementation of the program, the department
shall provide, upon request, a list of dentists participating in the
state Medicaid program to primary care providers in the oral health
initiative.
                                             
 III. The department shall submit a Title XIX Medicaid state plan
amendment to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services for the
purpose of establishing the children's oral health initiative.

**Source.** 2010, 76:1, eff. July 18, 2010.

### Section 126-A:4-h

 **126-A:4-h Home Health Aide Services for Children who are Medically
Fragile or Children With Chronic Illness; Pilot Program. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2011, 224:299, eff. July 1, 2014.
                                             ]

### Section 126-A:5

 **126-A:5 Commissioner of Health and Human Services. –**
                                             
 I. Administrative and executive direction of the department of
health and human services shall be under the direction of a commissioner
of health and human services who shall be appointed by the governor and
council. The commissioner shall hold office for a term of 4 years from
the date of the appointment.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may enter into such contracts as the
commissioner deems necessary for the provision of services to clients of
the department and for the operation of facilities of the department,
subject to the approval of the governor and council. The commissioner
further may receive, expend, control, convey, hold in trust, or invest
any funds or real or personal property given or devised to or owned by
any facility as the commissioner deems appropriate or expedient. At the
discretion of the commissioner, the department may directly operate and
administer any program or facility which provides, or which may be
established to provide, services to clients of the department, or the
commissioner may contract with any individual, partnership, association,
agency, or corporation, either public or private, profit, or nonprofit,
as, in the discretion of the commissioner, may be necessary and
appropriate for the operation and administration of any program or
facility which provides services to clients of the department.
                                             
 II-a. Sixty days after the end of each fiscal year, the commissioner
shall produce an annual report which shall consist of an aggregate
schedule of payables for class 90 grant lines, which are greater than

                                             $1,000,000, for such fiscal year. Payables shall start with the date
the bill for goods or services is received by the department without
regard to whether the bill is subsequently adjusted or paid. All
payables with a receipt date within the report period shall be included.
The report shall be submitted to the legislative budget assistant, the
house and senate finance committees, the house speaker, senate
president, and the governor.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may designate any member of the department to
act on behalf of the commissioner or the department. The commissioner
further may delegate any duty or authority of the commissioner or the
department to any member of the department or to any sub-unit or
component of the department.
                                             
 IV. Pursuant to RSA 541-A, the commissioner shall have the authority
to establish fees, copayments or any other charges for services or
assistance provided by or on behalf of the department.
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall have the authority to direct an autopsy be
made upon the death of any person admitted to, a resident of, or
receiving care from the New Hampshire hospital, Glencliff home, or any
other residential facility operated by the department or a contract
service provider, if the commissioner deems it necessary for the purpose
of determining the existence of infection or disease, cause of death, or
for other good reason. The findings of any such autopsy shall be treated
by the department in accordance with the quality assurance program under
RSA 126-A:4, IV and by the medical examiner in accordance with the
provisions of RSA 611-B:21, IV.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner shall have the authority to make arrangements
for the funeral and burial of any person who has not made other
arrangements and dies while admitted to, a resident of, or receiving
care from New Hampshire hospital, Glencliff home, or any other
residential facility operated by the department or a contract service
provider. If an autopsy is ordered pursuant to RSA 126-A:5, V, then
following the autopsy, the medical examiner shall deliver the body to
any person authorized pursuant to RSA 611:14. In the event that a dead
body is unclaimed for a period of not less than 48 hours following
completion of any autopsy ordered pursuant to this section, then the
medical examiner shall deliver the body to a funeral home as directed by
the commissioner, who shall decently bury or cremate the body at
department expense, or, with consent of the commissioner, it may be sent
at department expense to the medical department of a medical school or
university, to be used for the advancement of the science of anatomy or
surgery, as provided for by law.
                                             
 VII. The commissioner shall establish advisory groups or other
mechanisms to solicit input from clients and providers of the department
and their families regarding the services provided by the department and
its contract providers.
                                             
 VIII. The commissioner shall establish an appeals process for any
individual applying for or receiving services from the department or its
contract service providers, any providers, programs, services, or
facilities which are licensed or certified by the department, or with
regard to actions related to employees of the department or any other
matter within the jurisdiction of the department. Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, the appeals process shall include:
                                             
 (a) A jurisdictional review by the commissioner, or a hearings
examiner designated by the commissioner, to determine whether a denial
or change in services, benefits, or a license is automatic due entirely
to a change in state or federal law. In the event the department's
action is due entirely to such a change in state or federal law, the
department shall provide adequate notice and provide the applicant,
recipient, or licensee the opportunity to state the reasons he or she
believes issues of fact or interpretation of law should be heard, prior
to the commissioner or hearings examiner designated by the commissioner
conducting a jurisdictional review.
                                             
 (1) If the commissioner, or hearings examiner designated by
the commissioner determines that sole issue on appeal is the result of
the state or federal law that caused a denial or change in services,
benefits, or a license, and the appeal does not require resolution of a
factual disagreement or legal issue, then an order dismissing the appeal
shall be issued by the commissioner, or a hearings examiner designated
by the commissioner, after such jurisdictional review and without an
administrative hearing.
                                             
 (2) In all other cases, if the automatic result of the new
state or federal law is not the only issue on appeal, then an
administrative hearing shall be conducted by the commissioner, or a
hearings examiner designated by the commissioner, to address the other
issues in accordance with rules established by the commissioner.
                                             
 (b) For appeals of all other matters, the commissioner, or a
hearings examiner designated by the commissioner, shall conduct an
administrative hearing in accordance with the rules established by the
commissioner.
                                             
 (c) Unless the commissioner has delegated to the hearings
examiner authority to issue a decision on behalf of the department,
following the hearing, the hearings examiner shall submit to the
commissioner a proposed decision which shall include:
                                             
 (1) A statement of the issues presented in the appeal;
                                             
 (2) A summary of the evidence received;
                                             
 (3) Proposed findings of fact and rulings of law; and
                                             
 (4) A proposed order.
                                             
 (d) If following a hearing the proposed decision is adverse to
the individual applying for or receiving services, facility or employee
who made the appeal, or if the commissioner proposes to make an adverse
finding, ruling, or order which the hearings examiner has not
recommended, the commissioner shall provide the appealing party with a
copy of the commissioner's proposed decision and offer an opportunity to
submit a brief and make an oral argument regarding the contested
findings of fact, rulings of law, or proposed order.
                                             
 (e) Following a review of a proposed decision after a hearing and
of a brief and argument in a contested case, if any, the commissioner
shall issue a final decision on the appeal.
                                             
 IX. The commissioner shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A
relative to the compensation of the members of the drug use review
board.
                                             
 X. The commissioner may assess and collect reasonable fees for the
duplication of materials made pursuant to RSA 91-A:4 and for material
generally available to the public upon request. Such fees shall be based
on an amount necessary to recover the cost of producing such documents,
regardless of the type of medium used. Fees paid to the department of
health and human services shall be continually appropriated to the
department. Local, state and federal agencies shall be exempted from
these fees.
                                             
 XI. The commissioner shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
implementing procedures for state registry and criminal background
investigations of all new department staff who have regular contact with
children, according to the provisions of RSA 170-G:8-c.
                                             
 XII. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
the commissioner shall, upon request, publicly disclose the information
in subparagraphs (c)(3)-(c)(12) regarding the abuse or neglect of a
child, as set forth in this paragraph, if there has been a fatality or
near fatality resulting from abuse or neglect of a child. Information
included in subparagraphs (c)(1) and (c)(2) shall also be disclosed if
it is determined that such disclosure shall not be contrary to the best
interests of the child, the child's siblings or other children in the
household and there has been a fatality or near fatality resulting from
abuse or neglect of a child. In addition, the same disclosure shall be
made when there has been a fatality, to include suicide, or near
fatality of a child under the legal supervision or legal custody of the
department. In determining whether disclosure will be contrary to the
best interests of the child, the child's siblings, or other children in
the household, the commissioner shall consider the privacy interests of
the child and the child's family and the effects which disclosure may
have on efforts to reunite and provide services for the family. If the
commissioner determines not to release the information, the commissioner
shall provide written findings in support of the decision to the
requestor. As used in this section, "near fatality'' means an act or
event that places a child in serious or critical condition as certified
by a physician.
                                             
 (b) Information may be disclosed as follows:
                                             
 (1) Information released prior to the completion of the
investigation of a report shall be limited to a statement that a report
is "under investigation.''
                                             
 (2) When there has been a prior disclosure pursuant to
subparagraph (b)(1) of this paragraph, information released in a case in
which the report has been unfounded shall be limited to the statement
that "the investigation has been completed, and the report has been
determined unfounded.''
                                             
 (3) If the report has been founded, then information may be
released pursuant to subparagraph (c) of this section.
                                             
 (c) For the purposes of this paragraph, the following information
shall be disclosed:
                                             
 (1) The name of the abused or neglected child, provided that
the name shall not be disclosed in a case of a near fatality unless the
name has otherwise previously been disclosed.
                                             
 (2) The name of the parent or other person legally responsible
for the child or the foster family home, group home, child care
institution, or child placing agency where the child is placed.
                                             
 (3) The date of any report to the department of suspected
abuse or neglect, to include any prior reports on file, provided that
the identity of the person making the report shall not be made public.
                                             
 (4) The statutory basis and supporting allegations of any such
report, provided that the identity of the person making the report shall
not be made public.
                                             
 (5) Whether any such report was referred to a district office
for assessment and, if so, the priority assigned by central intake.
                                             
 (6) The date any such report was referred to the district
office for assessment.
                                             
 (7) For each report, the date and means by which the district
office made contact with the family regarding the assessment.
                                             
 (8) For each report, the date and means of any collateral
contact made as part of the investigation provided that the identity of
an individual so contacted shall not be made public.
                                             
 (9) For each report, the date the assessment was completed.
                                             
 (10) For each report, the fact that the department's
investigation resulted in a finding of either abuse or neglect and the
basis for the finding.
                                             
 (11) Identification of services and actions taken, if any, by
the department regarding the child named in the report and his or her
family or substitute caregiver as a result of any such report or
reports.
                                             
 (12) Any extraordinary or pertinent information concerning the
circumstances of the abuse or maltreatment of the child and the
investigation of such abuse or maltreatment, where the commissioner
determines such disclosure is consistent with the public interest.
                                             
 (d) Any disclosure of information pursuant to this paragraph
shall be consistent with the provisions of subparagraph (c). Such
disclosure shall not identify or provide an identifying description of
the source of the report, and shall not identify the name of the abused
or neglected child's siblings, or any other members of the child's
household, other than the subject of the report.
                                             
 XIII. The commissioner shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A
relative to approved headgear required by RSA 265:144, X.
                                             
 XIV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XIV-a. (a) The children's health insurance program shall include a
public education and outreach component, the purpose of which shall be
to increase enrollment by informing new parents of the program's
availability and assisting families in the completion of the application
process as necessary.
                                             
 (b) The department shall, through the New Hampshire healthy kids
corporation, allocate funds for the development of a volunteer program
to promote the program to eligible families and to identify those
families who may require assistance with the application or
redetermination process, and provide training and supervision of
volunteers. The healthy kids corporation shall coordinate with and
utilize the services of Volunteer NH, AmeriCorps, and other volunteer
organizations.
                                             
 (c) The department shall reimburse designated partner agencies,
including health and home visiting providers, who had to provide
additional follow-up with applicants an enhanced application fee for the
outreach assistance to individuals requesting assistance in the
application or redetermination process. Such fee shall be equal to twice
the regular application fee.
                                             
 XV. The commissioner shall establish a quality early learning
opportunity initiative which shall be available on a first-come,
first-served basis to families whose income is between 190 percent and
250 percent of the federal poverty guidelines, and whose children are
enrolled in a child care program licensed under RSA 170-E, and who
otherwise meet all other eligibility requirements for child care
assistance. The amount of support provided to eligible families shall be
calculated annually by the department and shall reflect the estimated
average difference between the cost of licensed child care and
unlicensed child care.
                                             
 XVI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XVII. The commissioner or designee shall participate in the
development of an evidence-based prescription drug education program
designed to provide health care providers who are licensed to prescribe
or dispense prescription drugs with information and education on the
therapeutic and cost-effective utilization of prescription drugs. This
program may be developed under the leadership of the New Hampshire
Medical Society in partnership with area health education centers
programs administered by Dartmouth Medical School and any organization
in New Hampshire or other state the partnership shall see fit to
consult. The commissioner or partners may seek grants and financial
gifts from non-profit charitable foundations to cover planning and
development of this program. The commissioner or partners shall present
a progress report on the development of the program to the oversight
committee on health and human services by November 1, 2008.
                                             
 XVIII. (a) The commissioner shall establish the state office of
rural health (SORH) within the department. The SORH shall:
                                             
 (1) Link rural health and human service providers with state
and federal resources.
                                             
 (2) Seek long-term solutions to the challenges of rural
health.
                                             
 (3) Increase access to health care in rural and underserved
areas of the state.
                                             
 (4) Improve recruitment and retention of health professionals
in rural areas.
                                             
 (5) Provide technical assistance and coordination to rural
communities and health organizations.
                                             
 (6) Maintain a clearing house for collecting and disseminating
information on rural health care issues and innovative approaches to the
delivery of health care in rural areas.
                                             
 (7) Coordinate rural health interests and activities.
                                             
 (8) Participate in strengthening state, local, and federal
partnerships.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to accomplishing the goals under subparagraph (a).
                                             
 (c) The commissioner shall submit an annual report beginning on
November 1, 2009 to the speaker of the house of representatives, the
senate president, and the governor on the health status of rural
residents incorporating current data from the bureau of health
statistics and data management and the SORH.
                                             
 XIX. (a) The commissioner shall employ a managed care model for
administering the Medicaid program and its enrollees to provide for
managed care services for all Medicaid populations throughout New
Hampshire consistent with the provisions of 42 U.S.C. 1396u-2. Models
for managed care may include, but not be limited to, a traditional
capitated managed care organization contract, an administrative services
organization, an accountable care organization, or a primary care case
management model, or a combination thereof, offering the best value,
quality assurance, and efficiency, maximizing the potential for savings,
and presenting the most innovative approach compared to other externally
administered models. The department shall present the opportunities of
the various models or combination of models with a recommendation for
the best managed care model for New Hampshire, no later than July 15,
2011, to the fiscal committee of the general court which shall consult
with the oversight committee on health and human services. Services to
be managed within the model shall include all mandatory Medicaid covered
services and may include, but shall not be limited to, care
coordination, utilization management, disease management, pharmacy
benefit management, provider network management, quality management, and
customer services. The model shall not include mandatory dental
services. The commissioner shall issue a 5-year request for proposals to
enter into contracts with the vendors that demonstrate the greatest
ability to satisfy the state's need for value, quality, efficiency,
innovation, and savings. The request for proposals shall be released no
later than October 15, 2011. The vendors of the managed care model or
combination of models demonstrating the greatest ability to satisfy the
state's need for value, quality, efficiency, innovation, and savings
shall be selected no later than January 15, 2012 with final contracts
submitted to the governor and council no later than March 15, 2012
unless this date is extended by the fiscal committee. After the bidding
process, the commissioner shall establish a capitated rate based on the
bids by the appropriate model for the contract that is full risk to the
vendors. The capitated rate shall be broken down into rate cells for
each population including, but not limited to, the persons eligible for
temporary assistance to needy families (TANF), aid for the permanently
and totally disabled (APTD), breast and cervical cancer program (BCCP),
home care for children with severe disabilities (HC-CSD), and those
residing in nursing facilities. The capitated rate shall be approved by
the fiscal committee of the general court. The managed care model or
models' selected vendors providing the Medicaid services shall establish
medical homes and all Medicaid recipients shall receive their care
through a medical home. In contracting for a managed care model and the
various rate cells, the department shall ensure no reduction in the
quality of care of services provided to enrollees in the managed care
model and shall exercise all due diligence to maintain or increase the
current level of quality of care provided. The target date for
implementation of the contract is July 1, 2012. The commissioner may, in
consultation with the fiscal committee, adopt rules, if necessary, to
implement the provisions of this paragraph. The department shall seek,
with the approval of the fiscal committee, all necessary and appropriate
waivers to implement the provisions of this paragraph.
                                             
 (b) The department shall ensure that all eligible Medicaid
members are enrolled in the managed care model under contract with the
department no later than 12 months after the contract is awarded to the
vendor or vendors of the managed care model.
                                             
 (c) For the purposes of this paragraph:
                                             
 (1) An "accountable care organization'' means an entity or
group which accepts responsibility for the cost and quality of care
delivered to Medicaid patients cared for by its clinicians.
                                             
 (2) "An administrative services organization'' means an entity
that contracts as an insurance company with a self-funded plan but where
the insurance company performs administrative services only and the
self-funded entity assumes all risk.
                                             
 (3) A "managed care organization'' means an entity that is
authorized by law to provide covered health services on a capitated risk
basis and arranges for the provision of medical assistance services and
supplies and coordinates the care of Medicaid recipients residing in all
areas of the state, including the elderly, those meeting federal
supplemental security income and state standards for disability, and
those who are also currently enrolled in Medicare.
                                             
 (4) "A primary care case management'' means a system under
which a primary care case management contracts with the state to furnish
case management services, which include the location, coordination, and
monitoring of primary health care services, to Medicaid recipients.
                                             
 (d) The vendors contracting with the department to carry out the
Medicaid managed care program pursuant to this paragraph shall make
quarterly reports to the commissioner regarding their efforts to
implement New Hampshire's 10-year mental health plan issued in 2008.
Such reports shall commence on November 1, 2013. The commissioner shall
make an annual report summarizing the information in the vendors'
reports to the oversight committee on health and human services,
established in RSA 126-A:13, commencing on November 1, 2014.


                                             [Paragraph XIX(e) repealed by 2015, 199:3 effective June 30, 2017.
                                             ]


                                             
 (e) Thirty days after the effective date of this subparagraph, a
managed care organization that provides prescription drug benefits to a
Medicaid recipient shall suspend prior authorization requirements for a
community mental health program, as defined under RSA 135-C:2, IV on
medication used to treat severe mental illness such as schizophrenia,
depression, or bipolar disorder. Medications shall be available under
this subparagraph without restriction except as otherwise approved by
the department.
                                             
 (f) The commissioner shall seek all necessary federal approvals,
including, but not limited to, Medicaid state plan amendments and
Medicaid care management contract approval, to allow the Medicaid
managed care organizations to use their own drug formulary in providing
pharmacy benefits and contracting with pharmacy providers. A managed
care organization as defined in subparagraph (c)(3) that implements its
own drug formulary shall comply with the provisions of the Federal
Medicaid statute, 42 U.S.C. section 1396r-8, and RSA 420-J:7-b, II,
II-a, and III.
                                             
 XX. The commissioner shall enter into a contract with the health
information organization established pursuant to RSA 332-I to administer
the grant for the New Hampshire Information Exchange Planning and
Implementation Project.
                                             
 XXI. (a) The commissioners of the departments of health and human
services and corrections, and the attorney general shall enter into a
memorandum of understanding establishing an inter-departmental team, to
address responsibilities associated with the most challenging cases of
individuals 18 years of age or older with developmental disabilities or
acquired brain disorders who present a substantial risk to community
safety as determined by a comprehensive risk assessment appropriate to
the individual. The memorandum of understanding shall include a
requirement for participation by: the department of health and human
services, including the bureau of developmental services, the bureau of
behavioral health, the division for children, youth and families, the
bureau of drug and alcohol services, the New Hampshire hospital, the
department of justice, and the department of corrections. The purpose of
the memorandum of understanding is to promote collaboration and
cooperation across all services systems to determine and recommend
system responsibility for providing and/or funding specific services and
supports to effectively meet the needs of the individual and the public
safety of the community in accordance with the rules of the respective
departments.
                                             
 (b) Nothing in this paragraph shall abrogate the rights of
individuals or responsibilities of agencies under RSA 171-A, RSA 171-B,
RSA 137-K, or any other applicable state or federal law.
                                             
 (c) Any of the departments may refer a case to the team for
consideration. In addition, a county house of corrections may refer a
case to the team for consideration for individuals determined eligible
under RSA 171-A.
                                             
 (d) The commissioners and the attorney general shall submit an
annual report beginning on November 1, 2011 to the president of the
senate, the speaker of the house of representatives, and the governor
relative to the outcomes and recommendations of the team.
                                             
 XXII. The commissioner shall fully implement expanded coverage of
Medicaid family planning services as required by RSA 126-A:4-c no later
than July 1, 2013. At the time of implementation, the state's Medicaid
plan shall be amended to enable the state to accept federal matching
funds. As provided in RSA 126-A:4-c, the department shall ensure that
the state realizes the 90 percent federal Medicaid match available for
the family planning services. If the traditional claims payment systems
are unavailable for implementation within the time frame indicated in
this paragraph, the commissioner shall manually process the payment of
claims or contract with a third party administrator to ensure timely
provider payment capacity and uninterrupted access to eligible
recipients. At least 30 days in advance of program implementation, the
commissioner shall conduct an outreach effort to all participating
Medicaid family planning providers to distribute guidance and technical
assistance regarding patient enrollment procedures, eligibility
criteria, and covered medical services and supplies. Within 60 days
after program implementation as required under this paragraph and
annually thereafter, the commissioner shall make a report relative to
the Medicaid family planning services program to the joint legislative
fiscal committee.
                                             
 XXIII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]


                                             [Paragraph XXIV repealed by 2014, 3:12, II, effective December 31,
2018.
                                             ]


                                             
 XXIV. (a) There is hereby established the voluntary bridge to
marketplace premium assistance program in order to provide medical
assistance for newly eligible adults and their spouse and dependents, if
applicable. This program shall be administered by the department of
health and human services and subject to subparagraph XXV(c) shall
terminate on March 31, 2015. In order to receive medical assistance
through the program, newly eligible adults shall choose health insurance
coverage either from qualified health plans (QHPs) offered on the
federally-facilitated exchange if cost effective or an alternative
benefit plan (ABP) offered by one of the managed care organizations
(MCO) awarded contracts as vendors to implement Medicaid managed care
under RSA 126-A:5, XIX(a). For the purposes of this paragraph,
alternative benefit plan is defined as the Medicaid benchmark or
benchmark equivalent coverage in section 1937 of the Social Security
Act. Provider payments shall be in an amount which shall be no less than
before the effective date of this paragraph.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner shall seek any necessary waivers or state
plan amendments to implement the provisions of this paragraph, including
provisions to address individuals determined to be medically frail after
completion of a health questionnaire screening process. To the greatest
extent practicable the waiver or state plan amendments shall incorporate
measures to promote continuity of health insurance coverage and personal
responsibility, including but not limited to: co-pays, deductibles,
disincentives for inappropriate emergency room use, and mandatory
wellness programs. Prior to submitting the waiver or state plan
amendments to CMS, the commissioner shall present the waiver or state
plan amendments to the fiscal committee of the general court for
approval. The program shall not begin until such waivers or state plan
amendments have been approved by CMS.
                                             
 (c) A determination of eligibility for the voluntary bridge to
marketplace premium assistance program or discontinuation of benefits,
including at the conclusion of the voluntary bridge to marketplace
premium assistance program, shall be a qualifying event under the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).
Individuals who participate in the voluntary bridge to marketplace
premium assistance program shall:
                                             
 (1) Provide all necessary information regarding financial
eligibility, residency, citizenship or immigration status, and insurance
coverage to the department of health and human services in accordance
with rules, or interim rules, adopted under RSA 541-A;
                                             
 (2) Inform the department of any changes in financial
eligibility, residency, citizenship or immigration status, and insurance
coverage within 10 days of such change; and
                                             
 (3) At the time of enrollment acknowledge that the voluntary
premium assistance program is subject to cancellation upon notice.
                                             
 (d) Enrollment for the voluntary bridge to marketplace premium
assistance program under this paragraph shall begin May 1, 2014 or as
soon thereafter as is practicable. Coverage under the voluntary bridge
to marketplace premium assistance program under this paragraph shall be
implemented commencing July 1, 2014 or as soon thereafter as is
practicable. The cost of the medical assistance provided under the
voluntary bridge to marketplace premium assistance program shall be paid
solely from federal funds as provided under 42 U.S.C. section 1396d(y).
                                             
 (e) For coverage under the voluntary bridge to marketplace
premium assistance program, the commissioner shall negotiate an
amendment to its existing managed care contracts to provide new private
insurance plans which will qualify for this program. Alternative benefit
plans shall reimburse at rates that are sufficient to ensure improved
access to and quality of care. Such plans shall maximize to the extent
allowable wellness programs, cost-sharing mechanisms, and disincentives
for inappropriate emergency room use.
                                             
 (f) The commissioner may adopt rules or interim rules, pursuant
to RSA 541-A, as necessary to implement any changes to the Medicaid
program consistent with any waivers or state plan amendments submitted
under this paragraph.
                                             
 (g) Nothing in this paragraph shall limit the existing and
traditional regulatory authority of the New Hampshire insurance
department under Title XXXVII with respect to private health insurance
coverage in which persons are enrolled in the program under this
paragraph. In developing this program including drafting any necessary
plan amendments or waiver requests, the commissioner shall consult with
the New Hampshire insurance department as necessary to ensure that each
program is designed to operate seamlessly with private insurance
coverage and is consistent with all applicable insurance regulatory
standards.


                                             [Paragraph XXV repealed by 2014, 3:12, III, effective December 31,
2018.
                                             ]


                                             
 XXV. (a) Consistent with the time frames in this paragraph, there is
hereby established the marketplace premium assistance program. This will
be a premium assistance program for newly eligible adults and their
eligible spouse and dependents, if applicable, until December 31, 2018
and shall be administered by the department of health and human
services. In order to receive medical assistance from the program, newly
eligible adults who are ineligible for the HIPP program shall choose
from any qualified health plans (QHPs) offered on the
federally-facilitated exchange if cost effective; provided, however,
that any newly eligible adult who had coverage under an alternative
benefit plan (ABP) offered by a managed care organization (MCO) under
paragraph XIX during the voluntary bridge to marketplace premium
assistance program established under RSA 126-A:5, XXIV shall be
automatically enrolled at the beginning of open enrollment in a
comparable QHP by that same MCO if one is available, unless such newly
eligible adult subsequently chooses a different QHP during the
enrollment period. If a comparable QHP is not offered by the newly
eligible adult's MCO then the newly eligible adult may choose from any
QHPs, if cost effective. Provider payments shall be in an amount which
shall be no less than before the effective date of this paragraph.
                                             
 (b) On or before December 1, 2014, the commissioner shall submit
to CMS any necessary waiver application to implement the provisions of
this paragraph, including provisions to address individuals determined
to be medically frail after completion of a health questionnaire
screening process. To the greatest extent practicable the waiver shall
incorporate measures to promote continuity of health insurance coverage
and personal responsibility, including but not limited to: co-pays,
deductibles, disincentives for inappropriate emergency room use, and
mandatory wellness programs. Prior to submitting the waiver to CMS the
commissioner shall present the waiver to the fiscal committee of the
general court for approval. The program shall not begin until such
waivers have been approved by CMS.
                                             
 (c) If the waiver to implement the marketplace premium assistance
program is approved on or before March 31, 2015 then, coverage under the
voluntary bridge to marketplace premium assistance program established
in RSA 126-A:5, XXIV shall terminate on December 31, 2015. Enrollment in
the marketplace premium assistance program shall begin on October 15,
2015 and coverage shall begin on January 1, 2016. Coverage shall end on
December 31, 2018. The cost of the medical assistance provided under the
marketplace premium assistance program shall be paid solely from
non-general fund sources, including federal funds as provided under 42
U.S.C. section 1396d(y).
                                             
 (d) If the waiver to implement the marketplace premium assistance
program is not approved on or before March 31, 2015 then the program
shall not begin and coverage under the voluntary bridge to marketplace
premium assistance program established in RSA 126-A:5, XXIV shall
terminate on June 30, 2015.
                                             
 (e) A determination of eligibility for the marketplace premium
assistance program shall be a qualifying event under the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).
Individuals who participate in the marketplace premium assistance
program shall:
                                             
 (1) Provide all necessary information regarding financial
eligibility, residency, citizenship or immigration status, and insurance
coverage to the department of health and human services in accordance
with rules, or interim rules, adopted under RSA 541-A;
                                             
 (2) Inform the department of any changes in financial
eligibility, residency, citizenship or immigration status, and insurance
coverage within 10 days of such change; and
                                             
 (3) At the time of enrollment acknowledge that the marketplace
premium assistance program is subject to cancellation upon notice.
                                             
 (f) The commissioner may adopt rules or interim rules, pursuant
to RSA 541-A, as necessary to implement any changes to the Medicaid
program consistent with any waivers or state plan amendments submitted
under this paragraph.
                                             
 (g) Nothing in this paragraph shall limit the existing and
traditional regulatory authority of the New Hampshire insurance
department under Title XXXVII with respect to private health insurance
coverage in which persons are enrolled in this program under this
paragraph. In developing the program under this paragraph including
drafting any necessary plan amendments or waiver requests, the
commissioner shall consult with the New Hampshire insurance department
as necessary to ensure that each program is designed to operate
seamlessly with private insurance coverage and is consistent with all
applicable insurance regulatory standards.


                                             [Paragraph XXVI repealed by 2014, 3:12, IV, effective December 31,
2018.
                                             ]


                                             
 XXVI. Any unemployed individual who qualifies for the voluntary
bridge to marketplace premium assistance program established in
paragraph XXIV or the marketplace premium assistance program established
in paragraph XXV shall be referred to the department of employment
security for the purpose of helping the unemployed individual find
employment.
                                             
 XXVII. The commissioner, in collaboration with the commissioner of
the department of safety, the director of the police standards and
training council, and the local chapter of the Alzheimer's Association,
shall develop an educational program on Alzheimer's disease and other
related dementia, for both the general public and special interest
groups, including law enforcement. Depending upon available resources,
additional information and input may be sought from the fish and game
department, the adjutant general's department, the board of medicine,
the New Hampshire Medical Society, and other interested parties. The
commissioner shall provide an interim report on or before January 1,
2015 with a final report on or before July 1, 2015 on the status of the
implementation of the educational program to the oversight committee on
health and human services established in RSA 126-A:13 and the
subcommittee on Alzheimer's disease and other related dementia
established in RSA 126-A:15-a. The commissioner shall post a link to the
local chapter of the Alzheimer's Association on the department's
website.
                                             
 XXVIII. The commissioner shall include a link to the International
Lyme and Associated Diseases Society (www.ILADS.org) on its Internet
website and may include a disclaimer that the department of health and
human services neither endorses nor supports the position of the
International Lyme and Associated Diseases Society.
                                             
 XXIX. The commissioner shall submit a state plan amendment to the
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services to provide substance use
disorder services to Title XIX and Title XXI beneficiaries. The
commissioner shall design the benefit consistent with Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Service Administration (SAMHSA) treatment guidelines.
The commissioner shall also determine the process and timeline for
implementing services and, if necessary, phase in the benefit.
                                             
 XXX. (a)(1) Newly eligible adults who are unemployed shall be
eligible to receive benefits under RSA 126-A:5 XXIV-XXV, if the
commissioner finds that the individual is engaging in at least 30 hours
per week of one or a combination of the following activities:
                                             
 (A) Unsubsidized employment.
                                             
 (B) Subsidized private sector employment.
                                             
 (C) Subsidized public sector employment.
                                             
 (D) Work experience, including work associated with the
refurbishing of publicly assisted housing, if sufficient private sector
employment is not available.
                                             
 (E) On-the-job training.
                                             
 (F) Job search and job readiness assistance.
                                             
 (G) Community service programs.
                                             
 (H) Vocational educational training not to exceed 12 months
with respect to any individual.
                                             
 (I) Job skills training directly related to employment.
                                             
 (J) Education directly related to employment, in the case
of a recipient who has not received a high school diploma or a
certificate of high school equivalency.
                                             
 (K) Satisfactory attendance at secondary school or in a
course of study leading to a certificate of general equivalence, in the
case of a recipient who has not completed secondary school or received
such a certificate.
                                             
 (L) The provision of child care services to an individual
who is participating in a community service program.
                                             
 (2) The requirements under subparagraph (1) shall be
consistent with the federal Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Program, 42 U.S.C. section 607(d).
                                             
 (3) Grounds for disqualification for benefits under this
subparagraph shall be consistent with the federal Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families Program, 42 U.S.C. section 607(e).
                                             
 (4) This subparagraph shall only apply to those considered
childless, abled-bodied adults as defined in section
1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII) of the Social Security Act of 1935, as amended,
42 U.S.C. section 1396a(a)(10)(A)(i). In this subparagraph, "childless''
means an adult who does not live with a dependent child which includes a
child under 18 years of age or under 20 years of age if the child is a
full-time student in a secondary school or the equivalent.
                                             
 (5) This subparagraph shall not apply to:
                                             
 (A) A person who is temporarily unable to participate in
the requirements under subparagraph (a)(1) due to illness or incapacity
as certified by a licensed physician, an advanced practice registered
nurse (APRN), a licensed behavioral health professional, a licensed
physician assistant, or a board-certified psychologist. The physician,
APRN, licensed behavioral health professional, licensed physician
assistant, or psychologist shall certify, on a form provided by the
department, the duration and limitations of the disability.
                                             
 (B) A person participating in a state-certified drug court
program, as certified by the administrative office of the superior
court.
                                             
 (C) A parent or caretaker as identified in RSA 167:82,
II(g) where the required care is considered necessary by a licensed
physician, APRN, board-certified psychologist, physician assistant, or
licensed behavioral health professional who shall certify the duration
that such care is required.
                                             
 (b) Newly eligible adults who visit the emergency room for
non-emergency purposes shall be required to make a co-payment of 
                                             $8 for
the first visit and 
                                             $25 for each and every non-emergency visit
thereafter.
                                             
 (c) All veterans who are current New Hampshire residents shall
receive medical and medical-related services from any hospital in this
state providing services to the newly eligible Medicaid population.
                                             
 (d) A person shall not be eligible to enroll or participate in
the New Hampshire health protection program, established under RSA
126-A:5, XXIV-XXV, unless such person verifies his or her United States
citizenship by 2 forms of identification and proof of New Hampshire
residency by either a New Hampshire driver's license or a nondriver's
picture identification card issued pursuant to RSA 260:21.
                                             
 (e) No person, organization, department, or agency shall submit
the name of any person to the National Instant Criminal Background Check
System (NICS) on the basis that the person has been adjudicated a
"mental defective'' or has been committed to a mental institution,
except pursuant to a court order issued following a hearing in which the
person participated and was represented by an attorney.
                                             
 (f) The commissioner shall seek any new waiver or state plan
amendments to implement the provisions of this paragraph. Any such
waivers or amendments necessary shall be in place by November 1, 2016.
Prior to submitting the waiver or state plan amendments to the CMS, the
commissioner shall present the waiver or state plan amendments to the
fiscal committee of the general court for approval. The program shall
not be reauthorized until such waivers or state plan amendments have
been approved by CMS. If the waiver or state plan is not approved, the
commissioner shall immediately, no later than November 1, 2016, notify
all program participants that the program has not been reauthorized
beyond December 31, 2016.
                                             
 (6) If any provision of subparagraph (a), (c), or (d), or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid,
including, but not limited to, being contrary to federal law or not
approved by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) in
necessary state plan amendments or waivers, such determination shall not
affect the provisions or applications of this act which can be given
effect without the invalid provision or application, and to that end the
provisions of these subparagraphs are severable.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, 199. 1998, 354:1. 1999, 110:2; 223:2. 2003,
206:2, 3. 2004, 98:2. 2005, 100:1. 2006, 258:18; 299:3. 2007, 156:4;
167:2; 263:12, 126; 324:11; 345:1. 2008, 119:1; 367:2. 2009, 144:41.
2011, 125:1; 232:7; 235:1. 2012, 156:1. 2013, 41:1; 92:1. 2014, 3:2,
eff. Mar. 27, 2014; 3:12, I, eff. Sept. 1, 2015; 3:12, II-IV, eff. Dec.
31, 2016; 67:2, eff. May 27, 2014. 2015, 42:3, eff. May 14, 2015; 199:1,
eff. July 6, 2015; 199:3, eff. June 30, 2017; 276:209, 231, 261, 262,
eff. July 1, 2015. 2016, 13:1, 3, 4, eff. Apr. 5, 2016.

### Section 126-A:5-a

 **126-A:5-a Access to Budget and Expenditures for Persons Receiving
State Services. –** The commissioner of the department of health and
human services and the area agencies shall provide to any person, or
that person's guardian, who is receiving state services pursuant to a
plan with an individualized budget, a copy of such budget and the
expenditures made under such budget.

**Source.** 2013, 144:108, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 126-A:5-b


                                             


                                             [RSA 126-A:5-b repealed by 2014, 3:12, V, effective December 31,
2018.
                                             ]

 **126-A:5-b The New Hampshire Health Protection Trust Fund. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established the New Hampshire health protection
trust fund which shall be accounted for distinctly and separately from
all other funds and shall be non-interest bearing. The trust fund shall
be administered by the commissioner of the department of health and
human services and shall be used solely to provide coverage for the
newly eligible Medicaid population as provided for under RSA 126-A:5,
XXIV-XXVI and RSA 126-A:67 in qualified health plans on the federal
marketplace and pay for the administrative costs for the program. The
commissioner may accept any gifts, grants, donations, or other funding
from any source and shall deposit all such revenue received into the
fund. No state general fund appropriations shall be deposited into the
fund. All moneys in the trust fund shall be nonlapsing and shall be
continually appropriated to the commissioner of the department of health
and human services for the purposes of the trust fund. The trust fund
shall be authorized to pay and/or reimburse:
                                             
 (a) The cost of the employee share of premiums, co-insurance,
co-payments, deductibles, and supplemental cost-sharing, plus the cost
of any wrap-around services that are determined by the department to be
cost effective to licensed health insurance carriers and/or private
employers for coverage under employer sponsored health insurance as
provided in RSA 126-A:5, XXIII.
                                             
 (b) The cost of medical services, including without limitation,
premiums and wrap-around benefits for those newly eligible adults who
obtain health coverage through the voluntary bridge to marketplace
premium assistance program as provided in RSA 126-A:5, XXIV.
                                             
 (c) The cost of premiums, co-insurance, co-payments, deductibles,
and supplemental cost-sharing plus the cost of any wrap-around services
to licensed health insurance carriers on the federally facilitated
exchange under the marketplace premium assistance program as provided in
RSA 126-A:5, XXV.
                                             
 (d) Any other costs that are fully reimbursable by the federal
government pertaining to the health insurance premium payment (HIPP)
program, the voluntary bridge to marketplace premium assistance program,
and the marketplace premium assistance program for the newly eligible as
established under 126-A:5, XXIII-XXVI and RSA 126-A:67.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of health and human services, as the
administrator of the trust fund, shall have the sole authority to:
                                             
 (a) Apply for federal funds to support the programs established
under RSA 126-A:5, XXIII-XXV and RSA 126-A:67.
                                             
 (b) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, accept
and expend federal funds as may be available for HIPP, the voluntary
bridge to marketplace premium assistance program, and the premium
assistance program. The commissioner shall notify the bureau of
accounting services, by letter, with a copy to the fiscal committee of
the general court and the legislative budget assistant.
                                             
 (c) Make payments and reimbursements from the trust fund as
outlined in this section.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall submit a report to the governor and the
fiscal committee of the general court detailing the activities and
operation of the trust fund annually within 90 days of the close of each
state fiscal year.

**Source.** 2014, 3:3, eff. Mar. 27, 2014. 2016, 13:5, eff. Apr. 5,
2016.

### Section 126-A:5-c

 **126-A:5-c Funding the State Share of the New Hampshire Health
Protection Program. –**
                                             
 I. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Program'' means the New Hampshire health protection program
under RSA 126-A:5, XXIV-XXV.
                                             
 (b) "Remainder amount'' means the cost of the program for
coverage effective between January 1, 2017 and June 30, 2017 plus
administrative costs attributable to the program, less all federal
reimbursement for the program and federal reimbursement for the related
administrative costs; and the cost of the program for coverage effective
between July 1, 2017 and December 31, 2018, plus administrative costs
attributable to the program, less all federal reimbursement for the
program and federal reimbursement for administrative costs attributable
to the program, and taxes attributable to premiums written for medical
and other medical related services for the newly eligible Medicaid
population as provided for under RSA 126-A:5, XXIV-XXVI, consistent with
RSA 400-A:32, III(b).
                                             
 II. Funding for the program from January 1, 2017 until December 31,
2018 shall not be funded from general funds. The program shall be funded
as follows:
                                             
 (a) Federal funds as made available by 42 U.S.C. section
1396d(y)(1).
                                             
 (b) Revenue generated under RSA 400-A:32, III(b).
                                             
 (c) Other non-general fund revenues.
                                             
 III. If the commissioner determines that at any time the sum total
of the federal match rate applied, as set forth in 42 U.S.C. section
1396d(y)(1), and insurance premium tax revenues attributable to the
program and revenue from non-general fund sources is insufficient to
fully fund the program for newly eligible adults under RSA 126-A:5,
XXIV-XXV, then RSA 126-A:5, XXIV and XXV shall be repealed 180 days
after such determination upon notification by the commissioner of the
department of health and human services to the secretary of state and
the director of legislative services and consistent with the terms of
the waiver for this program issued by the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services. Upon such determination, the commissioner shall
immediately issue notice to program participants of the program's
pending repeal.
                                             
 IV. On or before August 15th of each year, the department of health
and human services, in consultation with the insurance department, shall
calculate the remainder amount pursuant to this section for the next
calendar year. The remainder amount shall be calculated utilizing
estimated insurance premium taxes attributable to medical and other
medical-related services for the newly eligible Medicaid population as
provided for under RSA 126-A:5, XXIV-XXVI for each calendar year. The
commissioner of health and human services shall report the remainder
amounts to the insurance department, any contributing charitable
foundation, the New Hampshire Health Plan, the governor, the speaker of
the house of representatives, and the senate president.
                                             
 V. After the close of each calendar year, on or before January 15th,
the department of health and human services, in consultation with the
insurance department, shall recalculate the remainder amount utilizing
actual insurance premium tax revenues attributable to medical and other
medical-related services for the newly eligible Medicaid population
provided for under RSA 126-A:5, XXIV-XXVI for the completed calendar
year. The commissioner of health and human services shall compare the
remainder amount calculations under this paragraph with the remainder
amount calculations under paragraph IV and report the results to the
insurance department, any contributing charitable foundation, the New
Hampshire Health Plan, the governor, the speaker of the house of
representatives, and the senate president. Any difference between
amounts calculated under paragraphs IV and V for a completed calendar
year shall be added to the remainder amount due and payable during the
current calendar year. In the event that actual program costs are less
than funds received, the difference shall be credited against the
remaining amount for the next payable period.
                                             
 VI. The commissioner of the department of health and human services
shall be responsible for determining, on a quarterly basis commencing no
later than December 31, 2016, whether there is sufficient funding in the
New Hampshire health protection trust fund, established in RSA
126-A:5-b, to cover projected program costs for the non-federal share
for the next quarter. If at any time the commissioner determines that a
projected shortfall exists, he or she shall terminate the program in
accordance with paragraph III.

**Source.** 2016, 13:6, eff. Apr. 5, 2016.

### Section 126-A:5-d

 **126-A:5-d Voluntary Provider Contributions. –** For the period of
January 1, 2017 through December 31, 2018, voluntary provider donations
received from the Foundation for Healthy Communities or any other
charitable foundation may be deposited into the New Hampshire health
protection trust fund, established pursuant to RSA 126-A:5-b.

**Source.** 2016, 13:6, eff. Apr. 5, 2016.

### Section 126-A:5-e


                                             


                                             [RSA 126-A:5-e repealed by 2016, 13:15, effective December 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **126-A:5-e Commission to Evaluate the Effectiveness and Future of
the Premium Assistance Program. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established a commission to evaluate the
effectiveness and future of the premium assistance program.
                                             
 (a) The members of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 (1) Three members of the senate, appointed by the president of
the senate, one of whom shall be a member of the minority party.
                                             
 (2) Three members of the house of representatives, appointed
by the speaker of the house of representatives, one of whom shall be a
member of the minority party.
                                             
 (3) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (4) The commissioner of the department of insurance, or
designee.
                                             
 (5) A representative of an insurance carrier that offers
policies for sale in New Hampshire on the exchange, appointed by the
senate president.
                                             
 (6) A representative of a hospital that operates in New
Hampshire, appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (7) A public member, who is a taxpayer, appointed by the
senate president.
                                             
 (8) A public member, who currently receives insurance coverage
through the program, appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives.
                                             
 (9) A licensed physician, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (10) A licensed mental health professional, appointed by the
governor.
                                             
 (11) A masters level licensed alcohol and drug counselor,
appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (b) Legislative members of the commission shall receive mileage
at the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the commission.
                                             
 II. (a) The commission shall evaluate the effectiveness and future
of the premium assistance program. Specifically the commission shall:
                                             
 (1) Review the program's financial metrics.
                                             
 (2) Review the program's product offerings.
                                             
 (3) Review the program's impact on insurance premiums for
individuals and small businesses.
                                             
 (4) Make recommendations for future program modifications,
including, but not limited to whether the premium assistance program is
the most cost-effective model for the long term versus a return to
private market managed care.
                                             
 (5) Evaluate non-general fund funding options for longer term
continuation of the program.
                                             
 (b) Any funding solutions recommended by the commission shall not
include the use of new general funds.
                                             
 (c) The commission shall solicit information from any person or
entity the commission deems relevant to its study.
                                             
 III. The members of the commission shall elect a chairperson from
among the members. The first meeting of the commission shall be called
by the first-named senate member. The first meeting of the commission
shall be held within 45 days of the effective date of this section.
Eight members of the commission shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 IV. The commission shall report its findings and any recommendations
for proposed legislation to the president of the senate, the speaker of
the house of representatives, the senate clerk, the house clerk, the
governor, and the state library on or before December 1, 2017.

**Source.** 2016, 13:12, eff. Apr. 5, 2016.

### Section 126-A:6

 **126-A:6 Department Administrator of Title XX Social Security. –**
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the governor
shall designate the department of health and human services to
administer the provisions of Title XX of the Social Security Act, Public
Law 93-647, and the commissioner is hereby authorized to receive and
distribute funds under said act.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:7

 **126-A:7 Deputy Commissioner of Health and Human Services. –**
Subject to the approval of the governor and council, the commissioner of
health and human services shall appoint a deputy commissioner who shall
serve for a term of 4 years. The deputy commissioner shall perform such
duties as may be assigned by the commissioner, which may include, but
not be limited to, the authority and power with approval of the
commissioner to direct and supervise the operation and administration of
any division of the department. The annual salary of the deputy
commissioner shall be as prescribed in RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:8

 **126-A:8 Acting Commissioner; Appointment. –** The commissioner of
health and human services may appoint one member of the commissioner's
staff who shall act in the commissioner's stead when the commissioner is
absent from the state and at such other times as directed by the
commissioner. When acting for the commissioner such person shall have
all the power, duties, and authority of the commissioner.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:9

 **126-A:9 Positions Established; Staffing. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be established within the department the following
unclassified positions, in addition to existing unclassified positions
and positions established in paragraph II of this section.
                                             
 (a) The commissioner shall nominate one or more persons duly
qualified by training and experience to serve as senior division
director of the department. From those nominated, the governor and
council shall appoint the senior division director who shall serve for a
term of 4 years. Any vacancy shall be filled for the full 4-year term in
the same manner as the original appointment. The annual salary of the
senior division director shall be as prescribed in RSA 94:1-a. The
provisions of RSA 21:33-a shall not apply to appointments made under
this subparagraph.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner shall nominate one or more persons duly
qualified by training and experience to serve as division director of
the department. From those nominated, the governor and council shall
appoint 2 division directors, each of whom shall serve for a term of 4
years. Any vacancy shall be filled for the full 4-year term in the same
manner as the original appointment. The annual salary of each division
director shall be as prescribed in RSA 94:1-a. The provisions of RSA
21:33-a shall not apply to appointments made under this subparagraph.
                                             
 II. (a) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (b) The commissioner shall appoint a person to each position
established pursuant to subparagraph (a). Any vacancy shall be filled in
the same manner as the original appointment. The annual salary of such
unclassified employees shall be as prescribed in RSA 94:1-a. The
provisions of RSA 21:33-a shall not apply to appointments made under
this subparagraph.
                                             
 (c) Each person appointed under subparagraph (b) shall serve
subject to the following provisions:
                                             
 (1) The commissioner, at any time, upon written notice to the
employee, may terminate the appointee from the position for either:
                                             
 (A) Good cause, which shall include, but not be limited to
malfeasance, misfeasance, or insubordination; or
                                             
 (B) The abolition of a position because of a change in
organization, lack of work, unappropriated or insufficient funds, or
like reasons.
                                             
 (2) Within 10 days after receipt of the notice of the
termination, the appointee may appeal the termination in writing to the
commissioner.
                                             
 (3) Within 20 days of receiving the notice of appeal, the
commissioner shall conduct a hearing in accordance with RSA 126-A:5,
VIII.
                                             
 (4) Within 10 days after completion of the hearing process,
the commissioner shall render a written decision. If the termination is
reversed, the employee shall be reinstated to the same position and all
pay and benefits lost during the time of the appeals process shall be
restored to the appointee.
                                             
 (d) Any positions that were established under this section and
subsequently transferred to the department of information technology and
become vacant may be filled by the commissioner of the department of
information technology in the same manner as prescribed for the
commissioner.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 2001, 158:109, II. 2008, 335:4, eff. Sept. 5,
2008.

### Section 126-A:10

 **126-A:10 Salaries. –** The annual salaries of the commissioner of
health and human services, deputy commissioner of health and human
services, senior division director, division directors, and unclassified
employees of the department shall be as prescribed by RSA 94:1-a.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:10-a

 **126-A:10-a Office of Professional Licensing. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2015,
276:108, I, eff. July 1, 2015.
                                             ]

### Section 126-A:11

 **126-A:11 Medical and Scientific Research Information. –**
                                             
 I. Personal medical and/or other scientific data of any kind
whatsoever obtained for the purpose of medical or scientific research by
the commissioner or by any person, organization, or agency authorized by
the commissioner to obtain such data shall be confidential and shall be
used solely for medical or scientific purposes. Such data shall include,
but not be limited to, all information, records of interviews, written
reports, statements, notes, memoranda, or other data procured in
connection with such scientific studies and research conducted by the
department, or by other persons, agencies, or other organizations so
authorized by the commissioner.
                                             
 II. No hospital, sanitarium, rest home, nursing home, other person,
or agency shall be held liable in any action for damages or other relief
arising from the furnishing of personal medical and/or other scientific
data to the department of health and human services or to the
representative of an authorized medical or scientific research project.
                                             
 III. Personal medical and/or other scientific data obtained by the
department of health and human services or by an authorized research
project shall not be admissible as evidence in any action of any kind in
any court or before any tribunal, board, agency, or person.
                                             
 IV. Personal medical and/or other scientific data shall not be
exhibited nor their contents disclosed in whole or in part by any
officer or employee of the department, or by any other person, except as
may be necessary to further the study or research project to which they
relate.
                                             
 V. Any person who violates the provisions of this section by the
unauthorized disclosure of any confidential medical or scientific data,
in whole or in part, is guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:12

 **126-A:12 Small Claims. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner may use funds accruing to the department of
health and human services for the payment of small claims of 
                                             $100 or
less occasioned by non-insured personal loss or accidents due to the
activities of the department. Any person claiming loss or damage due to
the activities of the department in an amount of 
                                             $100 or less may make
application to the commissioner for payment. The application shall be
filed within 60 days of the date the loss or damage is incurred. If the
commissioner, upon investigation, is of the opinion that the loss or
damage was caused as a result of the activities of the department, the
commissioner shall make payment to the claimant from department funds.
                                             
 II. Any person claiming loss or damage due to the activities of the
department in an amount of less than 
                                             $500, but greater than 
                                             $100, may
make application to the commissioner for payment of such claim. The
application shall be filed within 60 days of the date the loss or damage
is incurred. If the commissioner, upon investigation, is of the opinion
that the loss or damage was caused because of the activities of the
department, the commissioner shall submit a recommendation to the board
of claims for approval of payment to the claimant from department funds.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:12-a

 **126-A:12-a Prompt Payment Required. –** The department shall pay
health care providers, including dental providers, within 45 days of
receipt of a clean claim for services rendered to medicaid recipients.
For the purposes of this section "clean claim'' means a claim for
payment of covered health care expenses that is submitted to the
department on the department's standard claim form using the most
current published procedural codes, with all the required fields
completed with correct and complete information in accordance with the
department's published filing requirements.

**Source.** 2000, 274:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001; 314:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 126-A:13

 **126-A:13 Oversight Committee; Establishment; Purpose. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be an oversight committee on health and human
services consisting of 8 members as follows:
                                             
 (a) 3 members of the senate, at least one of whom shall be a
member of the senate health and human services committee and one of whom
shall be a member of the senate finance committee, appointed by the
president of the senate; and
                                             
 (b) 5 members of the house of representatives, 4 of whom shall be
from the health, human services and elderly affairs committee, and one
of whom shall be from the house finance committee, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 II. Membership on the oversight committee shall be for the biennium
and shall be coterminous with membership in the general court.
                                             
 III. The oversight committee on health and human services shall
provide legislative oversight of the department to support a cost
effective, comprehensive, coordinated system of health and human
services that is family-centered and community-based. The committee
shall promote greater efficiencies by consolidating and centralizing
reporting requirements and other responsibilities of the department
under this section to avoid duplication of efforts involving other
non-regulatory boards, commissions, councils, advisory committees, and
task forces.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 1998, 140:1. 2005, 177:21. 2010, 268:1, 2, eff.
Sept. 4, 2010.

### Section 126-A:14

 **126-A:14 Organization and Compensation. –** The oversight
committee shall have a chairperson who shall be chosen by vote from
among the committee membership. The chairperson's term of office shall
be for the biennium. The committee shall have a clerk who shall be
chosen by vote by the members of the committee. The clerk's term of
office shall be for the biennium. The members of the committee shall
receive legislative mileage when in performance of their duties.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 1998, 140:1, eff. Aug. 7, 1998.

### Section 126-A:15

 **126-A:15 Duties of Oversight Committee. –**
                                             
 I. The committee shall provide legislative oversight of and
informational meetings on the programs, policies, and rules of the
department as brought to its attention by committee members,
legislators, department personnel, or others. The committee shall
monitor the efficiency of operation and the quality of service provided
by the department's programs. The committee's work may include, but is
not limited to, analyzing the efficacy of selected programs, studying
the characteristics of target populations, researching trends affecting
program costs and participation, and reviewing alternate approaches to
programmatic and administrative concerns. The committee may make
recommendations to the commissioner and recommendations for legislation
as indicated by its findings. The committee shall maintain
communications with the department, and any other departments, as
necessary to accomplish its work.
                                             
 II. The oversight committee shall create subcommittees, councils,
task forces, or other ancillary bodies as necessary to implement its
responsibilities. In developing these bodies, the committee shall take
into account major program areas of the department and populations
served by the department, such as public health, behavioral health,
developmental disabilities, and elderly and adult services. The
authorization for each such body shall be repealed on December 31 of the
even-numbered year of the biennium. The committee shall:
                                             
 (a) Establish specific guidelines or outcomes for each such body,
including reporting requirements.
                                             
 (b) Appoint members to each such body, including at least one
legislator and, as appropriate, other members as determined by the
expertise necessary to accomplish the work of the body. Legislative
members need not be a member of the oversight committee.
                                             
 (c) Appoint a chair of each such body, who shall be a legislator
and who shall act as the liaison between the body and the oversight
committee.
                                             
 III. Directly or through an ancillary body, the oversight committee
shall review quarterly the allocation of funds to and receipt of
services by persons with developmental disabilities and acquired brain
disorders, to assure that eligible persons receive services in a timely
manner and in accordance with their needs as provided in RSA 171-A.
                                             
 IV. Directly or through an ancillary body, the oversight committee
shall serve as the legislative liaison for the state committee on aging,
established under RSA 161-F:7, and shall consider the major problems
facing elderly citizens.
                                             
 V. The committee shall meet at the call of the chair but in no case
less than every 2 months.
                                             
 VI. The committee shall make a report no later than the first day of
November of the second year of the biennium as to its activities and
recommendations to the speaker of the house of representatives and the
president of the senate.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 1998, 140:2. 2001, 39:1. 2003, 78:2. 2005,
175:20. 2006, 46:1. 2007, 181:4. 2010, 268:3, eff. Sept. 4, 2010.

### Section 126-A:15-a

 **126-A:15-a Subcommittee on Alzheimer's Disease and Other Related
Dementia. –**
                                             
 I. In addition to the subcommittees established under RSA 126-A:15,
II, the health and human services oversight committee shall create a
permanent subcommittee on Alzheimer's disease and other related
dementia.
                                             
 II. Members of the subcommittee shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) One member of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (b) One member of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (d) The attorney general, or designee.
                                             
 (e) A representative of the Alzheimer's Association, appointed by
the association.
                                             
 (f) A representative of the New Hampshire Medical Society,
appointed by the society.
                                             
 (g) The following persons appointed by the governor:
                                             
 (1) A person who has Alzheimer's disease.
                                             
 (2) A caregiver of a person who has Alzheimer's disease.
                                             
 (3) A representative of the nursing facility industry.
                                             
 (4) A representative of the assisted living industry.
                                             
 (5) A representative of the adult day care services industry.
                                             
 (6) A researcher with Alzheimer's-related expertise in basic
transitional, clinical, or drug development science.
                                             
 (h) A representative of the New Hampshire Nurse Practitioner
Association, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (i) A representative of the Home Care Association of New
Hampshire, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (j) A representative of the board of nursing, appointed by the
board.
                                             
 III. The subcommittee shall:
                                             
 (a) Review other states' plans for Alzheimer's disease.
                                             
 (b) Survey individuals with Alzheimer's disease to more
accurately estimate the number of persons in the state with the
disease.
                                             
 (c) Study existing services and resources, including but not
limited to:
                                             
 (1) The type, cost, and availability of dementia services.
                                             
 (2) Dementia-specific training requirements for long-term care
staff.
                                             
 (3) Quality care measures across all care settings.
                                             
 (4) Capacity of public safety and law enforcement to respond
to persons with Alzheimer's disease.
                                             
 (5) Availability of home and community-based resources for
persons with Alzheimer's disease and respite care to assist families and
caregivers.
                                             
 (6) Inventory of long-term care dementia care units and beds.
                                             
 (7) Adequacy and appropriateness of geriatric-psychiatric
units for persons with behavior disorders associated with Alzheimer's
disease and related dementia.
                                             
 (8) Assisted living residential options for persons with
dementia.
                                             
 (9) State support of Alzheimer's disease research through New
Hampshire universities and other resources.
                                             
 (d) Determine state policies and responses that are necessary to
provide clear and coordinated services and supports to persons,
families, and caregivers living with Alzheimer's disease and develop
strategies to address any identified gaps in service.
                                             
 (e) Establish a New Hampshire state plan for Alzheimer's disease
and other related dementia as approved by the health and human services
oversight committee.
                                             
 IV. Beginning November 1, 2014, and each November 1 thereafter, the
health and human services oversight committee shall submit an annual
report to the chairperson of the health, human services and elderly
affairs committee, the speaker of the house of representatives, the
president of the senate, the house clerk, the senate clerk, the
governor, and the state library relative to:
                                             
 (a) The status of implementation of the New Hampshire state plan
for Alzheimer's disease and other related dementia.
                                             
 (b) The subcommittee's findings and recommendations, including
any recommendations for legislation.

**Source.** 2014, 67:1, eff. May 27, 2014.

### Section 126-A:16

 **126-A:16. Department Rules. –** 
                                             [Repealed by 1995, 310:3, II,
eff. Dec. 31, 1998.
                                             ]

### Section 126-A:17

 **126-A:17 Advisory Council on Child Care. –**
                                             
 I. There is established an advisory council on child care in New
Hampshire consisting of voting and nonvoting members listed in
paragraphs II and III.
                                             
 II. The advisory council shall consist of the following voting
members:
                                             
 (a) One member of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house.
                                             
 (b) One member of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (c) Two representatives of Early Learning New Hampshire, one to
represent the family child care provider community and one to represent
the center-based child care provider community, appointed by such
organization.
                                             
 (d) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (e) One individual representing the interests of school age child
care providers, appointed by the New Hampshire Afterschool Network.
                                             
 (f) The president of the New Hampshire Child Care Resource and
Referral Network, or designee.
                                             
 (g) The president of the New Hampshire Association for the
Education of Young Children, or designee.
                                             
 (h) The president of the New Hampshire American Academy of
Pediatrics, or designee.
                                             
 (i) The chair of the New Hampshire Head Start Directors
Association, or designee.
                                             
 (j) One individual representing the concerns of the business
community relative to child care services, appointed by the Business and
Industry Association.
                                             
 (k) Three individuals who are consumers of child care services,
appointed by the governor. To the extent possible, economic, cultural,
and geographical diversity shall be maintained among these at-large
appointees, with one residing in a city, one residing in a town with a
population in excess of 5,000 persons, and one residing in a town with
fewer than 5,000 persons. One consumer appointee shall have a child with
a disability who attends a child care program.
                                             
 (l) One representative of New Hampshire early childhood education
programs, appointed by the chancellor of the community college system of
New Hampshire.
                                             
 (m) One representative of the university system of New Hampshire
whose area of expertise is early childhood education, appointed by the
chancellor of the university system of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (n) One representative of the department of education, appointed
by the commissioner of education. The representative shall have
nonvoting status for votes pertaining to the department of education
matters.
                                             
 (o) One individual representing the interests of foster parents,
appointed by the New Hampshire Foster and Adoptive Parent Association.
                                             
 III. The advisory council shall consist of the following nonvoting
members:
                                             
 (a) Representatives from the department of health and human
services, appointed by the commissioner of health and human services.
One of the representatives shall be the administrator of the child
development bureau. Additional representatives from the child
development bureau shall be included. Other representatives from the
department shall include, but not be limited to individuals with
expertise in child care licensing, maternal and child health, behavioral
health, developmental disability services, child care subsidies, Head
Start, and Temporary Assistance for Needy Families.
                                             
 (b) Any number of additional non-voting members appointed by a
majority vote of the voting members. The purpose of this provision is to
permit the council to seek out and recognize persons with expertise and
experience in the field of child care who may make significant
contributions to the work of the council in specific policy areas.
                                             
 IV. (a) The term of office for each member appointed under
subparagraphs II(j) through (n) shall be 3 years, or until a successor
is appointed and qualified in the case of a vacancy. The term of office
for all other members shall be coterminous with the term of office for
the position that qualifies that member to serve on the advisory
council. A vacancy shall be filled in the same manner, but only for the
unexpired term.
                                             
 (b) The advisory council shall meet at least quarterly, and may
meet more often at the call of the chair, or at the request of a
majority of the members directed to the chair. The council may, by
majority vote of the voting members, adopt additional bylaws as deemed
necessary by the council.
                                             
 (c) The council shall, at its annual meeting, elect one voting
member to serve as chair for a one-year term, or until a successor is
elected and qualified.
                                             
 (d) No member shall receive any compensation for serving on the
council, provided that the legislative members shall receive legislative
mileage when in performance of their duties and the consumer members may
receive compensation dependent upon the availability of funds, other
than from the general fund.
                                             
 V. The duties of the council shall include, but not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) Developing a 5-year state plan of recommended improvements of
child care services in the state of New Hampshire, copies to be sent to
the speaker of the house of representatives, the president of the
senate, and the governor.
                                             
 (b) Submitting an annual progress report of the council's 5-year
state plan to the speaker of the house of representatives, the president
of the senate, the oversight committee on health and human services, and
the governor.
                                             
 (c) Reviewing and making recommendations regarding federal plan
submissions and proposed legislative changes to facilitate the
development and provision of quality child care services in the state of
New Hampshire.
                                             
 (d) Acting as a forum to receive information from child care
professionals, educators, providers, consumers, government agencies, and
the business community relating to the provision of child care services
in the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (e) Advising the commissioner of health and human services on any
issue related to child care in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (f) Informing and communicating with the commissioner of
education on any issue related to child care in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (g) Informing and communicating with the governor on any issue
related to child care in New Hampshire.
                                             
 VI. The duties of the department of health and human services shall
include, but not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) Informing the advisory council, in a timely manner, of any
proposed legislation and any proposed changes to administrative rules
relating to the provision of quality child care.
                                             
 (b) Informing the advisory council, at least twice annually, on
matters regarding:
                                             
 (1) Federal and child care revenues and expenditures.
                                             
 (2) Financial reporting and statistics related to child care
subsidies.
                                             
 (3) The status of other federal and state child care grants.
                                             
 (4) Information on consumer and provider utilization and
availability.
                                             
 VII. The department of health and human services shall continue to
provide administrative support to the advisory council.
                                             
 VIII. The council is the advisory body for the federally-funded
Child Care Development Fund. The advisory council may serve as an
advisory body when required for state participation in or may coordinate
with other federally-funded child care programs granted to the state of
New Hampshire.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 1999, 184:1. 2004, 92:1, 2. 2007, 361:9. 2012,
39:1-3, eff. July 1, 2012.

### Section 126-A:18

 **126-A:18 Primary Preventative Health Services. –** The
commissioner shall:
                                             
 I. (a) Develop primary preventive health services for low-income and
underserved populations.
                                             
 (b) Establish a network of primary care and family support
services for children with chronic illness.
                                             
 (c) Recruit and establish retention of primary care practitioners
in rural communities and areas of high primary care needs.
                                             
 (d) Provide technical assistance to communities, health care
agencies, and primary care providers developing comprehensive care
services.
                                             
 II. On June 30, 1999, any unexpended funds appropriated for the
purposes of this section shall lapse to the fund from which they were
appropriated.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:18-a

 **126-A:18-a Rate Setting for Home Health Services. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of health and human services shall adopt rules
under RSA 541-A to establish a rate setting methodology which
establishes unit medicaid reimbursement rates for home health services
which reflect the average cost to deliver services. The commissioner
shall consider the factors of economy, efficiency, quality of care, and
access to care, in accordance with guidelines in federal regulations.
                                             
 II. The department of health and human services shall annually on or
before October 1 establish unit rates for home health services paid
under medicaid which better reflect the average cost to deliver
services.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall make a biennial report commencing on
November 1, 2017 and thereafter before November 1 of odd-numbered years
relative to the rates for home health services, to the speaker of the
house of representatives, the president of the senate, and the
chairpersons of the house and senate finance committees.

**Source.** 1997, 346:2, eff. Aug. 23, 1997. 2015, 259:17, eff. July 1,
2015.

### Section 126-A:18-b

 **126-A:18-b Medicaid Reimbursement Rates. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2013,
80:1, eff. Aug. 18, 2013.
                                             ]

Community Living Facilities
---------------------------

### Section 126-A:19

 **126-A:19 Community Living Facilities. –** The commissioner shall
develop a statewide program of community living facilities for persons
with developmental disabilities or mental illnesses. The commissioner
shall be responsible for the selection, certification, and monitoring of
such community living facilities in accordance with rules adopted by the
commissioner pursuant to RSA 541-A. The commissioner shall also be
responsible for prior approval of all individual residential placements
and shall adopt rules relative to monitoring the care, treatment, and
habilitation provided to all residents of community living facilities.
Rates for enhanced family care residents shall be set according to the
severity of the resident's disability. Placements of children shall be
consistent with RSA 170-A, 170-C, and 170-E, as appropriate. Approval by
the commissioner of an individual for placement in a community living
facility shall be based on a finding by the commissioner that the
community living facility is the least restrictive environment
appropriate to the needs of the individual. "Least restrictive
environment'' means the facility, program, or service which least
inhibits a person's freedom of movement, freedom of choice, and
participation in the community, while achieving the purposes of
habilitation and treatment.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:20

 **126-A:20 Standards and Certification for Community Living
Facilities. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall adopt rules pursuant to RSA 541-A to
govern the establishment and operation of community living facilities.
The certification of community living facilities shall be based on these
rules. Certification of such community living facilities shall be on a
permanent, temporary, or emergency basis in accordance with these rules.
No placements shall occur in the absence of such certification. The
commissioner may withdraw certification at any time the commissioner has
reasonable cause to believe that there exist violations of federal,
state, or local law or of department rules adopted pursuant to RSA 541-A
pertaining to community living facilities.
                                             
 II. Certifications shall be subject to periodic review and renewal
by the commissioner.
                                             
 III. The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, after notice and hearing, pursuant to rules adopted under RSA
541-A, may impose an administrative fine not to exceed 
                                             $2,000 for each
offense upon any person who violates any provision of this subdivision
or rules adopted under this subdivision. Rehearings and appeals from a
decision of the commissioner shall be in accordance with RSA 541. Any
administrative fine imposed under this section shall not preclude the
imposition of further penalties or administrative actions under this
subdivision. The commissioner shall adopt rules in accordance with RSA
541-A relative to administrative fines which shall be scaled to reflect
the scope and severity of the violation. The sums obtained from the
levying of administrative fines under this subdivision shall be
forwarded to the state treasurer to be deposited into the general fund.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 2003, 73:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2004.

### Section 126-A:21

 **126-A:21 Standards for Fire Safety. –** Notwithstanding RSA 153:5,
153:10-b, or any law to the contrary, the fire code applicable to single
family dwellings, as defined in RSA 153:1, X, or, where applicable,
single rental units in multi-unit dwellings, as defined in RSA 153:1,
IX-a and VI, respectively, shall be the fire code applied by the state
fire marshal and local fire departments to community living facilities
housing 3 or fewer clients.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:22

 **126-A:22 Rates for Community Living Facilities. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall establish rates, by rules adopted under
RSA 541-A, sufficient to provide a reasonable subsistence compatible
with decency and health for persons in placement under this program.
Payments hereunder may be made monthly by the commissioner from
appropriated funds.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may establish rates pursuant to RSA 167:7, I-a
for certain programs administered by the department.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:23

 **126-A:23 Types of Community Living Facilities. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2012, 40:1, eff. July 1, 2012.
                                             ]

### Section 126-A:24

 **126-A:24 Placement. –** Community living facilities serving
persons with developmental disabilities shall be considered a part of
the service delivery system as defined in RSA 171-A.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

Emergency Shelter Program
-------------------------

### Section 126-A:25

 **126-A:25 Purpose. –** The purpose of this subdivision is to assist
in maintaining and making available additional emergency shelter
facilities and other supportive and preventive services and to assist in
meeting the operating costs of such shelters and services.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:26

 **126-A:26 Program Established. –** There is hereby established an
emergency shelter program to assist in providing safe and sanitary
shelters on a short-term emergency or transitional basis for persons who
are destitute, mentally ill, abandoned, or developmentally disabled, and
other poor persons.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:27

 **126-A:27 Capital Construction and Rehabilitation. –** Such funds
as the general court may specifically appropriate from time to time may
be granted to private nonprofit organizations on an equal matching grant
formula basis for the capital costs of renovation, major rehabilitation,
or conversion of buildings for use as emergency shelters for the
homeless. Such organizations may also use such funds to add additional
beds to existing emergency shelters, to maintain such shelters and to
provide related supportive and preventive services.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:28

 **126-A:28 Operating Funds. –** Such funds as the general court may
specifically appropriate from time to time may be granted to private
nonprofit organizations on an equal matching formula basis to provide
essential services including, but not limited to, maintenance,
operation, utilities, and furnishings, and to support and maintain the
volunteer operational structure.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:29

 **126-A:29 Eligibility; Grants. –**
                                             
 I. For the purposes of this subdivision, the term "private nonprofit
organization'' means a secular or religious organization described in
section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 which is exempt from
taxation under subtitle A of such code. Such organization shall also
have an accounting system, a voluntary board, and shall practice
nondiscrimination in providing assistance.
                                             
 II. No grant shall be awarded unless the commissioner makes an
administrative finding of fact that the grant is primarily for the
public benefit. To make a finding that the grant is primarily for public
benefit, the commissioner shall find that:
                                             
 (a) With respect to grants for a new shelter or additional beds
for an existing shelter:
                                             
 (1) That insufficient shelter facilities exist in the area;
and
                                             
 (2) That the proposal will increase the supply of such
facilities.
                                             
 (b) With respect to grants for operations, that such assistance
is needed to maintain essential services or structures under RSA
126-A:29.
                                             
 (c) In all cases, that the shelter is for the public use and
public benefit.
                                             
 (d) With respect to grants for supportive and preventive
services, that such assistance will enable persons assisted to obtain
permanent housing and that such services are for the public use and the
public benefit.
                                             
 III. If the grant is to be made to a religious organization, it must
have a primary effect of neither advancing nor inhibiting religion. In
awarding grants under this subdivision, the department shall give
substantial weight to the performance record and general stability of
the grant applicant.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:30

 **126-A:30 Residency. –** Persons receiving short-term emergency
housing under this subdivision shall continue to maintain their legal
residence as it existed at the time of entering the emergency shelter.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:31

 **126-A:31 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner may adopt such rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, as the commissioner deems reasonable and
necessary to carry out the provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:32

 **126-A:32 Emergency Shelter and Homeless Coordination Commission.
–** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 368:1(41), eff. Dec. 31, 2010.
                                             ]

Office of Reimbursements
------------------------

### Section 126-A:33

 **126-A:33 Office Established. –** There shall be an office of
reimbursements within the department of health and human services.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:34

 **126-A:34 Duties. –**
                                             
 I. Subject to the direction and supervision of the commissioner, the
office of reimbursements shall:
                                             
 (a) Review and investigate all records of the New Hampshire
hospital, Laconia developmental services, the secure psychiatric unit,
the Glencliff home, and the Anna Philbrook center, relative to expenses
incurred by patients, residents, or clients at such institutions,
facilities, or programs or expenses incurred by patients, residents, or
clients receiving care, treatment, services, or maintenance at the
direction of the commissioner of health and human services, and make
recommendations to the commissioner and to the respective
superintendents or directors of such institutions, facilities, or
programs as to the rates to be charged for the care, treatment, and
maintenance of such patients, residents, or clients.
                                             
 (b) Investigate the ability of patients, residents, or clients of
such institutions and of the persons receiving care, treatment,
maintenance, or services either in public or private institutions or
otherwise at the direction of the commissioner and those legally
chargeable for their support and maintenance to pay for such care,
treatment, maintenance, and/or services and recommend to the
commissioner the charge to be rendered.
                                             
 (c) Submit monthly to the commissioner any recommended changes in
the schedule of charges based upon the ability of the patient, resident,
or client or those legally chargeable for their support to pay.
                                             
 (d) Submit monthly to the commissioner a report setting forth any
facts or information which bear upon or affect the domicile of any
patient, residents, or clients of such institution, facility, or program
which the office of reimbursements has found in conjunction with
investigations under this subdivision.
                                             
 (e) Administer estates.
                                             
 (f) Serve as appraiser without certification if appointed by the
probate court, notwithstanding any other provision of law.
                                             
 (g) Consistent with RSA 126-A:42, II, file a notice of lien with
the register of deeds of the county in which the patient or resident of
any of the institutions named in RSA 126-A:34 or at a public or private
institution owns real property.
                                             
 II. The commissioner of health and human services shall take such
action as the commissioner deems advisable.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 1997, 215:1. 2007, 263:12. 2010, Sp. Sess.,
1:27. 2011, 224:300. 2012, 228:2. 2013, 144:39, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 126-A:35

 **126-A:35 Other State Departments. –** The office of
reimbursements, with the approval of the commissioner, may, upon
request, act on behalf of any state department, as defined in RSA 9:1,
to recover any moneys due such department. The office of reimbursements
shall not be liable for any expenses or costs incurred in any action
brought pursuant to this section.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:36

 **126-A:36 Persons Chargeable With Support of Patients or Residents
of Public Institutions. –** Except as limited in RSA 126-A:43, II,
expenses incurred in the institutions named in RSA 126-A:34 or at the
direction of the commissioner in any public or private institution or
elsewhere, may be recovered in any action in the name of the state from
the person, or the person's spouse, or, if a minor, the minor's father
or mother, whose income or other resources are more than sufficient to
provide a reasonable subsistence compatible with decency and health, and
the spouse, father and mother are declared jointly and severally liable
for such expenses, unless otherwise ordered by the court.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:37

 **126-A:37 Estates Chargeable for Support. –** Except as limited in
RSA 126-A:39, expenses incurred by anyone in the institutions named in
RSA 126-A:34, or, at the direction of the commissioner in any public or
private institution, or elsewhere, may be recovered in any action in the
name of the state from the estate of the person, or the person's spouse,
or mother or father, whose estate is more than sufficient to pay
priorities in RSA 554:19. The spouse and the father and mother are
declared jointly and severally liable for expenses, unless otherwise
ordered by the court, except that recovery of expenses against a mother
or father shall be limited:
                                             
 I. To the expenses incurred before their child reached the age of
majority.
                                             
 II. As provided for in RSA 126-A:42.
                                             
 III. To the share the patient or resident is entitled to if the
father or mother died intestate.
                                             
 IV. To the greater of the share the patient or resident is entitled
to under the will or the share the patient or resident would have been
entitled to if the father or mother had died intestate.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 2010, 189:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 126-A:38

 **126-A:38 Financial Statements. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Within 60 days after admittance, except as provided in
paragraph II, and annually thereafter if requested by the commissioner,
a financial statement shall be filed under penalty of perjury by a
person legally chargeable for expenses pursuant to RSA 126-A:36 on forms
provided for this purpose by the office of reimbursements.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner is hereby authorized to request and receive
from any and all former or current employers, including, but not limited
to, personal information with respect to dates of employment, number of
hours worked, rate of pay, date of birth, available health insurance,
current address, payroll deductions, and social security number of any
person with respect to whom the department is investigating the ability
to pay; provided, however, the commissioner shall limit the request to
the minimum information necessary for the review of the individual's
ability to pay. The employer shall furnish the information within 15
days of the department's request unless the time period is extended for
good cause shown. If the request for the information is burdensome to
the employer, it shall give written notice to the commissioner within
the 15-day period, and the commissioner shall review the request of the
employer and modify the request if reasonably possible to alleviate the
burden on the employer.
                                             
 (c) The department or employer who discloses financial or
employment records under this section shall not be subject to civil
liability or criminal prosecution which is based upon its disclosure
under this section, or for any other action taken in good faith to
comply with the requirements of this section.
                                             
 (d) Any records established or information collected pursuant to
the provisions of this section shall be made available only to the
commissioner and the attorney general and their authorized designees,
attorneys employed by the department of health and human services, and
the client or the client's authorized representative. Such records and
information shall be available and used only for purposes directly
connected with the investigation of a person's ability to pay under this
chapter. The records and information made available to the client or the
client's authorized representative shall not include information
provided to the department that is prohibited from release by federal
law, state statute, state case law, or by contract or agreement between
the department and another entity if such contract or agreement
prohibits release of such information.
                                             
 II. Persons admitted to the multiple DWI offender intervention
program (M.O.P.) prior to January 1, 2013 who do not pay program fees in
full at the time of admission shall file a financial statement under
penalty of perjury on forms provided for this purpose by the office of
reimbursements and shall enter a payment contract for balance of fees
due. The office of reimbursements shall be entitled to recover
reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of collection for program fees not
paid in accordance with a payment contract.
                                             
 III. Persons admitted to the multiple DWI offender intervention
program (M.O.P.) prior to January 1, 2013 shall notify the office of
reimbursements of each change of mail address and actual street address
until that person has made payment in full of fees due in accordance
with an M.O.P. payment contract. Whenever notice to a person subject to
a payment contract is required, notice to the last mail address on file
with the office of reimbursements shall be deemed notice to and binding
on the payer.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 1997, 215:2. 2010, Sp. Sess., 1:28. 2013,
144:40, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 126-A:39

 **126-A:39 Educational Expenses. –**
                                             
 I. Educational expenses of any resident or patient, who is capable
of being benefited by instruction and who is between 3 and 21 years of
age, as required under statute and incurred in the institutions named in
or at the direction of the commissioner in any public or private
institution or elsewhere, shall be recovered from the school district in
which the patient's or resident's parents or legal guardian reside up to
the state average elementary cost per pupil, as determined by the state
board of education for the preceding school year. The liability of the
school district for such expenses shall precede that of the persons or
estates named in RSA 126-A:36 and RSA 126-A:37, which are hereby
relieved of liability for such expenses to the extent of the school
district's liability.
                                             
 II. Rates for private providers of special education services shall
be set as provided in RSA 186-C:7, III, by the departments of health and
human services, education, and administrative services.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 2002, 67:1, eff. June 25, 2002.

### Section 126-A:40

 **126-A:40 Liability for Expenses and Hearing on Liability. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Whenever the court issues an order for evaluation, care, or
treatment of a child at the Philbrook center pursuant to RSA 169-B,
169-C, or 169-D, the expenses of such evaluation, care, or treatment
shall be borne by the department, except as otherwise provided in this
section.
                                             
 (b) Subparagraph (a) shall not apply to expenses incurred for
special education and related services.
                                             
 (c) The state shall have a right of action over for such expenses
against the parents or the people chargeable by law for the minor's
support and necessities. The court shall require the individual
chargeable by law for the minor's support and necessities to assign to
the state any insurance coverage that may be available to pay for all or
a portion of the services provided and to submit a financial statement
to the court upon which the court may make an order as to reimbursement
to the state as may be reasonable and just, based on the person's
ability to pay. Such financial statement shall include, but not be
limited to, any benefits received from the Social Security
Administration or insurance coverage available to the individual. The
court shall include disposition of these benefits in its order as to
reimbursement. Such reimbursement shall be established on a per month or
per week basis and shall continue for a duration of time equal to the
duration of time in which expenses are incurred on behalf of the minor
by the state. The court's jurisdiction to order reimbursement shall
continue until the obligation to reimburse has been fulfilled. If the
state receives reimbursement for the expenses of a child under this
section, the state shall return to the formerly liable county that
percentage of the reimbursement equal to the percentage of expenses paid
by the county for the child.
                                             
 II. Upon the issuance of an order under paragraph I, the court shall
send notice to the state. The state may, within 30 days from the receipt
of notice, request a hearing on the issues of the cost or
appropriateness of services, or recovery. At such hearing, the court
shall provide all financial information, including names and addresses
of persons chargeable by law for the minor's support and necessities, to
the state.
                                             
 III. The office of reimbursements, acting on behalf of the New
Hampshire hospital, is authorized to compromise or reduce any expense to
be charged to the state.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 2008, 274:33, eff. July 1, 2008; 296:21-23,
eff. July 1, 2008.

### Section 126-A:41

 **126-A:41 Support Order. –** Upon petition for support in the name
of the state, the superior court may enter an order requiring any
patient or resident or persons legally chargeable for the support of a
patient or resident to contribute to the support of such patient or
resident. Anyone against whom an order is entered requiring a person to
contribute to the support of such relative who fails to comply therewith
shall be deemed to be in contempt of court and may be imprisoned not
less than 60 nor more than 90 days.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:42

 **126-A:42 Recovery of Expenses. –**
                                             
 I. Subject to the provisions of RSA 126-A:43, II, the state is
entitled to recover the expense of care, treatment, and maintenance of
any patient or resident at any of the institutions named in RSA 126-A:34
or at a public or private institution or otherwise at the direction of
the commissioner from the patient or resident, if of sufficient ability
to pay, or the person's estate, or from persons legally chargeable with
such person's support as defined in RSA 126-A:36 or from the estates
provided in RSA 126-A:37.
                                             
 I-a. The department shall file with the register of deeds of the
county in which the patient or resident or the spouse of the patient or
resident, if any, owns real property, notice of the lien for
reimbursement of expenses, as provided in RSA 126-A:37, after providing
all owners of the real property known to the department with prior
notice and an opportunity for a hearing. Such notice of lien shall
contain the names of the patient or resident and that patient's or
resident's spouse, if any. All such liens shall continue until released
by the department. The register of deeds shall keep a suitable record of
such notices of lien without charging any fee therefor and enter on the
record an acknowledgment of satisfaction or release upon written request
from the department.
                                             
 II. Recovery of the past due expense of care, treatment, and
maintenance of a patient or resident in any of the institutions named in
RSA 126-A:34 is limited in amount as follows:
                                             
 (a) If such person is living and is a resident of the
institution, recovery is limited to the expense incurred within the last
5 years of residence at the institution.
                                             
 (1) If such person is living and is a resident of the
institution, and if the person legally chargeable for such person's
support dies, subject to the provisions of RSA 126-A:43, II, recovery
from an estate legally chargeable for expenses as provided in RSA
126-A:37 is limited to the expenses incurred within the 5 years
immediately preceding the death of the person chargeable.
                                             
 (b) If such person dies while a resident of the institution,
subject to provisions of RSA 126-A:43, II, recovery is limited to the
expense incurred within the 5 years immediately preceding death.
                                             
 (c) If such person is discharged from the institution, subject to
the provisions of RSA 126-A:43, II, recovery is limited to the expense
incurred within the 5 years immediately preceding discharge.
                                             
 (d) If such person dies after discharge from the institution,
subject to the provisions of RSA 126-A:43, II, recovery is limited to
the expense incurred within the 5 years immediately preceding
discharge.
                                             
 (e) Expenses incurred by the institution during the time such
person is on parole from the institution shall not be included in the
total charges for expenses.
                                             
 (f) If an agreement was made under RSA 126-A:43, III, recovery
shall be limited to any payment obligation resulting from such
agreement.
                                             
 III. In an action by the state for recovery of the expenses of a
patient or resident at any of the institutions named in RSA 126-A:34 who
is discharged from the institution, or is dead, the action shall be
brought within 6 years after the person's discharge or death.
Notwithstanding RSA 556:5 or any other provision of law to the contrary,
the administrator of the estate of a patient or resident at any of the
institutions named in RSA 126-A:34 or at a public or private institution
shall be conclusively presumed to have accepted a claim for
reimbursement of expenses as provided in RSA 126-A:37 which is subject
to the jurisdiction of the probate court unless, within 12 months from
the initial grant of administration, the administrator commences an
equitable action in the superior court challenging the validity or
amount of the department's claim and lien.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 2011, 224:301, 302. 2013, 144:42, eff. July 1,
2013.

### Section 126-A:43

 **126-A:43 Regular Rate. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall establish for any patient, resident, or
client of an institution, facility, or program named in RSA 126-A:34, a
uniform rate to cover the expenses of the several categories of service
provided to patients, residents, or clients such as but not necessarily
limited to the following: intensive medical care, treatment, and
maintenance; intensive psychiatric care, treatment, and maintenance; and
custodial care, treatment, and maintenance. The commissioner is not
required to establish such rate by rules adopted under RSA 541-A. The
categories or classifications of service provided may be modified by the
commissioner.
                                             
 II. After any person has been a resident or patient in any of the
institutions named in RSA 126-A:34 for 10 years or has reached the age
of majority, the liability of persons other than the patient or resident
or such patient's or resident's spouse to provide payments to cover the
expenses of care, treatment, and maintenance shall cease, except for
recoveries from the estates of such persons which shall be limited as
provided in RSA 126-A:42, II. The liability of a spouse under RSA
126-A:36 shall cease after the person has been a patient or resident of
any of the institutions named in RSA 126-A:34 for 10 years. The
liability of the patient or resident under this paragraph shall continue
unless it is determined by the office of reimbursements, in consultation
with the commissioner, that the patient or resident lacks sufficient
income from any source including, but not limited to, social security,
retirement, civil service or veterans administration income, trust fund,
or other income to pay a full rate or a higher partial rate.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may compromise or reduce any debt or
obligation owed to the state pursuant to an agreement with a group
health plan carrier, as defined in RSA 420-G:2, or any health insurer as
defined in 607(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
(ERISA), 29 U.S.C. section 1167(1), federal and or state funded
assistance, or any other legally liable third party or persons
chargeable for support.
                                             
 IV. The office of reimbursements shall, upon request, furnish to
each estate from which, or to each person chargeable from whom, a
recovery of expenses is sought pursuant to RSA 126-A:42, a record of the
accumulated charges against said estate or said person.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 1997, 215:3. 2013, 144:43, eff. July 1, 2013.

### Section 126-A:44

 **126-A:44 Partial Charges. –** The commissioner may charge less
than the uniform rate when the commissioner finds a patient or any
relative chargeable therewith is able to bear only a portion of the
expense incident to the patient's care, treatment, and maintenance at
such institution, or care, treatment, and maintenance furnished at the
direction of the commissioner. In establishing such charge, the
commissioner shall consider the report, investigation and recommended
charge of the office of reimbursements. The established charge shall be
billed by the superintendent of such institution. The office of
reimbursements shall make further recommendations as provided in this
section where conditions affecting the ability to pay of persons legally
chargeable for the support of the patient or resident have changed. The
establishment of a partial rate as provided herein shall not preclude
the collection of the balance between the partial rate and the full rate
from an estate of the patient or resident or the estate of those legally
chargeable as provided in RSA 126-A:37.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:45

 **126-A:45 Support by the State. –**
                                             
 I. Any person transferred to the New Hampshire hospital under RSA
135:17 for observations as to sanity under court order shall be at state
expense for the observation period only.
                                             
 II. Any patient or resident of such institutions defined in RSA
126-A:34 or patient receiving care, treatment, or maintenance at the
direction of the commissioner who has no means of support and no person
chargeable for the patient's or resident's support shall be supported by
the state.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:46

 **126-A:46 Special Services. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to rates for special services rendered
to patients or residents of institutions named in RSA 126-A:34.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:47

 **126-A:47 Reports. –** The superintendent of such institutions
shall forward forthwith to the commissioner any change in population at
such institutions, any change affecting the rates charged patients or
residents, and any other changes affecting expenses incurred by a
patient or resident.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:48

 **126-A:48 Nature of Payment. –** All payments, except for
educational payments made pursuant to RSA 126-A:39, made by or with
respect to a patient at any institution named in RSA 126-A:34, which
furnished medical services shall conclusively be deemed to be made on
account of medical services.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

Poison Information and Control Center
-------------------------------------

### Section 126-A:49

 **126-A:49 Poison Information and Treatment. –** The commissioner
shall develop or designate a statewide program for poison information
and treatment. In connection with this program, the commissioner shall
be responsible for establishment or designation of a poison information
and treatment center which shall make available to New Hampshire
residents information and medical consultation on a daily, 24-hour
basis.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

Housing Security Guarantee Program
----------------------------------

### Section 126-A:50

 **126-A:50 Declaration of Purpose and Findings Regarding Housing
Security. –** The legislature finds that the inability of individual
citizens to amass sufficient funds for housing security deposits
contributes significantly to the problem of homelessness in the state of
New Hampshire; that a program of security deposit guarantees which is
coordinated with other programs that address rental housing security
could assist in alleviating that problem; that it is possible, and
desirable, to structure and implement such a program without threatening
the fiscal health of the state; that the financial health of the state
shall indeed be served by enabling private housing opportunities; and
that such a program is necessary for the public good, health, welfare,
and stability of the state.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:51

 **126-A:51 Program Established. –** There is hereby established a
housing security guarantee program.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:52

 **126-A:52 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Department'' means the department of health and human services.
                                             
 II. "Guarantee certificate'' means a document issued under this
subdivision for the payment of the security deposit it guarantees.
                                             
 III. "Landlord'' means a person and such person's employees,
officers, or agents who rent or lease to another person a housing unit,
including single family homes, apartments, mobile homes, prefabricated
homes, or other real or personal property used as a dwelling for one or
more persons.
                                             
 IV. "Local administrator'' means the director, governing board,
president, or other official with organizational authority to direct the
day-to-day operations of a local housing security provider as that term
is defined in paragraph V.
                                             
 V. "Local housing security provider'' means a local or area
governmental or private nonprofit agency or organization which contracts
with the division to administer and provide assistance to tenants in
obtaining security deposit funding and which shall comply with all
federal fair housing standards.
                                             
 VI. "Qualified tenant'' means a person whose total household income
does not exceed the amount defined as "very low income,'' as adjusted
for household size and region, as is defined and published from time to
time by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
                                             
 VII. "Qualifying security deposit amount'' means an adjustable
amount consistent with local market conditions as determined by the
local or area administrator and reported to the division, such amount
not to exceed one month's rental fee for the subject housing unit.
                                             
 VIII. "Security deposit'' means any funds in excess of monthly rent
which are required to be transferred from a tenant to a landlord for any
purpose.
                                             
 IX. "Security deposit guarantee application'' means an application
for a guarantee certificate made in accordance with RSA 126-A:54.
                                             
 X. "Subject housing unit'' means a specific dwelling unit, single
family home, apartment, mobile home, prefabricated home, or other real
or personal property used as a dwelling for one or more persons that
satisfies legal health and safety standards and is specifically
designated on an individual security deposit guarantee application.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 2000, 316:2, eff. July 1, 2000.

### Section 126-A:53

 **126-A:53 Allocation and Designation of Guarantee Capacity;
Administration. –**
                                             
 I. Upon application from a local housing security provider in such
form as the department may require, the department may allocate and
commit itself to issue, and the local housing security provider may be
authorized to process applications and provide the ancillary services
connected with the issuance of, guarantee certificates for the purposes
of this subdivision. In no event shall the aggregate guarantee amounts
allocated by the department to all local housing security providers
exceed 
                                             $2,000,000. The department shall allocate the aggregate
guarantee certificate capacity authorized by this section in a manner
which takes into account both housing needs and geographic diversity.
                                             
 I-a. The department shall make payments either directly to the
landlord or through the local housing security provider to the extent of
the state's obligation under the terms of the guarantee certificates.
The department shall be subrogated to the landlord's right title and
interest in any amounts received pursuant to the lease or rental
agreement. The state treasurer shall reimburse the department for these
amounts from funds not otherwise appropriated. The governor is hereby
authorized to draw a warrant from funds not otherwise appropriated for
the purposes of this subdivision.
                                             
 II. The department may expend no more than 
                                             $100,000 per fiscal year
from funds appropriated to the emergency shelter program, established in
RSA 126-A:26, for the purposes of administering this subdivision.
                                             
 III. The department shall make a report on or before December 1 of
each year to the speaker of the house of representatives, the president
of the senate, and the governor and council on the usage of the program
and the success of its participants.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 2000, 316:3-5. 2008, 81:1, eff. July 20, 2008.

### Section 126-A:54

 **126-A:54 Application for and Issuance of Guarantee Certificates.
–**
                                             
 I. Applications for individual guarantee certificates shall be made
jointly by a landlord and qualified tenant to a local housing security
provider for the geographic region in which a subject housing unit is
located.
                                             
 II. Applications for guarantee certificates shall include:
                                             
 (a) Name, address, and telephone number of the landlord.
                                             
 (b) Address of the subject housing unit.
                                             
 (c) Name of the qualified tenant.
                                             
 (d) The dollar amount of the requested security deposit.
                                             
 (e) The dollar amount of the qualified tenant's income.
                                             
 (f) The dollar amount of monthly rent to be charged for the
subject housing unit.
                                             
 (g) A copy of the subject lease or rental agreement, if any,
governing the tenancy. If no written lease agreement is provided,
program participants shall comply with the terms of form lease
agreements approved by the department.
                                             
 (h) Sworn statements from both the landlord and the qualified
tenant describing their prior participations, if any, in the security
deposit guarantee program established under this subdivision.
                                             
 (i) The landlord's written agreement to accept a guarantee
certificate issued in accordance with this subdivision in lieu of any
other security deposit.
                                             
 (j) The qualified tenant's written agreement to make the periodic
payments required by RSA 126-A:56.
                                             
 III. Review of applications and decisions on such applications shall
be performed and made by a local housing security provider and completed
within 5 business days of the submission of a completed application.
When a local housing security provider approves an application, it shall
notify the department of such approval.
                                             
 IV. Upon receipt of a notice of approval by a local housing security
provider of an application, the department shall issue within 5 business
days to the landlord a certificate of guarantee with a face value equal
to the qualifying security deposit amount and issue to the qualified
tenant a coupon book for periodic payments as required under RSA
126-A:56.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:55

 **126-A:55 Delegation of Local Administration. –** The department
may enter into written agreements or contracts with one or more agencies
or organizations to provide for the administration and application of
the guarantee program established under this subdivision. Such
agreements shall specifically require the provision of coordinated
services necessary to assure the success of this program, including such
services as financial counseling, referrals to assistance agencies and
organizations, and performance or payment monitoring and adjustments and
may specifically require issuance of guarantee certificates, collection
of periodic payments from tenants, redemption of certificates, and
payments of tenants and landlords.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:56

 **126-A:56 Periodic Payment Requirement. –** Beginning with the
first month of tenancy and each month thereafter, a qualified tenant
participating in this program shall make a monthly payment to the
department of a fractional amount of the qualifying security deposit
amount, which amount is determined by and adjustable with the approval
of the local housing security provider. Notice of all adjustments to
required payment amounts shall be forwarded to the department by the
local housing security provider. The payments shall be made until the
full amount of the security deposit guarantee has been received by the
department. In no event shall a qualified tenant's failure to make the
periodic payments required by this section create a default under any
lease or rental agreement for a subject housing unit. All amounts
received by the department pursuant to RSA 126-A:56 shall not be a
"security deposit'' as defined by RSA 540-A:5, II.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 2000, 316:6, eff. July 1, 2000.

### Section 126-A:57

 **126-A:57 Redemption of Certificates in Event of Default. –**
                                             
 I. In the event a default occurs which under the lease or rental
agreement entitles the landlord to claim and retain some or all of the
security deposit or a landlord completes eviction proceedings in
accordance with RSA 540, in order to effect a redemption of a guarantee
certificate issued under this subdivision, the landlord shall within 30
days of such default event or eviction submit to the local housing
security provider:
                                             
 (a) A certification of default and entitlement to some or all of
the security deposit executed by the landlord under penalties of
perjury, or a copy of the landlord's eviction notice prepared and served
in accordance with RSA 540:3 and RSA 540:5, as applicable.
                                             
 (b) A copy of the writ of possession, if any, and a certification
that the subject housing unit has been vacated.
                                             
 (c) A written request for redemption of the certificate of
guarantee, specifying the amount requested and the issue date and number
of the certificate.
                                             
 II. After receipt by the local housing security provider of the
materials required under paragraph I, the local housing security
provider shall have 30 days to issue a notice of approval, proposed
adjustment, or rejection, stating with specificity its grounds for such
adjustment or refusal. Upon approval of a request for redemption, the
local housing security provider shall notify the division of such
approval and the division shall have 30 days to redeem the certificate
of guarantee.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 2006, 192:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 126-A:58

 **126-A:58 Tenant's Right to Refund. –** In the event a tenancy is
terminated before all periodic payments have been made to the department
and no claim for redemption is brought by the landlord within the period
specified, a qualified tenant may claim a refund of all payments made by
the tenant and a cancellation of the tenant's written agreement to make
any additional payments. The claims shall be brought by tenants within
one year from the date of the termination of the tenancy.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1. 2000, 316:7, eff. July 1, 2000.

### Section 126-A:59

 **126-A:59 Mandatory Redemption of Certificates Without Default. –**
When all periodic payments required by RSA 126-A:56 have been made in
full by or on behalf of a qualified tenant participating in the program
established under this subdivision, the department shall issue a notice
to the qualified tenant and the landlord calling for the mandatory
redemption of the guarantee certificate. A participating qualified
tenant and landlord shall comply with such notice and submit the
certificate for redemption, and the department shall pay to the landlord
the amount stated in the certificate. Upon receipt of such payment, the
landlord shall hold such payment as a security deposit pursuant to law
and terms of the lease or rental agreement.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:60

 **126-A:60 Guarantee: Credit of State Pledged. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2000,
316:8, II, eff. July 1, 2000.
                                             ]

### Section 126-A:61

 **126-A:61 Rulemaking Authority. –** The department shall adopt
rules, under RSA 541-A, relative to matters as are necessary to carry
out the powers and duties of the department under this subdivision.

**Source.** 1995, 310:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 126-A:62

 **126-A:62 Fund Established. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2000, 316:8, III, eff.
July 1, 2000.
                                             ]

### Section 126-A:63

 **126-A:63 Homeless Housing and Access Revolving Loan Fund. –**
There is hereby established a non-lapsing and continually appropriated
homeless housing and access revolving loan fund. The fund shall be
administered by the department of health and human services with advice
and recommendations from the governor's interagency council on
homelessness. To be eligible, an applicant shall have no permanent
address and shall be residing temporarily in a shelter for the homeless,
a hotel, a motel, the home of another household designed for occupancy
by only one household, or entirely without shelter. Funds shall be used
solely to provide loans for the first month of rent and security deposit
for homeless individuals and families. Repayment terms of the loans
shall be determined by the department in consultation with the
interagency council and shall be based on need. Such repayments shall
commence no later than 120 days after the loan is disbursed.

**Source.** 2007, 263:8, eff. July 1, 2007.

New Hampshire Comprehensive Cancer Plan
---------------------------------------

### Section 126-A:64

 **126-A:64 Comprehensive Cancer Plan Fund. –** There is hereby
established in the office of the state treasurer the comprehensive
cancer plan fund, to be administered by the department of health and
human services. The department is authorized to accept public sector and
private sector grants, gifts, donations, and appropriations for deposit
into the fund. The fund shall be nonlapsing and continually appropriated
to the department, and shall be used to implement the provisions of the
New Hampshire comprehensive cancer plan as developed by the New
Hampshire Comprehensive Cancer Collaboration. The fund shall be expended
annually for the following purposes, with allocations determined by the
commissioner of the department of health and human services, in
consultation with the New Hampshire Comprehensive Cancer Collaboration:
                                             
 I. Tobacco use prevention and cessation programs using strategies
included in RSA 126-K:15.
                                             
 II. Diet and exercise programs.
                                             
 III. Early detection and screening programs for breast and cervical
cancer.
                                             
 IV. Early detection and screening programs for colorectal cancer.
                                             
 V. Survivorship and cancer support for those affected by prostate
cancer.
                                             
 VI. Support services for survivors.
                                             
 VII. Data collection and analysis of minority population behavioral
risk and cancer rates.

**Source.** 2007, 263:96. 2008, 144:2. 2011, 231:9, eff. June 29, 2011.

### Section 126-A:65

 **126-A:65 Comprehensive Cancer Plan Oversight Board. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2007, 263:98, II, eff. June, 30, 2011.
                                             ]

Commission to Study Expansion of Medicaid Eligibility
-----------------------------------------------------

### Section 126-A:66

 **126-A:66 Commission Established; Membership; Duties. –**

                                             [Repealed 2014, 3:12, VIII, eff. Mar. 27, 2014.
                                             ]

Statewide Section 1115 Demonstration Waiver
-------------------------------------------

### Section 126-A:67

 **126-A:67 Statewide Section 1115 Demonstration Waiver. –**
                                             
 I. On or before June 1, 2014, the commissioner, after consultation
with stakeholders including state, county, and local officials and
health care providers, shall submit a statewide section 1115
demonstration waiver to enhance designated state health programs and
transform the Medicaid care delivery system. The section 1115
demonstration waiver will promote the improvement of overall health
through increased access to private insurance coverage options and will
integrate and align New Hampshire's Medicaid care management program,
the provision of coverage to the newly eligible under this chapter,
existing Medicaid waivered programs, and other department initiatives in
a manner that improves public health, and improves the quality of care
and access to care for all Medicaid and CHIP beneficiaries. The waiver
shall be used to allow the state maximum flexibility to redesign
Medicaid including establishing premium assistance programs that are
customized to transform the state's reform goals. To the greatest degree
possible programs funded under the demonstration waiver shall complement
the mental health settlement and shall be designed to promote
innovation, reform delivery systems, and reduce the number of uninsured
patients who seek treatment from health care providers.
                                             
 II. Prior to submitting the waiver to CMS, the commissioner shall
present the waiver to the fiscal committee of the general court for
approval. The waiver shall be approved by the CMS by December 1, 2014.

**Source.** 2014, 3:5, eff. Mar. 27, 2014.

Commission to Study Oversight, Regulation, and Reporting of Patient Safety and Infectious Disease Prevention and Control Issues
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 126-A:68

 **126-A:68 Commission to Study Oversight, Regulation, and Reporting
of Patient Safety and Infectious Disease Prevention and Control Issues
Established. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2015, 147:3, eff. Nov. 1, 2015.
                                             ]

Commission to Study Narcan
--------------------------

### Section 126-A:69


                                             


                                             [RSA 126-A:69 repealed by 2016, 1:1, effective November 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **126-A:69 Commission Established; Membership; Duties. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a commission to study Narcan.
                                             
 (a) The members of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 (1) Two members of the senate, one of whom shall be appointed
by the president of the senate, and one of whom shall be appointed by
the senate minority leader.
                                             
 (2) Two members of the house of representatives, one of whom
shall be appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives, and
one of whom shall be appointed by the house minority leader.
                                             
 (3) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (4) A pharmacist, appointed by the board.
                                             
 (5) A licensed alcohol and drug counselor, appointed by the
chairperson of the board of licensing for alcohol and other drug use
professionals.
                                             
 (6) A licensed physician, appointed by the board of medicine.
                                             
 (7) An emergency medical technician, appointed by the director
of the division of fire standards and training and emergency medical
services, department of safety.
                                             
 (8) A police officer, appointed by the senate president.
                                             
 (9) An APRN, appointed by the New Hampshire Nurse Practitioner
Association.
                                             
 (10) A public member, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (11) A public member, appointed by the senate president.
                                             
 (12) A public member, appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives.
                                             
 (b) Legislative members of the commission shall receive mileage
at the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the commission.
                                             
 II. (a)(1) The commission shall study all aspects of Narcan,
including, but not limited to:
                                             
 (A) Whether there should be a registry established for
those in possession of Narcan.
                                             
 (B) The training required regarding dosage, conditions for
administering Narcan, and other appropriate training.
                                             
 (C) Whether there should be mandatory reporting of use of
Narcan.
                                             
 (D) Whether those persons who are administered Narcan
should be required to go to outpatient treatment for a certain period of
time.
                                             
 (2) The commission shall produce a long-term plan on the use
and distribution of Narcan.
                                             
 (b) The commission shall solicit information from any person or
entity the commission deems relevant to its study.
                                             
 III. The members of the commission shall elect a chairperson from
among the members. The first meeting of the commission shall be called
by the first-named senate member. The first meeting of the commission
shall be held within 45 days of the effective date of this section. Six
members of the commission shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 IV. The commission shall make an interim report within 6 months of
the effective date of this section, and a final report on November 1,
2017 indicating its findings and any recommendations for proposed
legislation to the president of the senate, the speaker of the house of
representatives, the senate clerk, the house clerk, the governor, and
the state library.

**Source.** 2016, 1:1, eff. Jan. 21, 2016.

Administration of Epinephrine
-----------------------------

### Section 126-A:70

 **126-A:70 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Administer'' means the direct application of an epinephrine
auto-injector to the body of an individual.
                                             
 II. "Authorized entity'' means any entity or organization in which
allergens capable of causing anaphylaxis may be present, including
recreation camps and day care facilities. Authorized entity shall not
include an elementary or secondary school or a postsecondary educational
institution eligible to establish policies and guidelines for the
emergency administration of epinephrine under RSA 200-N.
                                             
 III. "Epinephrine auto-injector'' means a single-use device used for
the automatic injection of a premeasured dose of epinephrine into the
human body.
                                             
 IV. "Health care practitioner'' means a person who is lawfully
entitled to prescribe, administer, dispense, or distribute controlled
drugs.
                                             
 V. "Provide'' means to furnish one or more epinephrine
auto-injectors to an individual.

**Source.** 2016, 39:1, eff. July 2, 2016.

### Section 126-A:71

 **126-A:71 Administration of Epinephrine. –**
                                             
 I. A health care practitioner may prescribe epinephrine
auto-injectors in the name of an authorized entity for use in accordance
with this subdivision, and pharmacists and health care practitioners may
dispense epinephrine auto-injectors pursuant to a prescription issued in
the name of an authorized entity.
                                             
 II. An authorized entity may acquire and maintain a supply of
epinephrine auto-injectors pursuant to a prescription issued in
accordance with this subdivision. Such epinephrine auto-injectors shall
be stored in a location readily accessible in an emergency and in
accordance with the instructions for use, and any additional
requirements that may be established by the department of health and
human services. An authorized entity shall designate employees or agents
who have completed the training required by paragraph IV to be
responsible for the storage, maintenance, control, and general oversight
of epinephrine auto-injectors acquired by the authorized entity.
                                             
 III. An employee or agent of an authorized entity, or other
individual, who has completed the training required by paragraph IV may
use epinephrine auto-injectors prescribed pursuant to this section to:
                                             
 (a) Provide an epinephrine auto-injector to any individual who
the employee agent or other individual believes in good faith is
experiencing anaphylaxis, or the parent, guardian, or caregiver of such
individual, for immediate administration, regardless of whether the
individual has a prescription for an epinephrine auto-injector or has
previously been diagnosed with an allergy.
                                             
 (b) Administer an epinephrine auto-injector to any individual who
the employee, agent, or other individual believes in good faith is
experiencing anaphylaxis, regardless of whether the individual has a
prescription for an epinephrine auto-injector or has previously been
diagnosed with an allergy.
                                             
 IV. (a) An employee, agent, or other individual described in
paragraph III shall complete an anaphylaxis training program at least
every 2 years, following completion of the initial anaphylaxis training
program. Such training shall be conducted by a nationally-recognized
organization experienced in training unlicensed persons in emergency
health care treatment or an entity or individual approved by the
department of health and human services. Training may be conducted
online or in person and, at a minimum, shall cover:
                                             
 (1) How to recognize signs and symptoms of severe allergic
reactions, including anaphylaxis;
                                             
 (2) Standards and procedures for the storage and
administration of an epinephrine auto-injector; and
                                             
 (3) Emergency follow-up procedures.
                                             
 (b) The entity or individual that conducts the training shall
issue a certificate, on a form developed or approved by the department
of health and human services, to each person who successfully completes
the anaphylaxis training program.
                                             
 V. No authorized entity that possesses and makes available
epinephrine auto-injectors and its employees, agents, and other
individuals, or health care practitioner that prescribes or dispenses
epinephrine auto-injectors to an authorized entity, or pharmacist or
health care practitioner that dispenses epinephrine auto-injectors to an
authorized entity, or individual or entity that conducts the training
described in paragraph IV, shall be liable for any injuries or related
damages that result from any act or omission pursuant to this section,
unless such injury or damage is the result of willful or wanton
misconduct. The administration of an epinephrine auto-injector in
accordance with this section shall not be considered to be the practice
of medicine or any other profession that otherwise requires licensure.
This section shall not be construed to eliminate, limit, or reduce any
other immunity or defense that may be available under state law. An
entity located in this state shall not be liable for any injuries or
related damages that result from the provision or administration of an
epinephrine auto-injector outside of this state if the entity would not
have been liable for such injuries or related damages had the provision
or administration occurred within this state, or is not liable for such
injuries or related damages under the law of the state in which such
provision or administration occurred.
                                             
 VI. An authorized entity that possesses and makes available
epinephrine auto-injectors shall submit to the department of health and
human services, on a form developed by the department of health and
human services, a report of each incident on the authorized entity's
premises that involves the administration of an epinephrine auto
injector pursuant to paragraph III. The department of health and human
services shall annually publish a report on the department's website
that summarizes and analyzes all reports submitted to it under this
section.

**Source.** 2016, 39:1, eff. July 2, 2016.

Commission to Study Volunteer Health Care Services
--------------------------------------------------

### Section 126-A:72


                                             


                                             [RSA 126-A:72 repealed by 2016, 274:2, effective November 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **126-A:72 Commission to Study Volunteer Health Care Services. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a commission to study volunteer health care
services.
                                             
 II. (a) The members of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 (1) One member of the senate, appointed by the president of
the senate.
                                             
 (2) One member of the house of representatives, appointed by
the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (3) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, or designee.
                                             
 (4) A representative of the New Hampshire Dental Society,
appointed by the society.
                                             
 (5) A representative from the New Hampshire Medical Society,
appointed by the society.
                                             
 (6) A physician assistant, appointed by the New Hampshire
board of medicine.
                                             
 (7) An advanced practice registered nurse, appointed by the
New Hampshire board of nursing.
                                             
 (8) An optometrist, appointed by the board of registration in
optometry.
                                             
 (9) A representative of the New Hampshire Hospital
Association, appointed by the association.
                                             
 (10) The attorney general, or designee.
                                             
 (11) A social worker, appointed by the board of mental health
practice.
                                             
 (12) A pharmacist, appointed by the pharmacy board.
                                             
 (b) Legislative members of the commission shall receive mileage
at the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the commission.
                                             
 III. (a) The commission's study shall include, but not be limited
to, whether New Hampshire should create a program to allow medical
professionals and licensed health care facilities to enter into
contracts with the department of health and human services or a
governmental contractor to allow them to provide volunteer health care
services to eligible low-income patients and whether such services
should be protected by immunity.
                                             
 (b) The commission shall solicit information from any person or
entity the commission deems relevant to its study.
                                             
 IV. The members of the commission shall elect a chairperson from
among the members. The first meeting of the commission shall be called
by the senate member. The first meeting of the commission shall be held
within 45 days of the effective date of this section. Seven members of
the commission shall constitute a quorum.
                                             
 V. The commission shall report its findings and any recommendations
for proposed legislation to the president of the senate, the speaker of
the house of representatives, the senate clerk, the house clerk, the
governor, and the state library on or before November 1, 2017.

**Source.** 2016, 274:1, eff. June 16, 2016.
