---
title: |
    CHAPTER 126-U LIMITING THE USE OF CHILD RESTRAINT PRACTICES IN SCHOOLS
    AND TREATMENT FACILITIES
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 126-U
                                             
LIMITING THE USE OF CHILD RESTRAINT PRACTICES IN SCHOOLS AND TREATMENT FACILITIES
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 126-U:1

 **126-U:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Child'' means a person who has not reached the age of 18 years
and who is not under adult criminal prosecution or sentence of actual
incarceration resulting therefrom, either due to having reached the age
of 17 years or due to the completion of proceedings for transfer to the
adult criminal justice system under RSA 169-B:24, RSA 169-B:25, or RSA
169-B:26. "Child'' also includes a person in actual attendance at a
school who is less than 22 years of age and who has not received a high
school diploma.
                                             
 II. "Director'' refers to the program director, school principal, or
other official highest in rank and with authority over the activities of
a school or facility.
                                             
 III. "Facility'' includes any of the following when used for the
placement, custody, or treatment of children:
                                             
 (a) The youth services center maintained by the department of
health and human services, or any other setting established for the
commitment or detention of children pursuant to RSA 169-B, RSA 169-C, or
RSA 169-D.
                                             
 (b) Child care agencies regulated by RSA 170-E.
                                             
 (c) Any foster home, group home, crisis home, or shelter care
setting used for the placement of children at any stage of proceedings
under RSA 169-B, RSA 169-C, or RSA 169-D or following disposition under
those chapters.
                                             
 (d) Any hospital, building, or other place, whether public or
private, which is part of the state services systems established under
RSA 135-C:3 and RSA 171-A:4, including but not limited to:
                                             
 (1) The Anna Philbrook center.
                                             
 (2) The acute psychiatric services building.
                                             
 (3) Any designated receiving facility.
                                             
 (4) A community mental health center as defined in RSA
135-C:7, or any of its subdivisions or contractors.
                                             
 (5) An area agency as defined in RSA 171-A:2, or any of its
subdivisions or contractors.
                                             
 (e) Any residence, treatment center, or other place used for the
voluntary or involuntary custody, treatment or care of children with
developmental, intellectual, or other disabilities under RSA 171-A or
171-B.
                                             
 (f) Community living facilities for persons with developmental
disabilities or mental illness as authorized by RSA 126-A:19, when used
for the placement of children.
                                             
 IV. "Restraint'' means bodily physical restriction, mechanical
devices, or any device that immobilizes a person or restricts the
freedom of movement of the torso, head, arms, or legs. It includes
mechanical restraint, physical restraint, and medication restraint used
to control behavior in an emergency or any involuntary medication. It is
limited to actions taken by persons who are school or facility staff
members, contractors, or otherwise under the control or direction of a
school or facility.
                                             
 (a) "Medication restraint'' occurs when a child is given
medication involuntarily for the purpose of immediate control of the
child's behavior.
                                             
 (b) "Mechanical restraint'' occurs when a physical device or
devices are used to restrict the movement of a child or the movement or
normal function of a portion of his or her body.
                                             
 (c) "Physical restraint'' occurs when a manual method is used to
restrict a child's freedom of movement or normal access to his or her
body.
                                             
 (d) Restraint shall not include:
                                             
 (1) Brief touching or holding to calm, comfort, encourage, or
guide a child, so long as limitation of freedom of movement of the child
does not occur.
                                             
 (2) The temporary holding of the hand, wrist, arm, shoulder,
or back for the purpose of inducing a child to stand, if necessary, and
then walk to a safe location, so long as the child is in an upright
position and moving toward a safe location.
                                             
 (3) Physical devices, such as orthopedically prescribed
appliances, surgical dressings and bandages, and supportive body bands,
or other physical holding when necessary for routine physical
examinations and tests or for orthopedic, surgical, and other similar
medical treatment purposes, or when used to provide support for the
achievement of functional body position or proper balance or to protect
a person from falling out of bed, or to permit a child to participate in
activities without the risk of physical harm.
                                             
 (4) The use of seat belts, safety belts, or similar passenger
restraints during the transportation of a child in a motor vehicle.
                                             
 (5) The use of force by a person to defend himself or herself
or a third person from what the actor reasonably believes to be the
imminent use of unlawful force by a child, when the actor uses a degree
of such force which he or she reasonably believes to be necessary for
such purpose and the actor does not immobilize a child or restrict the
freedom of movement of the torso, head, arms, or legs of any child.
                                             
 V. "School'' means:
                                             
 (a) A school operated by a school district.
                                             
 (b) A chartered public school governed by RSA 194-B.
                                             
 (c) A public academy as defined in RSA 194:23, II.
                                             
 (d) A nonpublic school subject to the approval authority of the
state board of education under RSA 186:11, XXIX.
                                             
 (e) A private or public provider of any component of a child's
individualized education program under RSA 186-C.
                                             
 V-a. "Seclusion'' means the involuntary placement of a child alone
in a place where no other person is present and from which the
particular child is unable to exit, either due to physical manipulation
by a person, a lock, or other mechanical device or barrier. The term
shall not include the voluntary separation of a child from a stressful
environment for the purpose of allowing the child to regain
self-control, when such separation is to an area which a child is able
to leave. Seclusion does not include circumstances in which there is no
physical barrier between the child and any other person or the child is
physically able to leave the place. A circumstance may be considered
seclusion even if a window or other device for visual observation is
present, if the other elements of this definition are satisfied.
                                             
 VI. "Serious injury'' means any harm to the body which requires
hospitalization or results in the fracture of any bone, non-superficial
lacerations, injury to any internal organ, second- or third-degree
burns, or any severe, permanent, or protracted loss of or impairment to
the health or function of any part of the body.

**Source.** 2010, 375:2. 2014, 324:1-3, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

### Section 126-U:2

 **126-U:2 Written Policies Required. –** Each facility and school
shall have a written policy and procedures for managing the behavior of
children. Such policy shall describe how and under what circumstances
seclusion or restraint is used and shall be provided to the parent,
guardian, or legal representative of each child at such facility or
school.

**Source.** 2010, 375:2. 2014, 324:4, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

### Section 126-U:3

 **126-U:3 Post Admission Planning in Facilities. –**
                                             
 I. As soon as possible after admission to a facility, the treatment
staff of the facility, the child, and the child's parent or guardian
shall develop a plan to:
                                             
 (a) Identify the child's history of physical, sexual, or
emotional trauma, if any.
                                             
 (b) Identify effective responses to potential behavior or
situations which will avoid the use of seclusion and restraint.
                                             
 (c) Identify health conditions which may make the child
vulnerable to injury while at the facility.
                                             
 II. The plan described in this section is not required if the child
is expected to be at the facility for fewer than 72 hours and, after
conducting a reasonable inquiry, the staff of the facility is not
informed of any history of the use of seclusion or restraint of the
child.

**Source.** 2010, 375:2. 2014, 324:4, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

### Section 126-U:4

 **126-U:4 Prohibition of Dangerous Restraint Techniques. –** No
school or facility shall use or threaten to use any of the following
restraint and behavior control techniques:
                                             
 I. Any physical restraint or containment technique that:
                                             
 (a) Obstructs a child's respiratory airway or impairs the child's
breathing or respiratory capacity or restricts the movement required for
normal breathing;
                                             
 (b) Places pressure or weight on, or causes the compression of,
the chest, lungs, sternum, diaphragm, back, or abdomen of a child;
                                             
 (c) Obstructs the circulation of blood;
                                             
 (d) Involves pushing on or into the child's mouth, nose, eyes, or
any part of the face or involves covering the face or body with
anything, including soft objects such as pillows, blankets, or
washcloths; or
                                             
 (e) Endangers a child's life or significantly exacerbates a
child's medical condition.
                                             
 II. The intentional infliction of pain, including the use of pain
inducement to obtain compliance.
                                             
 III. The intentional release of noxious, toxic, caustic, or
otherwise unpleasant substances near a child for the purpose of
controlling or modifying the behavior of or punishing the child.
                                             
 IV. Any technique that unnecessarily subjects the child to ridicule,
humiliation, or emotional trauma.

**Source.** 2010, 375:2, eff. Sept. 1, 2010.

### Section 126-U:5

 **126-U:5 Limitation of the Use of Restraint to Emergencies Only.
–**
                                             
 I. Restraint shall only be used in a school or facility to ensure
the immediate physical safety of persons when there is a substantial and
imminent risk of serious bodily harm to the child or others. The
determination of whether the use of restraint is justified under this
section may be made with consideration of all relevant circumstances,
including whether continued acts of violence by a child to inflict
damage to property will create a substantial risk of serious bodily harm
to the child or others. Restraint shall be used only by trained
personnel using extreme caution when all other interventions have failed
or have been deemed inappropriate.
                                             
 II. Restraint shall never be used explicitly or implicitly as
punishment for the behavior of a child.

**Source.** 2010, 375:2. 2014, 324:5, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

### Section 126-U:5-a

 **126-U:5-a Limitation on the Use of Seclusion. –**
                                             
 I. Seclusion may not be used as a form of punishment or discipline.
It may only be used when a child's behavior poses a substantial and
imminent risk of physical harm to the child or to others, and may only
continue until that danger has dissipated.
                                             
 II. Seclusion shall only be used by trained personnel after other
approaches to the control of behavior have been attempted and been
unsuccessful, or are reasonably concluded to be unlikely to succeed
based on the history of actual attempts to control the behavior of a
particular child.
                                             
 III. Seclusion shall not be used in a manner that that unnecessarily
subjects the child to the risk of ridicule, humiliation, or emotional or
physical harm.

**Source.** 2014, 324:6, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

### Section 126-U:5-b

 **126-U:5-b Conditions of Seclusion. –**
                                             
 I. When permitted by this chapter, seclusion may only be imposed in
rooms which:
                                             
 (a) Are of a size which is appropriate for the chronological and
developmental age, size, and behavior of the children placed in them.
                                             
 (b) Have a ceiling height that is comparable to the ceiling
height of the other rooms in the building in which they are located.
                                             
 (c) Are equipped with heating, cooling, ventilation, and lighting
systems that are comparable to the systems that are in use in the other
rooms of the building in which they are located.
                                             
 (d) Are free of any object that poses a danger to the children
being placed in the rooms.
                                             
 (e) Have doors which are either not equipped with locks, or are
equipped with devices that automatically disengage the lock in case of
an emergency. For the purposes of this subparagraph, an "emergency''
includes, but is not limited to:
                                             
 (1) The need to provide direct and immediate medical attention
to a child;
                                             
 (2) Fire;
                                             
 (3) The need to remove a child to a safe location during a
building lockdown; or
                                             
 (4) Other critical situations that may require immediate
removal of a child from seclusion to a safe location.
                                             
 (f) Are equipped with unbreakable observation windows or
equivalent devices to allow the safe, direct, and uninterrupted
observation of every part of the room.
                                             
 II. Each use of seclusion shall be directly and continuously
visually and auditorially monitored by a person trained in the safe use
of seclusion.

**Source.** 2014, 324:6, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

### Section 126-U:5-c

 **126-U:5-c Room Confinement at the Youth Development Center. –**
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the youth
development center may confine children in their rooms when such
confinement is part of a routine practice applicable to substantial
portions of the population at the center and not imposed as a
consequence in response to the behavior of one or more children. Such
confinement is not subject to the notice and reporting requirements of
RSA 126-U:7.

**Source.** 2014, 324:6, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

### Section 126-U:6

 **126-U:6 Schools Limited to Physical Restraint. –** Use of
restraint in schools shall be limited to physical restraint as permitted
by this chapter. Schools shall not use medication restraint and shall
not use mechanical restraint except as otherwise permitted in the
transportation of children pursuant to RSA 126-U:12.

**Source.** 2010, 375:2, eff. Sept. 1, 2010.

### Section 126-U:7

 **126-U:7 Notice and Record-Keeping Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. Unless prohibited by court order, the facility or school shall,
make reasonable efforts to verbally notify the child's parent or
guardian and guardian ad litem whenever seclusion or restraint has been
used on the child. Such notification shall be made as soon as
practicable and in no event later than the time of the return of the
child to the parent or guardian or the end of the business day,
whichever is earlier. Notification shall be made in a manner calculated
to give the parent or guardian actual notice of the incident at the
earliest practicable time.
                                             
 II. A facility employee or school employee who uses seclusion or
restraint, or if the facility employee or school employee is
unavailable, a supervisor of such employee, shall, within 5 business
days after the occurrence, submit a written notification containing the
following information to the director or his or her designee:
                                             
 (a) The date, time, and duration of the use of seclusion or
restraint.
                                             
 (b) A description of the actions of the child before, during, and
after the occurrence.
                                             
 (c) A description of any other relevant events preceding the use
of seclusion or restraint, including the justification for initiating
the use of restraint.
                                             
 (d) The names of the persons involved in the occurrence.
                                             
 (e) A description of the actions of the facility or school
employees involved before, during, and after the occurrence.
                                             
 (f) A description of any interventions used prior to the use of
the seclusion or restraint.
                                             
 (g) A description of the seclusion or restraint used, including
any hold used and the reason the hold was necessary.
                                             
 (h) A description of any injuries sustained by, and any medical
care administered to, the child, employees, or others before, during, or
after the use of seclusion or restraint.
                                             
 (i) A description of any property damage associated with the
occurrence.
                                             
 (j) A description of actions taken to address the emotional needs
of the child during and following the incident.
                                             
 (k) A description of future actions to be taken to control the
child's problem behaviors.
                                             
 (l) The name and position of the employee completing the
notification.
                                             
 (m) The anticipated date of the final report.
                                             
 III. Unless prohibited by court order, the director or his or her
designee shall, within 2 business days of receipt of the notification
required in paragraph II, send or transmit by first class mail or
electronic transmission to the child's parent or guardian and the
guardian ad litem the information contained in the notification. Each
notification prepared under this section shall be retained by the school
or facility for review in accordance with rules adopted under RSA 541-A
by the state board of education and the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 IV. Whenever a facility or school employee has intentional physical
contact with a child which is in response to a child's aggression,
misconduct, or disruptive behavior, a representative of the school or
facility shall make reasonable efforts to promptly notify the child's
parent or guardian. Such notification shall be made no later than the
time of the return of the child to the parent or guardian or the end of
the business day, whichever is earlier. Notification shall be made in a
manner calculated to give the parent or guardian actual notice of the
incident at the earliest practicable time.
                                             
 V. In any case requiring notification under paragraph IV, the school
or facility shall, within 5 business days of the occurrence, prepare a
written description of the incident. Such description shall include at
least the following information:
                                             
 (a) The date and time of the incident.
                                             
 (b) A brief description of the actions of the child before,
during, and after the occurrence.
                                             
 (c) The names of the persons involved in the occurrence.
                                             
 (d) A brief description of the actions of the facility or school
employees involved before, during, and after the occurrence.
                                             
 (e) A description of any injuries sustained by, and any medical
care administered to, the child, employees, or others before, during, or
after the incident.
                                             
 VI. The notification and record-keeping requirements of paragraphs
IV and V shall not apply in the following circumstances:
                                             
 (a) When a child is escorted from an area by way of holding of
the hand, wrist, arm, shoulder, or back to induce the child to walk to a
safe location. However, if the child is actively combative, assaultive,
or self-injurious while being escorted, the requirements of paragraphs
IV and V shall apply.
                                             
 (b) When actions are taken such as separating children from each
other, inducing a child to stand, or otherwise physically preparing a
child to be escorted.
                                             
 (c) When the contact with the child is incidental or minor, such
as for the purpose of gaining a misbehaving child's attention. However,
blocking of a blow, forcible release from a grasp, or other significant
and intentional physical contact with a disruptive or assaultive child
shall be subject to the requirements.
                                             
 (d) When an incident is subject to the requirements of paragraphs
I-III.

**Source.** 2010, 375:2. 2014, 324:8, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

### Section 126-U:7-a

 **126-U:7-a Notice and Record-Keeping Requirements for Foster Family
Homes. –** Notwithstanding RSA 126-U:7, foster family homes, as defined
in RSA 170-E:25, shall keep records and provide notice of incidents
involving seclusion or restraint, according to rules adopted pursuant to
RSA 541-A by the commissioner of the department of human services. The
rules shall provide for timely notice to parents or guardians, which may
be provided through the department. In cases involving serious injury or
death to a child subject to seclusion or restraint in a foster home, the
rules shall provide for timely notification to the commissioner of the
department of health and human services, the attorney general, and the
state's federally-designated protection and advocacy agency for
individuals with disabilities.

**Source.** 2014, 324:7, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

### Section 126-U:8

 **126-U:8 Review of Restraint Records by Department of Education.
–**
                                             
 I. The state board of education shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA
541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (a) Periodic, regular review by the department of education of
records maintained by schools relative to the use of seclusion and
restraint.
                                             
 (b) A process for the department of education's receipt of
complaints and its conduct of investigations of improper use of
seclusion and restraint in schools. The process shall provide for:
                                             
 (1) Investigation of complaints regarding any violation of
this chapter, regardless of whether injury results.
                                             
 (2) Investigation by persons not affiliated with the school
district which is the subject of the complaint.
                                             
 (3) Resolution of complaints and completion of investigations
within 30 days, with provision for limited extensions for good cause.
                                             
 (4) Protection of children before and after completion of the
investigation.
                                             
 (5) Appropriate remedial measures to address physical and
other injuries, protect against retaliation, and reduce the incidence of
violations of this chapter.
                                             
 II. Beginning November 1, 2010, and each November 1 thereafter, the
state board of education shall provide an annual report to the
chairpersons of the education committees of the senate and house of
representatives regarding the use of seclusion and restraint in schools.
The annual report shall be prepared from the periodic, regular review of
such records, and shall include the number and location of reported
incidents and the status of any outstanding investigations.

**Source.** 2010, 375:2. 2014, 324:8, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

### Section 126-U:9

 **126-U:9 Review of Restraint Records by Department of Health and
Human Services. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department of health and human services
shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (a) Periodic, regular review by the department of health and
human services of records maintained by facilities regarding the use of
seclusion and restraint.
                                             
 (b) A process for the department's receipt of complaints and its
conduct of investigations of reports of improper use of seclusion and
restraint in facilities, which may be through the department of health
and human services, office of the ombudsman, or otherwise. The process
shall provide for:
                                             
 (1) Investigation of complaints regarding any violation of
this chapter, regardless of whether injury results.
                                             
 (2) Investigation by persons not affiliated with the facility
which is the subject of the complaint.
                                             
 (3) Resolution of complaints and completion of investigations
within 30 days, with provision for limited extensions for good cause.
                                             
 (4) Protection of children before and after completion of the
investigation.
                                             
 (5) Appropriate remedial measures to address physical and
other injuries, protect against retaliation, and reduce the incidence of
violations of this chapter.
                                             
 II. Beginning November 1, 2010, and each November 1 thereafter, the
commissioner of the department of health and human services shall
provide an annual report to the committees of the house of
representatives and the senate with jurisdiction over health and human
services and over children and family law, regarding the use of
seclusion and restraint in facilities. The annual report shall be based
on the periodic, regular review of such records and shall include the
number and location of reported incidents and the status of any
outstanding investigations.

**Source.** 2010, 375:2. 2014, 324:8, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

### Section 126-U:10

 **126-U:10 Injury or Death During Incidents of Restraint or
Seclusion. –**
                                             
 I. In cases involving serious injury or death to a child subject to
restraint or seclusion in a facility, the facility shall, in addition to
the provisions of RSA 126-U:7, notify the commissioner of the department
of health and human services, the attorney general, and the state's
federally-designated protection and advocacy agency for individuals with
disabilities. Such notice shall include the notification required in RSA
126-U:7, II. The department of health and human services shall annually
notify facilities of their responsibilities under this section and
provide contact information for the persons to be notified.
                                             
 II. In cases involving serious injury or death to a child subject to
restraint or seclusion in a school, the school shall, in addition to the
provisions of RSA 126-U:7, notify the commissioner of the department of
education, the attorney general, and the state's federally-designated
protection and advocacy agency for individuals with disabilities. Such
notice shall include the written notification required in RSA 126-U:7,
II. The department of education shall annually notify schools of their
responsibilities under this section and provide contact information for
the persons to be notified.

**Source.** 2010, 375:2. 2014, 324:8, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.

### Section 126-U:11

 **126-U:11 Authorization and Monitoring of Extended Restraint. –**
In a school or facility:
                                             
 I. Restraint shall not be imposed for longer than is necessary to
protect the child or others from the substantial and imminent risk of
serious bodily harm.
                                             
 II. Children in restraint shall be the subject of continuous direct
observation by personnel trained in the safe use of restraint.
                                             
 III. No period of restraint of a child may exceed 15 minutes without
the approval of the director or a supervisory employee designated by the
director to provide such approval.
                                             
 IV. No period of restraint of a child may exceed 30 minutes unless a
face-to-face assessment of the mental, emotional, and physical
well-being of the child is conducted by the facility or school director
or by a supervisory employee designated by the director who is trained
to conduct such assessments. The assessment shall also include a
determination of whether the restraint is being conducted safely and for
a purpose authorized by this chapter. Such assessments shall be repeated
at least every 30 minutes during the period of restraint. Each such
assessment shall be documented in writing and such records shall be
retained by the facility or school as part of the written notification
required in RSA 126-U:7, II.

**Source.** 2010, 375:2, eff. Sept. 1, 2010.

### Section 126-U:12

 **126-U:12 Restriction of the Use of Mechanical Restraint During the
Transport of Children. –**
                                             
 I. A school or facility shall not use mechanical restraints during
the transportation of children unless case-specific circumstances
dictate that such methods are necessary.
                                             
 II. Whenever a child is transported to a location outside a school
or facility, the director shall ensure that all reasonable and
appropriate measures consistent with public safety are made to transport
or escort the child in a manner which:
                                             
 (a) Prevents physical and psychological trauma;
                                             
 (b) Respects the privacy of the child; and
                                             
 (c) Represents the least restrictive means necessary for the
safety of the child.
                                             
 III. Whenever a child is transported using mechanical restraints,
the director shall document in writing the reasons for the use of
mechanical restraints. Such documentation shall be treated as a
notification of restraint under RSA 126-U:7.

**Source.** 2010, 375:2, eff. Sept. 1, 2010.

### Section 126-U:13

 **126-U:13 Restriction of the Use of Mechanical Restraint in
Courtrooms. –** At any hearing under RSA 169-B, RSA 169-C, or RSA 169-D,
the judge may subject a child to mechanical restraint in the courtroom
only when the judge finds the restraint to be reasonably necessary to
maintain order, prevent the child's escape, or provide for the safety of
the courtroom. Whenever practical, the judge shall provide the child and
the child's attorney an opportunity to be heard to contest the use of
mechanical restraint before the judge orders its use. If mechanical
restraint is ordered, the judge shall make written findings of fact in
support of the order.

**Source.** 2010, 375:2, eff. Sept. 1, 2010.

### Section 126-U:14

 **126-U:14 School Review Following the Use of Restraint or
Seclusion. –** Upon information that restraint or seclusion has been
used for the first time upon a child with a disability as defined in RSA
186-C:2, I or a child who is receiving services under Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. section 701, and its implementing
regulations, the school shall review the individual educational program
and/or Section 504 plan and make such adjustments as are indicated to
eliminate or reduce the future use of restraint or seclusion. A parent
or guardian of a child with a disability may request such a review at
any time following an instance of restraint or seclusion and such
request shall be granted if there have been multiple instances of
restraint or seclusion since the last review.

**Source.** 2014, 324:9, eff. Sept. 30, 2014.
