---
title: 'CHAPTER 126-I OSTEOPOROSIS PREVENTION AND EDUCATION PROGRAM'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 126-I
                                             
OSTEOPOROSIS PREVENTION AND EDUCATION PROGRAM
---------------------------------------------

### Section 126-I:1

 **126-I:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 III. "Osteoporosis'' means a bone disease characterized by a
reduction in bone density accompanied by increasing porosity and
brittleness and associated with loss of calcium from the bones.

**Source.** 1997, 216:2, eff. Aug. 17, 1997.

### Section 126-I:2

 **126-I:2 Program Established. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall establish, promote, and maintain an
osteoporosis prevention and education program to promote public
awareness of causes of osteoporosis, options for prevention, and the
value of early detection and possible treatments, including the benefits
and risks of those treatments.
                                             
 II. The program shall include the following:
                                             
 (a) Development of a public education and outreach campaign to
promote osteoporosis prevention and education, including but not limited
to:
                                             
 (1) Causes and nature of the disease.
                                             
 (2) Risk factors.
                                             
 (3) The role of hysterectomy.
                                             
 (4) Prevention of the disease, including nutrition, diet, and
physical exercise.
                                             
 (5) Diagnostic procedures and appropriate indications for
their use.
                                             
 (6) Hormone replacement, including benefits and risks.
                                             
 (7) Environmental safety and injury prevention.
                                             
 (8) The availability of osteoporosis diagnostic treatment
services in the community.
                                             
 (9) The impact of long-term use of medications and medical
treatment for other medical conditions on the development of
osteoporosis.
                                             
 (b) Development of educational materials to be made available for
consumers, particularly targeted toward high-risk groups, through local
health departments, local physicians, other health care providers and
women's organizations.
                                             
 (c) Development of professional education programs for health
care providers to assist them in understanding research findings and the
subjects set forth in paragraph I.
                                             
 (d) Development and maintenance of a list of current providers,
including holistic providers, of specialized services for the prevention
and treatment of osteoporosis. Dissemination of the list shall be
accompanied by a description of diagnostic procedures, appropriate
indications for their use, and a cautionary statement about the current
status of osteoporosis research, prevention and treatment. The statement
shall also indicate that the department does not license, certify, or in
any other way approve osteoporosis programs or centers in the state.
                                             
 III. The department shall conduct a needs assessment to identify:
                                             
 (a) Available technical assistance and educational materials and
programs nationwide.
                                             
 (b) The level of public and professional awareness about
osteoporosis.
                                             
 (c) The needs of osteoporosis patients, their families, and
caregivers.
                                             
 (d) Needs of health care providers, including physicians, nurses,
persons practicing naturopathic medicine, managed care organizations,
and other health care providers.
                                             
 (e) The services available to osteoporosis patients.
                                             
 (f) Existence of osteoporosis treatment groups.
                                             
 (g) Existence of osteoporosis support groups.
                                             
 (h) Existence of rehabilitation services.
                                             
 (i) Number and location of bone density testing equipment.
                                             
 IV. The department shall gather appropriate data to track incidents
of osteoporosis in this state.
                                             
 V. The department, with the assistance of the advisory council,
shall annually evaluate the performance of the osteoporosis prevention
and education program and issue a report of its findings and
conclusions, together with the data collected pursuant to paragraph IV
and recommendations for legislation, on or before November 1 of each
year to the governor, the speaker of the house of representatives, the
president of the senate, and appropriate committee chairs of both
houses.

**Source.** 1997, 216:2, eff. Aug. 17, 1997.

### Section 126-I:3

 **126-I:3 Advisory Council. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2011, 231:2(2), eff. Dec.
31, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 126-I:4

 **126-I:4 Rulemaking. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2012, 171:26, II, eff. Aug. 10,
2012.
                                             ]

### Section 126-I:5

 **126-I:5 Sources of Grants, Services, and Property; Federal
Waivers. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner may accept grants, services, and property from
the federal government, foundations, organizations, medical schools, and
other entities as may be available for the purposes of fulfilling the
obligations of the program established in this chapter.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall seek any federal waiver or waivers that
may be necessary to maximize funds from the federal government to
implement the program.

**Source.** 1997, 216:2, eff. Aug. 17, 1997.
