---
title: 'CHAPTER 126-Q NEW HAMPSHIRE VACCINE ASSOCIATION'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 126-Q
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE VACCINE ASSOCIATION
---------------------------------

### Section 126-Q:1

 **126-Q:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Assessable coverage'' means:
                                             
 (a) Health coverage as defined in RSA 420-G:2, IX;
                                             
 (b) Stop loss coverage that conforms with RSA 415-H:3, or other
group excess loss insurance purchased against the risk that any
particular claim, or total liability, will exceed a specified dollar
amount; or
                                             
 (c) Group health plan, as defined by 42 U.S.C. 300gg-91(a).
                                             
 II. "Assessable entity'' means any:
                                             
 (a) Health maintenance organization, as defined by RSA 420-B:1,
VI.
                                             
 (b) Third party administrator, as defined by RSA 402-H:1, I.
                                             
 (c) Entity providing administrator services and required to
register with the insurance commissioner under RSA 402-H:11-a or RSA
402-H:11-b.
                                             
 (d) Insurance company licensed pursuant to RSA 401:1, IV.
                                             
 (e) Health service corporation, as defined by RSA 420-A:1, III.
                                             
 III. "Assessable lives'' means all children under 19 years of age
residing in the state who have assessable coverage written or
administered by an assessable entity, with the exception of children
whose vaccines are paid for under the federal Vaccines for Children
program, established under 42 U.S.C. section 1396s.
                                             
 IV. "Assessment'' means the assessable entity's liability with
respect to childhood vaccines determined in accordance with this
chapter. For purposes of rate setting and medical loss ratio
calculations, all association assessments are considered pharmaceutical
or medical benefit costs and not regulatory costs. In the event of any
insolvency or similar proceeding affecting any payer, assessments shall
be included in the highest priority of obligations to be paid by or on
behalf of such payer.
                                             
 V. "Association'' means the New Hampshire vaccine association.
                                             
 VI. "Board'' means the board of directors of the New Hampshire
vaccine association.
                                             
 VII. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 VIII. "Estimated vaccine cost'' means the estimated cost to the
state over the course of a state fiscal year of the purchase,
distribution, and administration of vaccines purchased at the federal
discount rate by the department of health and human services.
                                             
 IX. "Provider'' means a person licensed by this state to provide
health care services to persons or a partnership or corporation made up
of those persons.
                                             
 X. "Total non-federal program cost'' means the estimated vaccine
cost less the amount of federal revenue available to the state for the
purchase, distribution, and administration of vaccines.
                                             
 XI. "Vaccine'' means any preparations of killed microorganisms,
living attenuated organisms, or living fully virulent organisms that are
approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration and recommended by
the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices of the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention and have been authorized by the
commissioner of the department of health and human services for
administration to children of the state of New Hampshire under the age
of 19 years for the purposes of producing or artificially increasing
immunity to particular life-threatening and disabling diseases.

**Source.** 2002, 279:2. 2008, 375:17. 2013, 260:1, eff. July 24, 2013.
2015, 276:154, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 126-Q:2

 **126-Q:2 Creation of Association. –** There is hereby created a
nonprofit corporation to be known as the New Hampshire vaccine
association. The association is formed to assess assessable entities for
the cost of vaccines provided to certain children in New Hampshire.

**Source.** 2002, 279:2. 2013, 260:2, eff. July 24, 2013.

### Section 126-Q:3

 **126-Q:3 Membership, Powers, and Duties of the New Hampshire
Vaccine Association. –**
                                             
 I. The New Hampshire vaccine association shall be comprised of all
assessable entities.
                                             
 II. The New Hampshire vaccine association shall be a not-for-profit,
voluntary corporation under RSA 292 and shall possess all general powers
of a not-for-profit corporation.
                                             
 III. The board of directors shall include:
                                             
 (a) Three representatives selected from the assessable entities
currently writing, maintaining, or administering assessable coverage
through a voting process where votes are based on assessable lives. The
plan of operation shall provide details for this selection process.
                                             
 (b) Two health care provider representatives appointed by the
commissioner.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, who shall serve as an ex-officio member.
                                             
 (d) The commissioner of the department of insurance who shall
serve as an ex-officio member.
                                             
 (e) One member appointed by the governor and council who shall
represent self-insured entities.
                                             
 (f) One public member appointed by the speaker of the house of
representatives.
                                             
 (g) One public member appointed by the president of the senate.
                                             
 IV. The directors' terms and appointments shall be specified in the
plan of operation adopted by the New Hampshire vaccine association.
                                             
 V. The board of directors of the association shall:
                                             
 (a) Prepare and adopt articles of association and bylaws.
                                             
 (b) Prepare and adopt a plan of operation.
                                             
 (c) Submit the plan of operation to the commissioner of insurance
for approval after the consultation with the commissioner.
                                             
 (d) Conduct all activities in accordance with the approved plan
of operation.
                                             
 (e) On an annual basis, no later than November 1 of each year,
establish the amount of the assessment for the succeeding year.
                                             
 (f) Enter into contracts as necessary or proper to collect and
disburse the assessment.
                                             
 (g) Enter into contracts as necessary or proper to administer the
plan of operation.
                                             
 (h) Sue or be sued, including taking any legal action necessary
or proper for the recovery of any assessment for, on behalf of, or
against members of the association or other participating person.
                                             
 (i) Appoint from among its directors, committees as necessary to
provide technical assistance in the operation of the association,
including the hiring of independent consultants as necessary.
                                             
 (j) Determine an assessment amount and collect payments from
assessed entities in accordance with RSA 126-Q:4.
                                             
 (k) Submit an annual report to the commissioner of insurance, in
a manner and form determined by the commissioner, listing the
association membership base, providing a count of assessable lives by
assessable entity, identifying changes in assessable lives by assessable
entity, describing the collection of assessments, listing payment
delinquencies, and containing such other related information as the
commissioner may require.
                                             
 (l) Allow each assessable entity up to 45 days after the closing
of each calendar quarter to report its assessable lives and remit its
corresponding assessment amount as calculated pursuant to RSA 126-Q:4.
                                             
 (m) Collect assessments from assessable entities as calculated
under RSA 126-Q:4 and deposit said assessments less the association's
administrative costs annually and reserves with the state treasurer to
the credit of the vaccine purchase fund established pursuant to RSA
141-C:17-a. At the written request of the association following a
majority vote of the board of directors, any funds forwarded to the
state treasurer for the vaccine purchase fund remaining unexpended for
childhood vaccines, shall promptly be returned to the association.
                                             
 (n) Be authorized to enter into one or more agreements with other
applicable authorities in surrounding states to reduce the risk of
duplicate assessments and to assure availability of vaccines for
children who are residents of this state but who receive vaccination
services in other states. Any costs relating to any such agreement shall
be considered additional vaccine costs of the program for purposes of
determining the association's assessments.
                                             
 (o) Adopt procedures by which affiliated assessable entities
calculate their assessment on an aggregate basis and procedures to
ensure that no assessable life is counted more than once. Unless
otherwise determined by the board, the assessable entity responsible for
the payment of the provider's administrative costs for childhood
vaccines shall be the entity responsible for reporting assessable lives
and payment of the corresponding assessment.
                                             
 (p) Submit an annual report regarding the association's
activities, its financial reports, and any newly-approved vaccines
adopted by the department of health and human services to the president
of the senate, the speaker of the house of representatives, and the
governor.
                                             
 (q) Perform any other functions as may be necessary or proper to
carry out the plan of operation.

**Source.** 2002, 279:2. 2008, 375:1, 12-14. 2013, 260:3-5. 2014, 199:1,
2, eff. July 11, 2014.

### Section 126-Q:4

 **126-Q:4 Assessment Determination. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall determine an assessment for each assessable
entity in accordance with this section, except that no assessment shall
be made based on children excluded from assessable lives whose vaccines
are paid for under the federal Vaccines for Children program,
established under 42 U.S.C. section 1396s. An assessment determination
made pursuant to this section is a pharmaceutical cost and not a
regulatory cost for purposes of calculating the carrier's medical loss
ratio.
                                             
 II. In determining the assessment amount, the board shall:
                                             
 (a) Estimate the total non-federal program cost for the
succeeding year;
                                             
 (b) Add its anticipated operating costs for the succeeding year
and such additional working capital reserves as may be established by
the board from time to time;
                                             
 (c) Add a reserve of up to 10 percent of the anticipated cost
under subparagraph (a) for unanticipated costs associated with providing
vaccines to children covered; and
                                             
 (d) Subtract the amount of any unexpended assessments collected
in the preceding year along with any unexpended interest accrued to the
fund during the preceding year.
                                             
 III. The board shall include in its plan of operations, details
regarding the timing for assessment collections, and the form and format
assessable entities shall use to calculate assessments.
                                             
 IV. The board shall include in its plan of operation details
regarding payment due dates, grace periods, late payment fees, interest,
and other details regarding the collection of assessments.
                                             
 V. The board may determine an interim assessment for new vaccines or
unanticipated shortfalls in the association's ability to meet childhood
vaccine funding needs. The board shall calculate the interim assessment
in accordance with paragraph II, and the interim assessment is payable
the calendar quarter that begins no less than 30 days following the
establishment of the federal contract price. The board shall not impose
more than one interim assessment per year, except in the case of a
public health emergency declared in accordance with state or federal
law.
                                             
 VI. In the event that the association discontinues operation for any
reason, any unexpended assessments, including unexpended funds from
prior assessments in the state vaccine purchase fund, shall be refunded
to payees in proportion to the respective assessment payments by payees
over the most recent 8 quarters prior to discontinuation of association
operations.

**Source.** 2002, 279:2. 2005, 177:112. 2008, 375:15. 2013, 260:6, eff.
July 24, 2013. 2015, 276:155, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 126-Q:5

 **126-Q:5 Powers and Duties. –** In addition to the duties and
powers enumerated elsewhere in this chapter:
                                             
 I. The commissioner of insurance shall, after notice from the
association, issue a show cause order to any assessable entity that
fails to comply with the association's plan of operation. In addition to
late fees and other penalties imposed by the association, assessable
entities may, after a finding of just cause, be subject to a minimum
fine of 
                                             $5,000, a maximum fine of 25 percent of the total amount of
delinquent assessments, and licensure suspension.
                                             
 I-a. The insurance commissioner shall annually review the assessment
report required under RSA 126-Q:3, V(k) to ensure that all assessable
entities are participating in the association and that all assessable
entities have accurately reported assessable lives. The association
shall remedy any problem identified by the commissioner with respect to
assessable entities and assessable lives.
                                             
 II. The commissioner and the commissioner of insurance may adopt
rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, as necessary to carry out the purposes of
this chapter.

**Source.** 2002, 279:2. 2008, 375:2, 16. 2013, 260:7, eff. July 24,
2013.

### Section 126-Q:6

 **126-Q:6 Examinations and Annual Reports. –** The board of
directors shall submit to the commissioner, no later than 120 days after
the close of the association's fiscal year, a financial report in a form
approved by the commissioner.

**Source.** 2002, 279:2, eff. June 17, 2002.

### Section 126-Q:7

 **126-Q:7 Exemption From Taxes. –** The association shall be exempt
from payment of all fees and all taxes levied by this state or any of
its subdivisions, except taxes levied on real property.

**Source.** 2002, 279:2, eff. June 17, 2002.

### Section 126-Q:8

 **126-Q:8 Immunity From Liability. –** There shall be no liability
on the part of and no cause of action of any nature shall arise against
any association member or its agents or employees, the association or
its agents or employees, members of the board of directors, or the
commissioner or the commissioner's representatives, for any action or
omission by them in the performance of their powers and duties under
this chapter.

**Source.** 2002, 279:2, eff. June 17, 2002.

### Section 126-Q:9

 **126-Q:9 Severability of Chapter. –** If any provisions of this
chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held
invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications
of the chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions
or applications, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.

**Source.** 2002, 279:2, eff. June 17, 2002.
