---
title: 'CHAPTER 126-P FAMILY MUTUAL SUPPORT SERVICES'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 126-P
                                             
FAMILY MUTUAL SUPPORT SERVICES
------------------------------

### Section 126-P:1

 **126-P:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 II-a. "Family mutual support organization'' means a nonprofit
corporation that provides family mutual support services, as defined in
paragraph III and further described in RSA 126-P:2, III and IV.
                                             
 III. "Family mutual support services'' that is, families helping
families, include, but are not limited to, culturally relevant,
family-focused educational, informational, referral, and advocacy
services that support families in their roles as primary caregivers for
adults and children with mental conditions and that help families
navigate through the multiple service systems they encounter.
                                             
 IV. "Mental conditions'' means mental disorders as defined in the
most recent edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders published by the American Psychiatric Association (DSM),
excluding those disorders designated by a "V Code'' in the DSM.

**Source.** 2001, 140:2. 2005, 177:20, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 126-P:2

 **126-P:2 Family Mutual Support Services. –**
                                             
 I. The department shall establish family mutual support
organizations to utilize their skills and experiences to help improve
treatment planning processes, treatment delivery systems, and treatment
evaluation as well as quality improvement activities of the department.
Family members shall be included on advisory boards, statewide planning
committees, regional quality improvement teams, and research design and
program evaluation committees.
                                             
 II. All services to families, whether provided by clinicians or
family mutual support organizations, shall be provided in a manner that
develops comprehensive, culturally responsive support to families in
their role as primary caregivers of adults and children with mental
conditions.
                                             
 III. Family mutual support services shall include statewide
education and training activities to individuals with mental conditions
and shall support families in their roles as primary caregivers of
adults and children with mental conditions. Further, family mutual
support services shall assist family members of persons with mental
conditions to acquire the skills and knowledge necessary to navigate the
complexities of multiple service systems, and to facilitate family
support groups in community mental health program regions.
                                             
 IV. Family mutual support services shall include statewide education
to the public about mental illness to reduce the stigma associated with
mental conditions and their impact on individuals and their families.
                                             
 V. The New Hampshire developmental disabilities council shall assist
the department in developing any requests for proposals for family
mutual support services, which shall include adult services, before they
are released for competitive bidding, and shall participate in
selection.

**Source.** 2001, 140:2. 2007, 263:53, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 126-P:3

 **126-P:3 Administration. –** The department shall administer this
chapter and shall coordinate family mutual support services with
existing services for individuals with mental conditions and their
families.

**Source.** 2001, 140:2, eff. Aug. 28, 2001.

### Section 126-P:4

 **126-P:4 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the proper administration of this
chapter.

**Source.** 2001, 140:2, eff. Aug. 28, 2001.
