---
title: 'CHAPTER 126-N PEER SUPPORT PROGRAMS'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 126-N
                                             
PEER SUPPORT PROGRAMS
---------------------

### Section 126-N:1

 **126-N:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to recognize
the effectiveness of mutual peer supports to the capacity of individuals
with disabilities to participate fully in the workforce, in their
families, and in the life of their community.

**Source.** 2000, 100:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 126-N:2

 **126-N:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 II. "Department'' means the department of health and human services.

**Source.** 2000, 100:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 126-N:3

 **126-N:3 Peer Support Programs. –** The commissioner shall
establish within the department peer support programs. Peer support
programs shall:
                                             
 I. Foster the self advocacy skills, autonomy, and independence of
individuals who receive services from the department.
                                             
 II. Ensure that individuals with disabilities are informed and
involved in system-wide service planning, program evaluation, and
educational and training activities.
                                             
 III. Provide information, networking, and assistance to local self
advocacy and peer support organizations and activities.
                                             
 IV. Offer training and technical assistance to individuals with
disabilities to advocate on their own behalf with regard to their health
care and private managed care systems.
                                             
 V. Undertake other activities to foster the goals of this chapter.

**Source.** 2000, 100:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.

### Section 126-N:4

 **126-N:4 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the proper administration of this
chapter.

**Source.** 2000, 100:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2001.
