---
title: 'CHAPTER 126-H HEALTHY KIDS CORPORATION'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 126-H
                                             
HEALTHY KIDS CORPORATION
------------------------

### Section 126-H:1

 **126-H:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Board'' means the healthy kids board established in RSA
126-H:3.
                                             
 II. "Corporation'' means the healthy kids corporation established in
this chapter.

**Source.** 1993, 312:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1993.

### Section 126-H:2


                                             


                                             [RSA 126-H:2 effective until notice is received of the transfer of the
state children's health insurance program as provided by 2011, 224:313;
see also RSA 126-H:2 set out below.
                                             ]

 **126-H:2 Corporation Established. –**
                                             
 There is hereby created a body politic and corporate having a
distinct legal existence separate from the state and not constituting a
department of state government, to be known as the New Hampshire healthy
kids corporation to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The
corporation is hereby deemed to be a public instrumentality and the
exercise by the authority of the powers conferred by this chapter shall
be deemed and held to be the performance of public and essential
governmental functions of the state. The corporation shall be the
program administrator for the state children's health insurance program
under Title XXI of the Social Security Act. The corporation shall be a
private nonprofit corporation and shall have all the powers necessary to
carry out the purposes of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
the power to receive and accept grants, loans, or advances of funds from
any public or private agency and to receive and accept from any source,
contributions of money, property, labor, or any other thing of value, to
be held, used, and applied for the purposes of this chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any payments made by the
corporation for insurance coverage under this chapter, either directly
or indirectly, shall be exempt from the premium tax under RSA 400-A:32.


                                             [RSA 126-H:2 effective upon receipt of notice of the transfer of the
state children's health insurance program as provided by 2011, 224:313;
see also RSA 126-H:2 set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
**126-H:2 Corporation Established.** --
                                             
 There is hereby created a body politic and corporate having a
distinct legal existence separate from the state and not constituting a
department of state government, to be known as the New Hampshire healthy
kids corporation to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The
corporation is hereby deemed to be a public instrumentality. The
corporation shall be a private nonprofit corporation and shall have all
the powers necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, the power to receive and accept grants,
loans, or advances of funds from any public or private agency and to
receive and accept from any source, contributions of money, property,
labor, or any other thing of value, to be held, used, and applied for
the purposes of this chapter.

**Source.** 1993, 312:2. 1996, 119:1. 2001, 295:17. 2007, 167:1. 2009,
224:1. 2011, 224:308, eff. as provided by 2011, 224:313.

### Section 126-H:3

 **126-H:3 Healthy Kids Board. –**
                                             
 I. The powers of the corporation shall be vested in 12 members for
3-year terms of office as follows:
                                             
 (a) A public member, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (b) A member of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house.
                                             
 (c) A member of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (d) The commissioner of the department of education, or
designee.
                                             
 (e) The commissioner of the insurance department, or designee.
                                             
 (f) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (g) One member appointed by the New Hampshire Hospital
Association.
                                             
 (h) One member appointed by the New Hampshire Pediatric Society.
                                             
 (i) One member appointed by the New Hampshire Academy of Family
Practice.
                                             
 (j) One member appointed by the New Hampshire School Nurses
Association.
                                             
 (k) One member appointed by the New Hampshire Alliance for
Children and Youth.
                                             
 (l) One member appointed by the New Hampshire Child Care
Association.
                                             
 (m) One member appointed by the New Hampshire School Boards
Association.
                                             
 (n) Four members-at-large, appointed by the healthy kids board of
directors.
                                             
 II. The terms of office shall be as follows: the members in
subparagraphs I(a), (g), and (j) shall serve for 2 years; the members in
subparagraphs I(b), (h), (k), and (m) shall serve for 3 years; and the
members in subparagraphs I(c), (i), and (l) shall serve for 4 years. The
members in subparagraphs I(d) and (e) shall serve terms which are
coterminous with their terms in office. Two of the 4 members in
subparagraph I(n) shall serve for 3 years, one shall serve for 2 years,
and one shall serve for 4 years.
                                             
 III. The members shall elect annually from among their number a
chairperson and such officers as they may determine. A member shall hold
office until a successor has been appointed and qualified. Members shall
receive no salary for the performance of their duties under this
chapter, but each member shall be reimbursed for reasonable expenses
incurred in carrying out duties under this chapter. Any such expenses by
board members shall have prior approval by 7 members of the board of
directors before reimbursement. A member of the board of directors may
be removed for cause by the official who appointed that member.
                                             
 IV. There shall be no liability on the part of, and no cause of
action shall arise against, any member of the board of directors, or its
employees or agents, for any action they take in the performance of
their powers and duties under this chapter.
                                             
 V. The corporation shall not be deemed an insurer. The officers,
directors, and employees of the corporation shall not be deemed to be
the agents of an insurer. Neither the corporation nor any officer,
director, or employee of the corporation shall be subject to the
licensing requirements of the insurance code or the rules of the
department of insurance. However, the department of insurance may
require that any marketing representative utilized and compensated by
the corporation be appointed as a representative of the insurers or
health service providers with which the corporation contracts.
                                             
 VI. The board shall have complete fiscal control over the
corporation and shall be responsible for all corporate operations.

**Source.** 1993, 312:2. 1995, 258:1, 2. 2011, 224:310, 311, 312, I,
eff. July 1, 2011.

### Section 126-H:4

 **126-H:4 Meetings of Board. –** Meetings shall be held at the call
of the chairperson or when 5 members so request. Seven members of the
board shall constitute a quorum and the affirmative vote of 7 members
shall be necessary for any action taken by the authority. No vacancy in
the membership of the board shall impair the right of a quorum to
exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the corporation.

**Source.** 1993, 312:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1993.

### Section 126-H:5

 **126-H:5 Powers and Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The corporation shall:
                                             
 (a) Organize school children groups to facilitate the provision
of preventive health care services to children at no more than 5
geographic pilot sites and to provide comprehensive health insurance
coverage to children.
                                             
 (b) Arrange for the collection of any premium, in an amount to be
determined by the board of directors, from all participants to provide
for payment for preventive health care services or premiums for
comprehensive health insurance coverage and for the actual or estimated
administrative expenses incurred during the period for which payments
are made.
                                             
 (c) Consult appropriate professional organizations and establish
standards for preventive health care services and providers and
comprehensive insurance benefits appropriate to children.
                                             
 (d) Establish participation criteria and, if appropriate,
contract with an authorized insurer, health maintenance organization, or
insurance administrator to provide administrative services to the
corporation.
                                             
 (e) Contract with authorized insurers or any provider of health
care services, in accordance with standards established by the
corporation, to provide comprehensive insurance coverage and preventive
health care services to participants.
                                             
 (f) Develop and implement a plan to publicize the New Hampshire
healthy kids corporation, the eligibility requirements of the program,
and the procedures for enrollment in the program and to maintain public
awareness of the corporation and the program.


                                             [Paragraph I(g) effective until notice is received of transfer of the
state children's health insurance program as provided by 2011, 224:313;
see also paragraph I(g) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 (g) Secure staff necessary to properly administer the
corporation. Staff costs shall be funded from state funds appropriated
by the legislature and such other private or public funds as become
available. The board of directors shall determine the number of staff
members necessary to administer the corporation.


                                             [Paragraph I(g) effective upon receipt of notice of transfer of the
state children's health insurance program as provided by 2011, 224:313;
see also paragraph I(g) set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 (g) Secure staff necessary to properly administer the
corporation. Staff costs shall be funded from available private funds.
The board of directors shall determine the number of staff members
necessary to administer the corporation.
                                             
 (h) Enter into contracts or agreements with local school boards
or other agencies which choose to provide on-site information,
enrollment, and other services necessary to the operation of the
corporation.
                                             
 (i) Provide an annual interim report, the first on or before
January 1, 1994, to the governor, insurance commissioner, commissioner
of health and human services, commissioner of education, senate
president, and speaker of the house of representatives on the
development of the program.
                                             
 I-a. The corporation may establish a young adult buy-in program,
with appropriate safeguards to prevent adverse risk selection, by which
individuals under 26 years of age, who cannot be included in their
family's insurance plan, and whose incomes are at or below 400 percent
of the federal poverty level, may purchase health insurance through the
healthy kids corporation. The corporation shall not implement a young
adult buy-in program until the insurance commissioner has reviewed a
description of the proposed benefit structure, marketing plan,
underwriting standards, enrollment procedures and eligibility criteria
and has determined that the program is not likely to have an adverse
impact on the commercial health insurance market. The commissioner shall
make the determination within 30 days from the submission of the plan
design. Within 2 years of the initiation of this buy-in option, the
corporation shall submit a report to the governor, the president of the
senate, the speaker of the house of representatives, and the standing
committees of the house of representatives and senate responsible for
health insurance policy on the status of the program, including summary
information on enrollment, claims experience, pricing, trends, and any
other information relevant to the goals of the program.
                                             
 II. Coverage under the corporation's program shall be secondary to
any other available private coverage held by the participant child or
family member. The corporation may establish procedures for coordinating
benefits under this program with benefits under other public and private
coverage.

**Source.** 1993, 312:2. 2009, 224:2. 2011, 224:309, eff. as provided by
2011, 224:313.

### Section 126-H:6

 **126-H:6 Rulemaking Authority. –** The corporation may adopt rules,
pursuant to its own procedures, relative to:
                                             
 I. The conduct of its business, including the administrative and
accounting procedures for operation of the corporation.
                                             
 II. The eligibility criteria which children and their family members
must meet in order to participate in the program.
                                             
 III. The procedures under which applicants to and participants in
the program may have grievances reviewed by an impartial body and
reported to the board of directors of the corporation.
                                             
 IV. Application procedures.
                                             
 V. Schedules of fees and other charges to be made by the corporation
and the insurer in renewing, acting upon, or accepting applications
under this chapter and any other matters related to such applications as
the corporation may deem necessary.
                                             
 VI. Criteria for the selection of a possible 5 geographic pilot
sites for the operation of the program.
                                             
 VII. Confidentiality of medical records obtained under this
chapter.
                                             
 VIII. Such other matters as are necessary to carry out the powers
and duties of the corporation.

**Source.** 1993, 312:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1993.

### Section 126-H:6-a

 **126-H:6-a Healthy Kids Subcommittee Established. –** 
                                             [Repealed
2011, 224:312, II, eff. July 1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 126-H:7

 **126-H:7 Healthy Kids Fund. –** There is hereby established in the
office of the state treasurer a fund to be known as the healthy kids
fund. The healthy kids corporation established in RSA 126-H:2 is
authorized to accept public sector and private sector grants, gifts,
donations, and appropriations of any kind to further the goals of the
corporation. Public sector appropriations shall be deposited in the
healthy kids fund and may be expended by the healthy kids corporation to
accomplish the purposes of RSA 126-H. The moneys in the fund shall be
nonlapsing and shall be continually appropriated to the corporation.
Other revenues of the corporation such as grants, gifts, donations, and
participant premium payments shall not be considered revenue of the
state, but rather shall be funds of the corporation to be deposited as
determined by the healthy kids board of directors.

**Source.** 1993, 312:2. 1995, 258:3, eff. Aug. 18, 1995.

### Section 126-H:8

 **126-H:8 Confidentiality. –** Notwithstanding any provision of law
to the contrary, the corporation shall have access to the medical
records of a child upon receipt of permission from a parent or guardian
of the child. Such medical records may be maintained by state and local
agencies. Any confidential information obtained by the corporation
pursuant to this section shall remain confidential and shall not be
subject to RSA 91-A.

**Source.** 1993, 312:2, eff. Aug. 22, 1993.

### Section 126-H:9

 **126-H:9 Legislative Oversight Committee. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010,
368:1(11), eff. Dec. 31, 2010.
                                             ]

### Section 126-H:10

 **126-H:10 Temporary Commission Relative to Children's Health
Insurance. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 351:3, eff. Dec. 31, 2011.
                                             ]
