---
title: CHAPTER 130 SANITARY INSPECTORS
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 130
                                             
SANITARY INSPECTORS
-------------------

### Section 130:1

 **130:1 Employment. –** For the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of this chapter and of other statutes the enforcement of
which rests with the department of health and human services, said
department may employ persons to be known as inspectors, sanitarians,
sanitary engineers and other agents. The salaries of such employees
shall be fixed within available appropriations and subject to the
regulations of the state personnel commission; and such employees shall
be paid their actual expenses legally incurred when engaged in the
performance of their duties. All powers and duties imposed on inspectors
by the provisions of this chapter may be imposed on sanitarians,
sanitary engineers and other agents insofar as the department shall
determine.

**Source.** 1909, 163:1. PL 136:1. 1941, 112:1. RL 161:1. 1950, 9:2. RSA
130:1. 1983, 291:1, I. 1995, 310:175, 181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 130:2

 **130:2 Inspection of Meat. –** It shall be the duty of the
inspectors, acting under the direction of the department of health and
human services, to make examinations as far as may be of the meat
supplies sold in this state not guaranteed by government inspection,
with reference to the detection of illegal, unsuitable or diseased
meats, the sanitary condition of places where meats are kept, the
methods of preparing meat products for sale and such other
investigations of meat products as may be authorized by the department
of health and human services.

**Source.** 1909, 163:2. PL 136:2. RL 161:2. RSA 130:2. 1969, 363:2.
1995, 310:181, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 130:3

 **130:3 Inspection of Food Products. –** The inspectors shall
investigate food manufacturing processes and food products offered, or
to be offered, for sale in this state, and may take samples of food for
examination at the laboratories of the department of health and human
services.

**Source.** 1909, 163:3. PL 136:3. RL 161:3. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov. 1,
1995.

### Section 130:4

 **130:4 Investigation of Sanitation. –** The inspectors shall, under
the direction of the department of health and human services,
investigate local sanitary conditions, in conjunction with and upon
request of local boards of health, in cases where such expert advice is
deemed necessary by the department of health and human services.

**Source.** 1909, 163:4. PL 136:4. RL 161:4. 1995, 310:181, eff. Nov. 1,
1995.

### Section 130:5

 **130:5 Public Health. –** In addition to the specific duties herein
prescribed, the inspectors shall perform such other duties in connection
with public health matters as the department of health and human
services shall direct.

**Source.** 1909, 163:5. PL 136:5. RL 161:5. RSA 130:5. 1995, 310:181,
eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 130:6

 **130:6 Seizure and Restraint. –** Said inspectors, sanitarians,
sanitary engineers and other agents are hereby authorized and empowered
to seize for use as evidence and without warrant, and seal from further
use, any article or commodity found being sold, distributed, stored or
employed in the processing of any food or drug which is in violation of
the laws relating to public health matters. Provided, however, that in
the collection of samples of foods and drugs for investigation, the
retail price thereof shall be tendered.

**Source.** 1941, 112:2. RL 161:6. 1951, 25:1, eff. Mar. 15, 1951.

### Section 130:7

 **130:7 Penalty for Obstructing. –** Whoever hinders, obstructs or
in any other way interferes with said inspectors or with any member of
said division, or any of their other officers, agents or employees, in
the performance of any of their duties, shall be guilty of a violation.
For each subsequent offense, any other person shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1909, 163:5. PL 136:6. RL 161:7. RSA 130:7. 1973, 530:6,
eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.
