---
title: |
    CHAPTER 132-A TEMPORARY CARE AND CONTROL OF CHILDREN AT A HOSPITAL OR
    SAFE HAVEN
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 132-A
                                             
TEMPORARY CARE AND CONTROL OF CHILDREN AT A HOSPITAL OR SAFE HAVEN
------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 132-A:1

 **132-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Department'' means the department of health and human services.
                                             
 II. "Hospital'' means a public or private institution which is
required to be licensed under RSA 151, and which is engaged in providing
to patients, under supervision of physicians, diagnostic and therapeutic
services for medical diagnosis, treatment and care of injured, disabled,
or sick persons, or rehabilitative services for the rehabilitation of
such persons.
                                             
 III. "Safe haven'' means a church which is attended by a person, or
a police or fire station which is attended by a person, or a 911
responder at an agreed transfer location.

**Source.** 2003, 40:1, eff. June 4, 2003.

### Section 132-A:2

 **132-A:2 Temporary Care and Control of Children at a Hospital or
Safe Haven. –**
                                             
 I. A hospital or safe haven, without a court order, shall take
temporary care and control of a child who is not more than 7 days old,
provided that the child is handed to a person at the hospital or safe
haven by the child's parent or parents, and the parent or parents did
not express an intent to return for the child. The child's parent or
parents shall not be required to reveal personally identifiable
information.
                                             
 II. A hospital or safe haven which takes temporary care and control
of a child under this chapter shall ensure the provision of any medical
services necessary to protect the physical health or safety of the
child.

**Source.** 2003, 40:1, eff. June 4, 2003.

### Section 132-A:3

 **132-A:3 Notice to Department. –**
                                             
 I. Within 24 hours after a hospital or safe haven assumes temporary
care and control of a child under RSA 132-A:2, the hospital or safe
haven shall notify the department and law enforcement officials that the
hospital or safe haven has assumed temporary care and control of the
child.
                                             
 II. Upon receipt of notice by the hospital or safe haven, the
department shall assume the temporary care and control of the child and
shall be responsible for all necessary medical and other costs incurred
by the hospital or safe haven related to the temporary care and control
of the child. The department shall reimburse the hospital or safe haven
for any necessary costs incurred prior to the child's placement in the
temporary care and control of the department.
                                             
 III. Within 24 hours of receiving a report under this paragraph, the
department shall request law enforcement officials to investigate the
incident using all resources available, including the National Crime
Information Center database, to determine if the child is a missing
child.

**Source.** 2003, 40:1, eff. June 4, 2003.

### Section 132-A:4

 **132-A:4 Liability. –** No person or entity subject to the
provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any claim at law or in
equity as a result of action taken pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter.

**Source.** 2003, 40:1, eff. June 4, 2003.

### Section 132-A:5

 **132-A:5 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of the department of
health and human services shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, to
implement the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 2003, 40:1, eff. June 4, 2003.
