---
title: CHAPTER 132 PROTECTION FOR MATERNITY AND INFANCY
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 132
                                             
PROTECTION FOR MATERNITY AND INFANCY
------------------------------------

### Section 132:1

 **132:1 Purpose; Instruction. –** The department of health and human
services may provide instruction, advice and such services as the
commissioner may deem necessary for children with special health care
needs, and to protect and promote the physical health of women in their
child-bearing years and their infants and children.

**Source.** 1921, 151:1. PL 128:1. RL 150:1. RSA 132:1. 1983, 291:1, I.
1986, 198:11. 1995, 310:181, 183. 2004, 21:3, eff. June 4, 2004.

### Section 132:2

 **132:2 Duties. –** The commissioner of the department of health and
human services shall:
                                             
 I. Conduct studies as necessary to carry out the provisions of this
chapter.
                                             
 II. Formulate and administer such plans as are necessary to carry
out the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 III. Receive and expend, in accordance with plans developed under
this chapter, funds made available to the department by the federal
government, the state or its political subdivisions, or other sources.
                                             
 IV. Cooperate with the federal government and with other state and
local agencies and organizations in developing, extending, and improving
the services provided under this chapter.
                                             
 V. Supervise those services authorized by this chapter and provided
under contract with local agencies.
                                             
 VI. Employ such persons as necessary to carry out the requirements
of this chapter.
                                             
 VII. Administer the supplemental food program for women, infants,
and children in accordance with RSA 132:12-a.
                                             
 VIII. Assure the prevention of ophthalmia neonatorum in accordance
with RSA 132:6.
                                             
 IX. Assure the screening of newborn children for metabolic disorders
in accordance with RSA 132:10-a.
                                             
 X. Administer services for children with special health care needs
as provided for under RSA 132:13.
                                             
 XI. Prepare, in conjunction with the office of alcohol and drug
abuse prevention, a brochure which provides information relative to
fetal alcohol syndrome and which shall be available to the public in the
office of the town clerk and at the check-out counter of the state
liquor store.

**Source.** 1921, 151:4. PL 128:2. RL 150:2. RSA 132:2. 1986, 198:12.
1988, 226:1. 1995, 310:182. 2004, 21:4. 2005, 261:1, eff. Sept. 20,
2005.

### Section 132:3

 **132:3 Enforcement of Rules. –** The division may enforce the
department's rules and ordinances through its inspectors, or through the
local boards of health.

**Source.** 1911, 121:2. PL 128:6. RL 150:6. RSA 132:3. 1985, 190:39,
eff. May 29, 1985.

### Section 132:4

 **132:4 Effect of Aid. –** No person receiving aid under this
chapter shall be affected thereby in any civil or political rights, nor
shall their identity be disclosed except upon written order of the
commissioner of the department of health and human services.

**Source.** 1921, 151:3. PL 128:3. RL 150:3. RSA 132:4. 1986, 198:13.
1995, 310:182, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 132:5

 **132:5 Contracts for Outside Services. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23,
XXVII, eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 132:6

 **132:6 Prevention of Ophthalmia in Newborn. –**
                                             
 I. The physician, hospital, nurse midwife, midwife, or other health
care provider attending a newborn child shall, after washing the lids
and adjacent tissues immediately following birth, place into each eye of
every child a single drop of a one percent solution of nitrate of silver
or some equally efficient solution.
                                             
 II. Should one or both eyes of an infant become inflamed, swollen,
and red, and show an unusual discharge at any time within 2 weeks after
its birth, a report shall be made in writing, within 6 hours thereafter,
to the department of health and human services, except if a licensed
physician is in attendance he shall report as required by this section
within 24 hours.
                                             
 III. If a physician is not in attendance, the parents, or whoever
has charge of such infant, shall immediately place it in the charge of a
licensed physician.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner of the department of health and human services
may publish such information and instruction and adopt rules as he deems
expedient to prevent the development of inflammation in the eyes of
newborn babies, or so-called ophthalmia neonatorum.

**Source.** 1911, 121:1. PL 128:5. RL 150:5. RSA 132:6. 1985, 190:40.
1986, 198:14. 1995, 310:181, 182. 1999, 213:1, eff. July 6, 1999.

### Section 132:7

 **132:7 Treatment. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XXVIII, eff. Aug. 2,
1986.
                                             ]

### Section 132:8

 **132:8 Reports to Local Health Board. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23,
XXIX, eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 132:9

 **132:9 Further Treatment. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XXX, eff.
Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 132:10

 **132:10 Report to Division of Public Health Services. –**

                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XXXI, eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 132:10-a

 **132:10-a Newborn Screening Tests Required; Newborn Screening
Advisory Committee. –**
                                             
 I. The physician, hospital, nurse midwife, midwife, or other health
care provider attending a newborn child shall test a newborn child for
metabolic disorders. Such tests shall include, but not be limited to,
phenylketonuria, galactosemia, homocystinuria, maple syrup urine
disease, and hypothyroidism. Additional disorders shall be added to the
newborn screening panel based upon, but not limited to, the following
considerations:
                                             
 (a) The disorder is well-defined with a known incidence.
                                             
 (b) The disorder is associated with significant morbidity and/or
mortality.
                                             
 (c) The disorder can be detected with a screening test that is
ethical, safe, accurate, and cost-effective.
                                             
 (d) Effective treatment exists for the disorder, and that early
treatment, meaning before the onset of symptoms, is more effective in
improving health outcomes than later treatment.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the
commissioner of the department of health and human services shall
establish fees, pursuant to RSA 541-A, to be paid by hospitals for the
tests required under paragraph I. All such fees shall be paid into the
newborn screening fund, hereby established in the state treasury. Moneys
from the newborn screening fund established under this section shall be
nonlapsing and shall be continually appropriated for use by the
department to cover laboratory analysis and related newborn screening
program costs.
                                             
 III. The department of health and human services shall establish a
newborn screening advisory committee which shall include a member of the
oversight committee on health and human services, established in RSA
126-A:13, and representation from health care subspecialties, as
determined by the department.
                                             
 III-a. The department shall ensure that the laboratory analyzing
tests authorized under paragraph I destroys any samples no later than 6
months following the completion of testing. Any samples taken for
newborn screening shall only be used for tests required under this
section. No such samples may be used for other research or DNA testing
purposes unless authorized by the parent or guardian.
                                             
 IV. The department shall make an annual report commencing on January
1, 2006 to the oversight committee on health and human services relative
to newborn screening tests which shall include, but not be limited to
the number and type of tests performed and their fiscal impact.
                                             
 V. No whole-genome DNA sequencing shall be performed pursuant to
this chapter unless the general court authorizes such sequencing by
statute.

**Source.** 1965, 48:1. 1986, 198:15. 1999, 213:2. 2005, 285:1. 2010,
233:1. 2014, 63:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 132:10-aa

 **132:10-aa Newborn Screening; Pulse Oximetry Test Required. –** The
physician, hospital, nurse midwife, midwife, or other health care
provider attending a newborn child shall perform a pulse oximetry
screening, according to the recommendations of the American Academy of
Pediatrics, on every newborn child.

**Source.** 2012, 190:3, eff. Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 132:10-b

 **132:10-b Rulemaking. –** The commissioner of the department of
health and human services shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 I. The women, infants, and children program under RSA 132:12-a.
                                             
 II. The prevention of ophthalmia in newborn babies under RSA 132:6.
                                             
 III. Newborn screening tests and how fees for such tests are to be
determined under RSA 132:10-a.
                                             
 IV. Services for children with special health care needs as provided
under RSA 132:13.
                                             
 V. Maternal and child health services provided directly by the
department or by local agencies under contract to it.

**Source.** 1965, 48:1. 1985, 190:41. 1986, 198:16. 1987, 279:1. 1995,
310:175, 182. 2004, 21:4. 2005, 285:2, eff. Sept. 20, 2005.

### Section 132:10-c

 **132:10-c Exception. –** The provisions of RSA 132:10-a, 10-aa, and
10-b shall not apply if the parents of such child object thereto.

**Source.** 1965, 48:1. 2012, 190:4, eff. Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 132:10-d

 **132:10-d Breast-feeding. –** Breast-feeding a child does not
constitute an act of indecent exposure and to restrict or limit the
right of a mother to breast-feed her child is discriminatory.

**Source.** 1999, 121:2, eff. Aug. 9, 1999.

Maternal, Child Health, and Services for Children With Special Health Care Needs
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 132:11

 **132:11 Authorization. –** The commissioner of the department of
health and human services may:
                                             
 I. Formulate and administer plans for the purposes specified in RSA
132:12 through RSA 132:13 and adopt rules under RSA 541-A to carry out
these plans.
                                             
 II. Receive and expend in accordance with such plans funds made
available to the department by the federal government, the state or its
political subdivisions, or other sources.
                                             
 III. Cooperate with the federal government and with other state and
local agencies and organizations in developing, extending, and improving
the services specified in RSA 132:12 through RSA 132:13, and in the
administration of such plans.

**Source.** 1937, 58:2. RL 150:11. RSA 132:11. 1981, 307:1. 1985,
190:42. 1995, 310:175, 182, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 132:12

 **132:12 Maternal and Child Health Services. –** The division may
administer a program of maternal and child health services, and shall
supervise those services not administered directly by it.

**Source.** 1937, 58:1. RL 150:12.

### Section 132:12-a

 **132:12-a Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) Program. –** The
commissioner of the department of health and human services shall
develop and administer a women, infants, and children program within the
state under the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, in accordance with federal
regulations promulgated by the Department of Agriculture and subject to
continued funding from the federal Department of Agriculture. In the
administration of the program, the commissioner:
                                             
 I. Shall suspend a vendor from the program for any of the
following:
                                             
 (a) Providing cash, unauthorized food, or other items to
participants in lieu of authorized supplemental foods.
                                             
 (b) Charging the state for food not received by participants.
                                             
 (c) Charging the program more for supplemental foods than other
customers are charged for the same food item.
                                             
 II. Shall suspend a participant from the program for any of the
following:
                                             
 (a) Knowingly and deliberately misrepresenting circumstances to
obtain benefits.
                                             
 (b) Selling supplemental foods or food instruments to, or
exchanging them with, other persons.
                                             
 (c) Receiving cash or credit towards purchases of unauthorized
food or other items of value from food vendors, in lieu of authorized
supplemental food.
                                             
 III. May, upon determination that a person has fraudulently obtained
funds under this program, bring an action to recover the funds. Any
funds so recovered shall be remitted to the proper federal officials as
required under federal law or regulation. Demand and payment of these
funds shall not relieve or discharge any person from liability, either
civil or criminal, for additional amounts or penalties as may be
prescribed under any other applicable law.

**Source.** 1981, 307:2. 1986, 198:17. 1995, 310:182, 183, eff. Nov. 1,
1995.

### Section 132:12-b

 **132:12-b Vendors. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XXXII, eff. Aug. 2,
1986.
                                             ]

### Section 132:12-c

 **132:12-c Participants. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XXXIII, eff.
Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 132:12-d

 **132:12-d Recovery by the State. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23,
XXXIV, eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 132:12-e

 **132:12-e Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) Program Fund. –**
There is hereby established the women, infants, and children (WIC) fund.
The fund shall be composed of food rebates, including but not limited
to, infant formula and baby food, purchased under the WIC program
established pursuant to this chapter. The fund shall be nonlapsing and
shall be continually appropriated to the commissioner of the department
of health and human services for the purposes of continuous support for
the WIC program as required by federal law and regulations.

**Source.** 2009, 68:1, eff. Aug. 8, 2009.

### Section 132:13

 **132:13 Children With Special Health Care Needs. –**
                                             
 I. Services provided for children with special health care needs in
accordance with RSA 132:2, X, shall include location, diagnoses,
hospitalization, medical, surgical, corrective, and other services and
care of such children.
                                             
 II. In this chapter, "children with special health care needs''
means children who have or are at risk for chronic physical,
developmental, behavioral, or emotional conditions and who also require
health and related services of a type or amount beyond that required by
children generally.

**Source.** 1937, 58:2. RL 150:13. RSA 132:13. 1986, 198:18. 2004, 21:1,
eff. June 4, 2004.

### Section 132:14

 **132:14 Limitation of Provisions. –** Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed as authorizing any public official, agent, or
representative, in carrying out any provision of this chapter, to take
charge of any child, or to provide services to any child, over the
objection of either the father or the mother of such child, or of the
person standing "in loco parentis'' to such child, except pursuant to a
proper court order. Nothing in this chapter shall affect the operation
of RSA 186 or 200 or any other law providing maternal or child health
services.

**Source.** 1937, 58:1, 2. RL 150:14. RSA 132:14. 1986, 198:19, eff.
Aug. 2, 1986.

### Section 132:15

 **132:15 Penalties. –** Any person committing a fraud on the women,
infants, and children program under RSA 132:12-a shall be charged under
RSA 638:15. Any person violating any other provision of this subdivision
or any rule adopted under this subdivision shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1911, 121:3. PL 128:11. 1937, 58:2. RL 150:15. RSA 132:15.
1981, 307:3, eff. Aug. 15, 1981.

### Section 132:16

 **132:16 Reports Required. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XXXV, eff.
Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

### Section 132:17

 **132:17 Information as to Schools. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23,
XXXVI, eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

Prenatal Tests
--------------

### Section 132:18

 **132:18 Testing for Syphilis. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 198:23, XXXVI,
eff. Aug. 2, 1986.
                                             ]

Perinatal Alcohol, Tobacco, and Other Drug Use Task Force
---------------------------------------------------------

### Section 132:19-21

 **132:19 to 132:21 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 368:1(12), eff.
Dec. 31, 2010.
                                             ]

Live-Birth Infants Protection Act
---------------------------------

### Section 132:22

 **132:22 Title. –** This subdivision shall be known and may be cited
as the Live-Birth Infants Protection Act.

**Source.** 2001, 219:1, eff. Sept. 9, 2001.

### Section 132:23

 **132:23 Definition. –**
                                             
 I. In this subdivision "live-birth'' means the complete expulsion or
extraction from its mother of a product of a human conception,
irrespective of the duration of the pregnancy, which after such
expulsion or extraction, breathes, or shows any other evidence of life
such as beating of the heart, pulsation of the umbilical cord, or
definite movement of voluntary muscles, whether or not the umbilical
cord has been cut or the placenta is attached.
                                             
 II. The definition under paragraph I shall apply whether the
expulsion or extraction occurs as a result of natural or induced labor,
cesarean section, or induced abortion.

**Source.** 2001, 219:1, eff. Sept. 9, 2001.

Parental Notification Prior to Abortion
---------------------------------------

### Section 132:24-28

 **132:24 to 132:28 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2007, 265:1, eff. June
29, 2007.
                                             ]

Maternal Mortality Review Panel
-------------------------------

### Section 132:29

 **132:29 Definitions. –** In this subdivision, "maternal mortality''
means the following:
                                             
 I. "Pregnancy-related'' means the death of a woman while pregnant or
within one year of the end of pregnancy, irrespective of the duration
and site of the pregnancy, from any cause related to or aggravated by
her pregnancy or its management, but not from accidental or incidental
causes.
                                             
 II. "Pregnancy-associated death'' means the death of a woman while
pregnant or within one year of the end of pregnancy, irrespective of
cause.
                                             
 III. "Pregnancy-associated, but not pregnancy-related'' means the
death of a woman while pregnant or within one year of the end of
pregnancy due to a cause unrelated to pregnancy.

**Source.** 2010, 129:2, eff. Aug. 8, 2010.

### Section 132:30

 **132:30 Maternal Mortality Review Panel Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is established a maternal mortality review panel to conduct
comprehensive, multidisciplinary reviews of maternal deaths in New
Hampshire for the purpose of identifying factors associated with the
deaths and to make recommendations for system changes to improve
services for women in the state. The panel shall consist of:
                                             
 (a) Two members from the New Hampshire chapter of the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, one of whom shall be a
generalist obstetrician, and one of whom shall be a maternal fetal
medicine specialist.
                                             
 (b) One member from the New Hampshire chapter of the American
Academy of Pediatrics, specializing in neonatology.
                                             
 (c) One member from the New Hampshire chapter of the American
College of Nurse-Midwives.
                                             
 (d) One member from the New Hampshire section of the Association
for Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses.
                                             
 (e) The administrator of maternal and child health who also is
the Title V director, division of public health services, department of
health and human services.
                                             
 (f) An epidemiologist from the department of health and human
services with experience analyzing perinatal data, or designee.
                                             
 (g) A representative of the community mental health centers.
                                             
 (h) A public member.
                                             
 (i) The chief medical examiner, or designee.
                                             
 II. Each member in subparagraphs I(a)-(h) shall be appointed by the
commissioner of health and human services, or designee, in collaboration
with the organizations listed in paragraph I.
                                             
 III. The term of each member shall be 3 years and the terms shall be
staggered. The chair shall be appointed by the commissioner. The
initially appointed chair shall call the meeting and panel together and
shall serve as chair for 6 months, after which time, the panel shall
elect its chair. Members of the panel shall receive no compensation.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner may delegate to the Northern New England
Perinatal Quality Improvement Network (NNEPQIN) the functions of
collecting, analyzing, and disseminating maternal mortality information,
organizing and convening meetings of the panel, and other substantive
and administrative tasks as may be incident to these activities. The
activities of NNEPQIN and its employees or agents shall be subject to
the same confidentiality provisions as those that apply to the panel.
                                             
 V. The commissioner shall submit an annual report beginning on June
1, 2011 to the oversight committee on health and human services
describing adverse events reviewed by the panel, including statistics
and causes, and outlining, in aggregate, corrective action plans, and
making recommendations for system change and legislation relative to
state health care operations.
                                             
 VI. (a) The panel, in collaboration with the commissioner of the
department of health and human services, or designee, shall conduct
comprehensive multidisciplinary reviews of the maternal mortality
deaths, as defined in RSA 132:29, I-III, in New Hampshire.
                                             
 (b) Each member of the panel shall be responsible for the
dissemination of panel recommendations to his or her respective
institutions and professional organizations. All such information shall
be disseminated through each participant's quality assurance program in
order to protect the confidentiality of all participants and patients
involved in any incident.
                                             
 (c) The panel shall not:
                                             
 (1) Call witnesses or take testimony from individuals involved
in the investigation of a maternal death.
                                             
 (2) Enforce any public health standard or criminal law or
otherwise participate in any legal proceeding, except if a member of the
team is involved in the investigation of the death or resulting
prosecution and must participate in a legal proceeding in the course of
performing in his or her duties outside the team.
                                             
 (d) Proceedings, records, and opinions of the maternal mortality
review panel are confidential, not subject to RSA 91-A, and not subject
to discovery, subpoena, or introduction into evidence in any civil or
criminal proceeding. Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed to
limit or restrict the right to discover or use in any civil or criminal
proceeding anything that is available from another source and entirely
independent of the proceedings of the panel.
                                             
 (e) Members of the panel shall not be questioned in any civil or
criminal proceeding regarding information presented in or opinions
formed as a result of a meeting of the team. Nothing in this
subparagraph shall be construed to prevent a member of the panel from
testifying to information obtained independently of the team or which is
public information.
                                             
 VII. The commissioner of the department of health and human
services, with the advice and recommendation of a majority of members of
the panel, shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the
following:
                                             
 (a) The system for identifying and reporting maternal deaths to
the commissioner, or designee.
                                             
 (b) The form and manner through which the program may acquire
information under RSA 132:31.
                                             
 (c) The protocol to be used in carefully and sensitively
contacting a family member of the deceased woman for a discussion of the
events surrounding the death, allowing grieving family members to refuse
such an interview.
                                             
 (d) Assuring de-identification of all individuals and facilities
involved in the panel review of cases.

**Source.** 2010, 129:2, eff. Aug. 8, 2010.

### Section 132:31

 **132:31 Acquisition of Information Related to Maternal Mortality.
–**
                                             
 I. If a root cause analysis of a maternal mortality event has been
completed, such findings shall be included in the records supplied to
the review panel.
                                             
 II. Health care providers, health care facilities, clinics,
laboratories, medical records departments, and state offices, agencies
and departments shall report all maternal mortality deaths as defined in
RSA 132:29, I-III to the chair of the panel and the commissioner, or
designee. The commissioner shall have access to individually
identifiable information relating to the occurrence of maternal deaths
only on a case-by-case basis where public health is at risk. This
information includes, but is not limited to: vital records, hospital
discharge data, prenatal, fetal, pediatric, or infant medical records,
hospital or clinic records, laboratory reports, records of fetal deaths
or induced terminations of pregnancies, and autopsy reports. The same
case information may be acquired from health care facilities, maternal
mortality review programs, and other sources in other states to ensure
that its records of New Hampshire maternal mortality cases are accurate
and complete. The chair shall not acquire and retain any individually
identifiable information.
                                             
 III. The commissioner, or designee, may retain identifiable
information regarding facilities where maternal deaths occur and
geographical information on each case solely for the purposes of
trending and analysis over time. Pursuant to RSA 132:30, VII(d),
identifiable information on all individuals and facilities shall be
removed prior to any case review by the panel.

**Source.** 2010, 129:2, eff. Aug. 8, 2010.

Parental Notification Prior to Abortion
---------------------------------------

### Section 132:32

 **132:32 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Abortion'' means the use or prescription of any instrument,
medicine, drug, or any other substance or device intentionally to
terminate the pregnancy of a female known to be pregnant with an
intention other than to increase the probability of a live birth, to
preserve the life or health of the child after live birth, or to remove
an ectopic pregnancy or the products from a spontaneous miscarriage.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 IV. "Emancipated minor'' means any minor female who is or has been
married or has by court order otherwise been freed from the care,
custody, and control of her parents.
                                             
 V. "Guardian'' means the guardian or conservator appointed under RSA
464-A, for pregnant females.
                                             
 VI. "Minor'' means any person under the age of 18 years.
                                             
 VII. "Parent'' means one parent of the pregnant girl if one is
living or the guardian or conservator if the pregnant girl has one.
                                             
 VIII. "Medical emergency'' means a condition that, on the basis of
the physician's good-faith clinical judgment, so complicates the medical
condition of a pregnant woman as to necessitate the immediate abortion
of her pregnancy to avert her death or for which a delay will create
serious risk of substantial and irreversible impairment of a major
bodily function.

**Source.** 2011, 205:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 132:33

 **132:33 Notification Required. –**
                                             
 I. No abortion shall be performed upon an unemancipated minor or
upon a female for whom a guardian or conservator has been appointed
pursuant to RSA 464-A because of a finding of incompetency, until at
least 48 hours after written notice of the pending abortion has been
delivered in the manner specified in paragraphs II and III.
                                             
 II. The written notice shall be addressed to the parent at the usual
place of abode of the parent and delivered personally to the parent by
the physician or an agent.
                                             
 III. In lieu of the delivery required by paragraph II, notice shall
be made by certified mail addressed to the parent at the usual place of
abode of the parent with return receipt requested and with restricted
delivery to the addressee, which means the postal employee shall only
deliver the mail to the authorized addressee. Time of delivery shall be
deemed to occur at 12 o'clock noon on the next day on which regular mail
delivery takes place, subsequent to mailing.

**Source.** 2011, 205:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 132:34

 **132:34 Waiver of Notice. –**
                                             
 I. No notice shall be required under RSA 132:33 if:
                                             
 (a) The attending abortion provider certifies in the pregnant
minor's medical record that a medical emergency exists and there is
insufficient time to provide the required notice; or
                                             
 (b) The person or persons who are entitled to notice certify in
writing that they have been notified.
                                             
 II. If such a pregnant minor elects not to allow the notification of
her parent or guardian or conservator, any superior court judge shall,
upon petition, or motion, and after an appropriate hearing, authorize an
abortion provider to perform the abortion if said judge determines that
the pregnant minor is mature and capable of giving informed consent to
the proposed abortion. If said judge determines that the pregnant minor
is not mature, or if the pregnant minor does not claim to be mature, the
judge shall determine whether the performance of an abortion upon her
without notification of her parent, guardian, or conservator would be in
her best interests and shall authorize an abortion provider to perform
the abortion without such notification if said judge concludes that the
pregnant minor's best interests would be served thereby.
                                             
 (a) Such a pregnant minor may participate in proceedings in the
court on her own behalf, and the court may appoint a guardian ad litem
for her. Any guardian ad litem appointed under this subdivision shall
maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings. The court shall,
however, advise her that she has a right to court-appointed counsel, and
shall, upon her request, provide her with such counsel.
                                             
 (b) Proceedings under this section shall be held in closed court,
shall be confidential and shall ensure the anonymity of the minor. All
court proceedings under this section shall be sealed. The minor shall
have the right to file her petition in the court using a pseudonym or
using solely her initials. All documents related to this petition shall
be confidential and shall not be available to the public. These
proceedings shall be given such precedence over other pending matters so
that the court may reach a decision promptly and without delay so as to
serve the best interest of the pregnant minor. In no case shall the
court fail to rule within 2 court business days from the time the
petition is filed, except that the 2 court business day limitation may
be extended at the request of the minor. A judge of the court who
conducts proceedings under this section shall make in writing specific
factual findings and legal conclusions supporting the decision and shall
order a record of the evidence to be maintained including the judge's
own findings and conclusions. If the court fails to rule within the 2
court business day period and an extension was not requested, then the
petition shall be deemed to have been granted, and the notice
requirement shall be waived.
                                             
 (c) An expedited confidential appeal shall be available, as the
supreme court provides by rule, to any such pregnant minor for whom the
court denies an order authorizing an abortion without notification. The
court shall make a ruling within 2 court business days from the time of
the docketing of the appeal. An order authorizing an abortion without
notification shall not be subject to appeal. No filing fees shall be
required of any such pregnant minor at either the trial or the appellate
level. Access to the trial court for the purposes of such a petition or
motion, and access to the appellate courts for purposes of making an
appeal from denial of the same, shall be afforded such a pregnant minor
24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
                                             
 (d) The supreme court shall make rules to ensure that procedures
followed in the appeals process are handled in an expeditious manner and
protect the confidentiality of the parties involved in the appeal to
satisfy the requirements of the federal courts.

**Source.** 2011, 205:2. 2012, 78:1, eff. May 23, 2012.

### Section 132:35

 **132:35 Penalty. –** Performance of an abortion in violation of
this subdivision shall be a misdemeanor and shall be grounds for a civil
action by a person wrongfully denied notification. A person shall not be
held liable under this section if the person establishes by written
evidence that the person relied upon evidence sufficient to convince a
careful and prudent person that the representations of the pregnant
minor regarding information necessary to comply with this section are
bone fide and true, or if the person has attempted with reasonable
diligence to deliver notice, but has been unable to do so.

**Source.** 2011, 205:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

### Section 132:36

 **132:36 Severability. –** If any provision of this subdivision or
the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the provisions or applications of this
subdivision which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or
applications, and to this end, the provisions of this subdivision are
severable.

**Source.** 2011, 205:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2012.

Access to Reproductive Health Care Facilities
---------------------------------------------

### Section 132:37

 **132:37 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Reproductive health care facility'' means a place, other than
within or upon the grounds of a hospital, where abortions are offered or
performed.
                                             
 II. "Patient escort services'' means the act of physically escorting
patients through the buffer zone to the reproductive health care
facility and does not include counseling or protesting of any sort
during such escort service.

**Source.** 2014, 81:2, eff. July 10, 2014.

### Section 132:38

 **132:38 Prohibited Acts. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall knowingly enter or remain on a public way or
sidewalk adjacent to a reproductive health care facility within a radius
up to 25 feet of any portion of an entrance, exit, or driveway of a
reproductive health care facility. This section shall not apply to the
following:
                                             
 (a) Persons entering or leaving such facility.
                                             
 (b) Employees or agents of such facility acting within the scope
of their employment for the purpose of providing patient escort services
only.
                                             
 (c) Law enforcement, ambulance, firefighting, construction,
utilities, public works and other municipal agents acting within the
scope of their employment.
                                             
 (d) Persons using the public sidewalk or street right-of-way
adjacent to such facility solely for the purpose of reaching a
destination other than such facility.
                                             
 II. Reproductive health care facilities shall clearly demarcate the
zone authorized in paragraph I and post such zone with signage
containing the following language:
                                             
 *Reproductive Health Center*
                                             
 *Patient Safety Zone*
                                             
 *No Congregating, Patrolling, Picketing, or Demonstrating Between
Signs*
                                             
 *Pursuant to RSA 132:38*
                                             
 III. Prior to posting the signage authorized under paragraph II, a
reproductive health care facility shall consult with local law
enforcement and those local authorities with responsibilities specific
to the approval of locations and size of the signs to ensure compliance
with local ordinances.
                                             
 IV. The provisions of this section shall only be effective during
the facility's business hours.

**Source.** 2014, 81:2, eff. July 10, 2014.

### Section 132:39

 **132:39 Enforcement; Civil Fine. –**
                                             
 I. Prior to issuing a citation for a violation of this section, a
police officer or any law enforcement officer shall issue one written
warning to an individual. If the individual fails to comply after one
warning, such individual shall be given a citation. Failure to comply
after one warning shall be cause for citation whether or not the failure
or subsequent failures are contemporaneous in time with the initial
warning.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates this subdivision shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be charged a minimum fine of 
                                             $100. In addition, the
attorney general or the appropriate county attorney may bring an action
for injunctive relief to prevent further violations of this
subdivision.
                                             
 III. This section shall not apply unless the signage authorized in
RSA 132:38, II was in place at the time of the alleged violation.

**Source.** 2014, 81:2, eff. July 10, 2014.

### Section 132:40

 **132:40 Severability. –** If any provision of this subdivision or
the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the
subdivision which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this subdivision are
declared to be severable.

**Source.** 2014, 81:2, eff. July 10, 2014.
