---
title: 'CHAPTER 135-F SYSTEM OF CARE FOR CHILDREN''S MENTAL HEALTH'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 135-F
                                             
SYSTEM OF CARE FOR CHILDREN'S MENTAL HEALTH
-------------------------------------------

### Section 135-F:1

 **135-F:1 Purposes. –** The purposes of this chapter are to:
                                             
 I. Increase service effectiveness and improve outcomes for children
with behavioral health challenges and their caretakers.
                                             
 II. Reduce the cost of providing services by leveraging funding
sources other than general funds, reducing the need for costly
out-of-home placements, and reducing duplication across agencies.
                                             
 III. Coordinate care for children involved in multiple systems and
children at risk of court involvement and out-of-home placement.

**Source.** 2016, 203:2, eff. June 6, 2016.

### Section 135-F:2

 **135-F:2 Statement of Policy. –** It is the policy of New Hampshire
to implement a system of care model for providing behavioral health
services to children in all of the publicly-funded service systems in
the state.

**Source.** 2016, 203:2, eff. June 6, 2016.

### Section 135-F:3

 **135-F:3 Definition; System of Care. –**
                                             
 I. In this chapter, "system of care'' means an integrated and
comprehensive delivery structure for the provision of publicly funded
behavioral health services to New Hampshire children and youth.
                                             
 II. The system of care is to provide services to all children and
youth receiving publicly-funded behavioral health services, including,
but not limited to, children and youth in any of the following systems:
                                             
 (a) Children in need of services under RSA 169-D.
                                             
 (b) Juvenile delinquency under RSA 169-B.
                                             
 (c) Child protection under RSA 169-C.
                                             
 (d) Children with disabilities under RSA 186-C.
                                             
 (e) Children and youth eligible for services under RSA 135-C.
                                             
 (f) Children eligible for early intervention pursuant to Part C
of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act and He-M 510.
                                             
 (g) Children eligible for the child care scholarship program
under He-C 6910 due to disability.
                                             
 III. The system of care shall have the following characteristics:
                                             
 (a) A comprehensive behavioral health program with a flexible
benefit package that includes clinically necessary and appropriate home
and community-based treatment services and comprehensive support
services in the least restrictive setting.
                                             
 (b) An absence of significant gaps in services and barriers to
access services.
                                             
 (c) Community-based care planning and service delivery, including
services and supports for children from birth through early childhood.
                                             
 (d) Service planning and implementation based on the needs and
preferences of the child or youth and his or her family which places an
emphasis on early identification, prevention, and treatment and uses an
individualized wraparound approach for children with complex needs.
                                             
 (e) Services that are family-driven, youth-guided,
community-based, and culturally and linguistically competent.
                                             
 (f) An efficient balance of local participation and state wide
administration.
                                             
 (g) Integration of funding streams.
                                             
 (h) A performance measurement system for monitoring quality and
access.
                                             
 (i) Accountability for quality, access, and cost.
                                             
 (j) Comprehensive children and youth behavioral health training
for agency and system staff and interested parents and guardians.
                                             
 (k) Effective identification of youth in need of transition
services to adult systems.

**Source.** 2016, 203:2, eff. June 6, 2016.

### Section 135-F:4

 **135-F:4 Duties of Commissioner of the Department of Health and
Human Services. –** The commissioner of the department of health and
human services shall:
                                             
 I. To the extent possible within existing statutory and budgetary
constraints, modify the policies and practices of the department of
health and human services to establish a system of care; and
                                             
 II. Develop a plan for full establishment and maintenance of a
system of care. Such plan shall be reviewed and amended annually. It
shall include sufficient detail to allow compliance with the reporting
requirements of RSA 135-F:6, and shall address at least the following
elements:
                                             
 (a) System capacity, including workforce sufficiency.
                                             
 (b) Federal funding participation, including but not limited to
Medicaid waivers and plan amendments.
                                             
 (c) Changes to statutes, administrative rules, and structure of
appropriations, and department policy, practice, and structure.
                                             
 (d) Projections of cost savings from increased service
effectiveness and reductions in costly forms of care and use of such
savings to close existing gaps in children's behavioral health
services.
                                             
 (e) Recommended modifications to law, practice, and policy to
prepare for and accommodate the participation of privately funded
service providers in the system of care.
                                             
 (f) Coordination with the plans and activities of the
commissioner of the department of education to implement the system of
care.

**Source.** 2016, 203:2, eff. June 6, 2016.

### Section 135-F:5

 **135-F:5 Duties of Commissioner of the Department of Education. –**
The commissioner of the department of education shall:
                                             
 I. To the extent possible within existing statutory and budgetary
constraints, modify the policies and practices of the department of
education to support establishment of a system of care; and
                                             
 II. Develop a plan for full support and participation of the
department of education in the establishment and maintenance of a system
of care by the department of health and human services. Such plan shall
be reviewed and amended annually. It shall include sufficient detail to
allow compliance with the reporting requirements of RSA 135-F:6, and
shall address at least the following elements:
                                             
 (a) Development of a multi-tiered system of supports in New
Hampshire schools.
                                             
 (b) System capacity, including workforce sufficiency.
                                             
 (c) Federal funding participation, including but not limited to
Medicaid waivers and plan amendments.
                                             
 (d) Changes to statutes, administrative rules, and structure of
appropriations, and department policy, practice, and structure.
                                             
 (e) Projections of cost savings from increased service
effectiveness and reductions in costly forms of care and use of such
savings to close existing gaps in children's behavioral health
services.
                                             
 (f) Coordination with the plans and activities of the
commissioner of the department of health and human services to implement
the system of care.

**Source.** 2016, 203:2, eff. June 6, 2016.

### Section 135-F:6

 **135-F:6 Reporting Requirements. –** The commissioners of the
department of health and human services and the department of education
shall issue a joint system of care report on or before December 1 of
each year, beginning on December 1, 2016. The report shall be provided
to the governor and executive council, the speaker of the house of
representatives, the president of the senate, the house and senate
finance committees, and the house and senate policy committees with
jurisdiction over health and human services and education issues.
                                             
 I. Beginning in 2016, the report shall address the following:
                                             
 (a) The total cost of children's behavioral health services.
                                             
 (b) The extent to which the state's behavioral health service
systems are consistent with a system of care.
                                             
 (c) A description of any actual or planned changes in department
policy or practice or developments external to the departments that will
affect implementation of a system of care.
                                             
 (d) Any other available information relevant to progress toward
full implementation of a system of care.
                                             
 II. Beginning in 2017, the report shall also address the following:
                                             
 (a) A summary of the interagency agreement between the
departments required by RSA 135-F:7.
                                             
 (b) Identification of those actions which will be required to
maximize federal and private insurance funding participation in the
system of care, along with target dates for completion.
                                             
 (c) Identification of changes to statutes, administrative rules,
policies, practices, and managed care and provider contracts which will
be necessary to fully implement the system of care.
                                             
 (d) Identification of significant gaps in the array of children's
behavioral health services, along with a description of plans to close
those gaps.
                                             
 III. Beginning in 2018, the report shall also address the
following:
                                             
 (a) Projections of future demand for services in the system of
care.
                                             
 (b) Identification of shortfalls in workforce sufficiency
affecting full implementation of the system of care and plans for
addressing those shortfalls.
                                             
 (c) Identification of specific plan amendments and other changes
to the Medicaid system required for full implementation of the system of
care and plans for making those changes.
                                             
 (d) Numbers of children and youth awaiting services in various
categories.
                                             
 IV. Beginning in 2019, the report shall also address the following:
                                             
 (a) Detailed statistical information regarding children and
families serviced, along with demographic characteristics, service need
and provision, involvement in service systems, service funding sources,
and placement or other site of service provision.
                                             
 (b) Outcomes, including but not limited to status upon exit from
the system of care, measured treatment results, recidivism, and other
returns to the service system.
                                             
 (c) Financial information, including but not limited to measures
of cost-effectiveness, comparisons with other states with regard to
levels of funding from federal, state, local, and private sources, and
cost savings resulting from service coordination and effectiveness.
                                             
 (d) An assessment of any influences external to the department of
health and human services and the department of education, including
configuration of the private children's behavioral health care system,
which may be affecting establishment of the system of care.

**Source.** 2016, 203:2, eff. June 6, 2016.

### Section 135-F:7

 **135-F:7 Joint Responsibilities of the Commissioner of the
Department of Education and the Commissioner of the Department of Health
and Human Services. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner of the department of education and the
commissioner of the department of health and human services shall enter
into an interagency agreement which supports full implementation of a
system of care. The agreement shall be completed no later than December
1, 2017, and shall be amended as necessary and renewed no less
frequently than every 2 years. The agreement shall provide for:
                                             
 (a) Coordination of a delivery system of behavioral health
services across the life span of children, youth, and adults with
behavioral health needs.
                                             
 (b) Maximum federal reimbursement and revenue.
                                             
 (c) Coordination of care and funding among agencies.
                                             
 (d) Assistance to local education and behavioral health
providers, including but not limited to:
                                             
 (1) Development of model agreements to be utilized by school
districts, other education providers, area agencies, community mental
health centers, and other entities participating in the system of care.
                                             
 (2) Provision of technical assistance to support development
of coordinated services by school districts, other education providers,
area agencies, community mental health centers, and other entities
participating in the system of care.
                                             
 II. The commissioners may apply for any federal waivers, plan
amendments, or other changes or expansion of federal funding mechanisms
necessary to implement the provisions of the agreement.

**Source.** 2016, 203:2, eff. June 6, 2016.
