---
title: CHAPTER 135 NEW HAMPSHIRE HOSPITAL AND INSANE PERSONS
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 135
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE HOSPITAL AND INSANE PERSONS
-----------------------------------------

New Hampshire Hospital
----------------------

### Section 135:1-14

 **135:1 to 135:14 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 212:4, IV, eff.
Jan. 1, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 135:14-a

 **135:14-a Patient Employment. –** The New Hampshire hospital is
authorized to employ patients of said hospital to perform such services
as may be determined as not necessarily being beneficial for the care
and treatment of any such patients. Such patients shall not be state
employees, and they shall be paid no less than the prevailing federal
minimum wage. Payment of wages to such patient workers shall be made
through a payment program which does not conflict with state or federal
requirements.

**Source.** 1974, 40:42, II. 1975, 377:1. 1979, 69:1, eff. June 17,
1979.

Commitment to Hospitals
-----------------------

### Section 135:15

 **135:15 Authority to Cause Commitment. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 556:6,
I, eff. July 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 135:16

 **135:16 Indigent Insane. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 212:4, IV, eff. Jan.
1, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 135:17

 **135:17 Competency; Commitment for Evaluation. –**


                                             [Paragraph I(a) effective until January 1, 2016 and as provided by
2015, 249:17; see also paragraph I(a) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. (a) When a person is charged or indicted for any offense, or is
bound over by any district or superior court to await the action of the
grand jury, the district or superior court before which he or she is to
be tried, if a plea of insanity is made in court, or said court is
notified by either party that there is a question as to the competency
or sanity of the person, may make such order for a pre-trial examination
of such person by a qualified psychiatrist or psychologist on the staff
of any public institution or by a private qualified psychiatrist or
psychologist as the circumstances of the case may require, which order
may include, though without limitation, examination at the secure
psychiatric unit on an out-patient basis, the utilization of local
mental health clinics on an in- or out-patient basis, or the examination
of such person, should he or she be incarcerated for any reason, at his
or her place of detention by qualified psychiatrists or psychologists
assigned to a state or local mental health facility. Such pre-trial
examination shall be completed within 45 days in the case of a person
being held at a county correctional facility, otherwise 90 days after
the date of the order for such examination, unless either party requests
an extension of this period. For the purposes of this paragraph and RSA
135:17-a, III, "qualified'' means board-eligible or board-certified in
forensic psychiatry or psychology, or demonstrated competence and
experience in completing court-ordered forensic criminal evaluations. A
licensed out-of-state psychiatrist or psychologist who meets the
definition of qualified may also conduct evaluations under this
paragraph and RSA 135:17-a, III.


                                             [Paragraph I(a) effective January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17; see also paragraph I(a) set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 I. (a) When a person is charged or indicted for any offense, or is
awaiting the action of the grand jury on any felony, the circuit or
superior court before which he or she is to be tried, if a plea of
insanity is made in court, or said court is notified by either party
that there is a question as to the competency or sanity of the person,
may make such order for a pre-trial examination of such person by a
qualified psychiatrist or psychologist on the staff of any public
institution or by a private qualified psychiatrist or psychologist as
the circumstances of the case may require, which order may include,
though without limitation, examination at the secure psychiatric unit on
an out-patient basis, the utilization of local mental health clinics on
an in- or out-patient basis, or the examination of such person, should
he or she be incarcerated for any reason, at his or her place of
detention by qualified psychiatrists or psychologists assigned to a
state or local mental health facility. Such pre-trial examination shall
be completed within 45 days in the case of a person being held at a
county correctional facility, otherwise 90 days after the date of the
order for such examination, unless either party requests an extension of
this period. For the purposes of this paragraph and RSA 135:17-a, III,
"qualified'' means board-eligible or board-certified in forensic
psychiatry or psychology, or demonstrated competence and experience in
completing court-ordered forensic criminal evaluations. A licensed
out-of-state psychiatrist or psychologist who meets the definition of
qualified may also conduct evaluations under this paragraph and RSA
135:17-a, III.


                                             [Paragraph I(b) effective until January 1, 2016 and as provided by
2015, 249:17; see also paragraph I(b) set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 (b) In cases where the person is being held at a county
correctional facility, the facility may request a pre-trial examination
of such person for the purpose of determining if the person is competent
to stand trial. Such request shall be reviewed, and a decision rendered
by the district or superior court before which he or she is to be tried.


                                             [Paragraph I(b) effective January 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015,
249:17; see also paragraph I(b) set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 (b) In cases where the person is being held at a county
correctional facility or the New Hampshire state prison, the facility
may request a pre-trial examination of such person for the purpose of
determining if the person is competent to stand trial. Such request
shall be reviewed, and a decision rendered by the district or superior
court before which he or she is to be tried.
                                             
 (c) In cases where the person is incarcerated and a pre-trial
examination has not been performed within 45 days of the court's order,
the court shall, upon request of the person, order an evaluation by a
qualified psychiatrist or psychologist. The court shall favorably
consider a request that the psychiatrist or psychologist be treated as a
defense expert who shall be compensated pursuant to RSA 604-A:6.
                                             
 (d) In cases where the person is incarcerated and an examination
has not been performed, the court before which he or she is to be tried
shall review the person's bail status on a monthly basis.


                                             [Introductory paragraph of paragraph II effective until January 1, 2016
and as provided by 2015, 249:17; see also introductory paragraph of
paragraph II set out below.
                                             ]


                                             
 II. The district or superior court may allow the parties to obtain
separate competency evaluations if such request is made and the
circumstances require it. The competency evaluations shall address:


                                             [Introductory paragraph of paragraph II effective January 1, 2016 and
as provided by 2015, 249:17; see also introductory paragraph of
paragraph II set out above.
                                             ]


                                             
 II. The circuit or superior court may allow the parties to obtain
separate competency evaluations if such request is made and the
circumstances require it. The competency evaluations shall address:
                                             
 (a) Whether the defendant suffers from a mental disease or
defect; and
                                             
 (b) Whether the defendant has a rational and factual
understanding of the proceedings against him or her, and sufficient
present ability to consult with and assist his or her lawyer on the case
with a reasonable degree of rational understanding.
                                             
 III. If the examiner concludes that the defendant is not competent
to stand trial under the definition set forth in II(b), the evaluation
shall include the examiner's findings as to whether there is a course of
treatment which is reasonably likely to restore the defendant to
competency.

**Source.** 1901, 21:1. 1911, 13:1. PL 11:13. RL 17:13. RSA 135:17.
1967, 132:4. 1969, 184:1. 1973, 532:28. 1975, 83:1. 1985, 337:12. 2000,
229:1. 2009, 263:1. 2010, 250:1, eff. Sept. 4, 2010. 2015, 249:3, 4,
eff. Jan. 1, 2016 and as provided by 2015, 249:17.

### Section 135:17-a

 **135:17-a Competency Hearing; Commitment for Treatment. –**
                                             
 I. If, after hearing, the district court or superior court
determines that the defendant is not competent to stand trial, the court
shall order treatment for the restoration of competency unless it
determines, by clear and convincing evidence, that there is no
reasonable likelihood that the defendant can be restored to competency
through appropriate treatment within 12 months. If the court finds, by
clear and convincing evidence, that the defendant cannot be restored to
competency within 12 months, the case against the defendant shall be
dismissed without prejudice and the court shall proceed as provided in
paragraph V.
                                             
 II. If the defendant is to undergo treatment to restore competency,
he or she may be treated in the state mental health system or at the
secure psychiatric unit only under an order for involuntary admission or
involuntary emergency admission ordered by the district court or probate
court having jurisdiction pursuant to RSA 135-C. In all other cases, the
accused shall, if otherwise qualified, be admitted to bail. The court
may order bail supervision by the division of field services and impose
such conditions, in addition to the appropriate course of treatment to
restore competency, as the court deems necessary to ensure the
appearance of the defendant for further proceedings in the case, and the
safety of the defendant and the community.
                                             
 III. Except for good cause shown, a further hearing to determine the
defendant's competency shall be held no later than 12 months after the
order committing the defendant for treatment. The hearing may be held
earlier if the court is notified that the defendant has been restored to
competency, or that there is no longer a reasonable likelihood of such
restoration. Prior to the scheduled hearing, the qualified psychiatrist
or psychologist who conducted the initial competency evaluation shall
conduct a further evaluation pursuant to RSA 135:17, and furnish a copy
of the report of such evaluation to the court and the parties. If that
qualified psychiatrist or psychologist is unavailable or unable to
conduct such further evaluation, the court may order that the evaluation
be conducted by another qualified psychiatrist or psychologist other
than the treating qualified psychiatrist or psychologist.
                                             
 IV. If following the hearing, the court determines that the
defendant has regained competency, the court shall docket the matter for
trial. If the court finds that the defendant has not regained
competency, the case against the defendant shall be dismissed without
prejudice.
                                             
 V. If the court has determined that the defendant has not regained
competency, and the court determines that he or she is dangerous to
himself or herself or others, the court shall order the person to remain
in custody for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 90 days, to be
evaluated for the appropriateness of involuntary treatment pursuant to
RSA 135-C:34 or RSA 171-B:2. The court may order the person to submit to
examinations by a physician, psychiatrist, or psychologist designated by
the state for the purpose of evaluating appropriateness and completing
the certificate for involuntary admission into the state mental health
services system, the state developmental services delivery system, or
the secure psychiatric unit, as the case may be. If a defendant who was
charged with a sexually violent offense, as defined in RSA 135-E:2, XI,
has not regained competency, the court shall proceed pursuant to RSA
135-E.
                                             
 VI. If the person is ordered to be involuntarily committed following
proceedings pursuant to RSA 135-C or RSA 171-B, the court may, upon
motion of the attorney general or county attorney at any time during the
period of the involuntary commitment and before expiration of the
limitations period applicable to the underlying criminal offense, order
a further competency evaluation, to be conducted as prescribed in
paragraph III. Such further competency evaluations may be ordered if the
court finds that there is a reasonable basis to believe that the
person's condition has changed such that competency to stand trial may
have been affected. During proceedings authorized by this paragraph, the
person is entitled to the assistance of counsel, including appointed
counsel under RSA 135-C:22.
                                             
 VII. Upon a finding that the defendant is not competent to stand
trial, the court, at the competency hearing, shall determine if the
competency report shall be available to the receiving facility, as
defined in RSA 135-C:26, or the secure psychiatric unit. Before the
court determines whether to provide the competency report to the
receiving facility or the secure psychiatric unit, the court shall
provide the defendant with an opportunity to object. The court shall
consider the defendant's privacy interest in the content of the
competency report and the receiving facility's, or the secure
psychiatric unit's, need to review the competency report for purposes of
treatment.

**Source.** 1990, 266:1. 1994, 55:1; 408:2. 1999, 195:1-3. 2000, 229:2.
2001, 243:3. 2005, 201:1, 2. 2006, 327:22. 2009, 263:2. 2010, 46:1, eff.
May 18, 2010.

### Section 135:17-b

 **135:17-b Notification Authorized. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, in the
event that a person who has been charged with a violent crime, found
incompetent to stand trial pursuant to RSA 135:17-a, and civilly
committed pursuant to RSA 135-C or RSA 171-B, or committed pursuant to
RSA 651:9-a, is transferred to another facility or discharged to the
community, either conditionally or absolutely, the department of health
and human services shall immediately notify the attorney general, who
shall notify the victim as defined in RSA 21-M:8-k, I(a) and, in the
event of a discharge, the law enforcement agency in the community to
which the person is being discharged. For purposes of this section,
discharge shall include the initial authorization by the administrative
review committee of New Hampshire hospital to allow a person to leave
the grounds of the hospital unaccompanied by a hospital staff member.
                                             
 II. For purposes of this section, the term "violent crime'' includes
those crimes listed in RSA 651:5, XIII and the following:
                                             
 (a) RSA 173-B:9, violation of protective order.
                                             
 (b) RSA 631:2, second degree assault.
                                             
 (c) RSA 631:3, felony reckless conduct.
                                             
 (d) RSA 631:4, criminal threatening involving the use of a deadly
weapon.
                                             
 (e) RSA 633:3-a, stalking.
                                             
 (f) RSA 635:1, burglary.
                                             
 (g) RSA 641:5, tampering with witnesses and informants.
                                             
 (h) RSA 650-A:1, felonious use of firearms.

**Source.** 2010, 293:4. 2011, 251:1. 2012, 151:1, eff. Aug. 6, 2012.

### Section 135:17-c

 **135:17-c Information Related to Competency Determinations. –** All
evaluation reports, recommendations, medical records, or other documents
related to the court's determinations under RSA 135:17-a, I, II, and III
shall be kept separately from the public court file and shall not be
disclosed except as follows:
                                             
 I. The court may order release with the written consent of the
parties.
                                             
 II. The competency report may be provided to the receiving facility
or the secure psychiatric unit pursuant to RSA 135:17-a, VII.
                                             
 III. In any case in which the court finds that the defendant is not
competent to stand trial pursuant to RSA 135:17-a, I, or has not been
restored to competency pursuant to RSA 135:17-a, IV, the court shall
make written findings which describe the evidence which was relied upon
to make its determination. Such written findings shall be part of the
public court file. The prosecutor shall provide a copy of the written
findings to the victim, as defined in RSA 21-M:8-k.

**Source.** 2012, 151:2, eff. Aug. 6, 2012.

### Section 135:18

 **135:18 Discharge From Hospital. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 212:4, IV,
eff. Jan. 1, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 135:19

 **135:19 Commitment by Judge of Probate. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 556:6,
II, eff. July 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 135:20

 **135:20 Examination. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 556:6, III, eff. July 1,
1973.
                                             ]

### Section 135:21

 **135:21 Physicians' Certificates. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 556:6, IV,
eff. July 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 135:21-a

 **135:21-a Emergency Admissions. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 556:6, V, eff.
July 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 135:21-b

 **135:21-b Emergency Treatment. –** A physician licensed in the
state, a psychiatric mental health advanced practice registered nurse,
or a person acting under such physician's or advanced practice
registered nurse's direction may administer a recognized and approved
form of medical or psychiatric treatment which the physician or the
psychiatric mental health advanced practice registered nurse reasonably
believes will tend to promote the physical and mental health of a
patient of the New Hampshire hospital, Laconia developmental services,
Glencliff home, any community mental health or developmental services
program or treatment facility receiving state grants under RSA 171-A, or
any other treatment facility designated as a receiving facility under
RSA 135-C, when:
                                             
 I. The physician or psychiatric mental health advanced practice
registered nurse reasonably believes that a medical or psychiatric
emergency exists; and
                                             
 II. The patient because of physical or mental condition is unable to
make an informed decision, as defined in RSA 135-C:2, IX, with respect
to the medical or psychiatric treatment offered; and
                                             
 III. No person who is legally responsible for the patient can be
consulted or appointed; and
                                             
 IV. A reasonable person would consent to the administration of the
emergency treatment.

**Source.** 1975, 219:1. 1979, 442:7. 1983, 469:134. 1988, 107:5. 1994,
248:2, 3. 2001, 184:1. 2007, 263:12. 2008, 52:2. 2009, 54:5, eff. July
21, 2009.

### Section 135:22

 **135:22 Voluntary Commitment; Penalty. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 556:6,
VI, eff. July 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 135:22-a

 **135:22-a Informal Admission. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 556:6, VII, eff.
July 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 135:23

 **135:23 Emotionally or Mentally Ill. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 556:6,
VIII, eff. July 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 135:24

 **135:24 Notification of State Board of Health. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1961,
29:1, eff. May 16, 1961.
                                             ]

### Section 135:25

 **135:25 Commitment to Other Places. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 556:6, IX,
eff. July 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 135:26

 **135:26 Insane Persons as Wards of State. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973,
556:6, X, eff. July 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 135:26-a

 **135:26-a Periodic Review of Persons Committed. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1973, 556:6, XI, eff. July 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 135:26-b

 **135:26-b Frequency; Results. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 556:6, XII, eff.
July 1, 1973.
                                             ]

Burial of Indigent
------------------

### Section 135:27

 **135:27 Burial. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 212:4, IV, eff. Jan. 1,
1987.
                                             ]

Discharge, Absences, Visitation
-------------------------------

### Section 135:28-30-a

 **135:28 to 135:30-a Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 212:4, IV, eff.
Jan. 1, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 135:31

 **135:31 Temporary Absences. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 556:6, XIII, eff.
July 1, 1973.
                                             ]

### Section 135:32

 **135:32 Visitation. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1973, 556:6, XIV, eff. July 1,
1973.
                                             ]

Inmate's Right to Communicate With Director
-------------------------------------------

### Section 135:33

 **135:33 Communications to Director. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 212:4, IV,
eff. Jan. 1, 1987.
                                             ]

Inquests
--------

### Section 135:34

 **135:34 Inquest of Sudden Death. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 212:4, IV,
eff. Jan. 1, 1987.
                                             ]

Inspections, Transfers, and Records
-----------------------------------

### Section 135:35

 **135:35 Commission. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 492:32, IV, eff. June 29,
1981.
                                             ]

### Section 135:36-38.

 **135:36 to 135:38 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 212:4, IV, eff.
Jan. 1, 1987.
                                             ]

Notification to Director
------------------------

### Section 135:39,-40

 **135:39, 135:40 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 212:4, IV, eff. Jan.
1, 1987.
                                             ]

Hospital Security Force
-----------------------

### Section 135:41

 **135:41 Hospital Security Force. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2004, 257:52, I,
eff. Jan. 1, 2005.
                                             ]

### Section 135:42

 **135:42 Authority. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2004, 257:52, II, eff. Jan. 1,
2005.
                                             ]

### Section 135:43

 **135:43 Training. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2004, 257:52, III, eff. Jan. 1,
2005.
                                             ]

Post-Release Plans
------------------

### Section 135:44-48.

 **135:44 to 135:48 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 212:4, IV, eff.
Jan. 1, 1987.
                                             ]
