---
title: 'CHAPTER 137-L NEW HAMPSHIRE POLST REGISTRY ACT'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 137-L
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE POLST REGISTRY ACT
--------------------------------

### Section 137-L:1

 **137-L:1 Short Title. –** This chapter shall be known as the "New
Hampshire POLST Registry Act.''

**Source.** 2014, 328:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 137-L:2

 **137-L:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Authorized user'' means a person authorized by the department to
provide information to or receive information from the POLST registry.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 IV. "Advanced practice registered nurse'' means an advanced practice
registered nurse licensed under RSA 326-B.
                                             
 V. "Physician'' means a physician licensed under RSA 329.
                                             
 VI. "Physician assistant'' means a physician assistant licensed
under RSA 328-D.
                                             
 VII. "POLST'' means a provider order for life-sustaining treatment
signed by a physician, advanced practice registered nurse, or physician
assistant.
                                             
 VIII. "POLST registry'' means the registry established in RSA
137-L:3.

**Source.** 2014, 328:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 137-L:3

 **137-L:3 POLST Registry Established; Rulemaking; Fund. –**
                                             
 I. Subject to sufficient funding, the department shall establish and
operate a statewide registry for the collection and dissemination of
provider orders for life-sustaining treatment to help ensure that
medical treatment preferences for an individual nearing the end of his
or her life are honored.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall adopt rules within 6 months of the
effective date of this chapter, pursuant to RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 (a) Requiring submission of the following documents to the
registry, if the patient has requested to opt into the registry:
                                             
 (1) A copy of each POLST;
                                             
 (2) A copy of a revised POLST; and
                                             
 (3) Notice of any known revocation of a POLST;
                                             
 (b) Prescribing the manner for submitting the information
described in subparagraph (a);
                                             
 (c) Requiring the release of registry information to authorized
users for treatment purposes;
                                             
 (d) Authorizing notification by the registry to specified persons
of the receipt, revision, or revocation of a POLST; and
                                             
 (e) Establishing procedures to protect the accuracy and
confidentiality of information submitted to the registry.
                                             
 III. To the extent allowed by the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), the department may permit qualified
researchers to obtain registry data for research purposes conditioned
upon removal by the department of any data that identifies a health care
provider, a facility, or an individual patient, including his or her
name, address, telephone number, and social security number. If the
department intends to permit qualified researchers to obtain registry
data, the department shall first adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
governing the process which shall include but not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) The definition of a qualified researcher;
                                             
 (b) The process for a qualified researcher to request and obtain
registry data;
                                             
 (c) The types of data that a qualified researcher may be provided
from the registry; and
                                             
 (d) The manner by which a qualified researcher shall protect
registry data obtained under this provision.
                                             
 IV. The department may contract with a private or public entity to
establish or maintain the registry.
                                             
 V. There is established the New Hampshire POLST registry fund, which
shall be nonlapsing and continually appropriated to the department and
administered by the commissioner. This fund shall be used for costs
incurred by the department in the course of carrying out the
requirements of this chapter. All monetary grants, gifts, donations, or
interest generated by these funds shall be deposited with the state
treasurer in the fund.

**Source.** 2014, 328:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 137-L:4

 **137-L:4 Application of Chapter to Department. –** Nothing in this
chapter shall require the department to:
                                             
 I. Prescribe the form or content of a POLST;
                                             
 II. Disseminate forms to be used for a POLST;
                                             
 III. Educate the public about POLSTs; or
                                             
 IV. Train health care providers about POLSTs.

**Source.** 2014, 328:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 137-L:5

 **137-L:5 POLST Registry Advisory Committee. –**
                                             
 I. There is hereby established the New Hampshire POLST registry
advisory committee to advise the commissioner regarding the
implementation, operation, and evaluation of the POLST registry. The
advisory committee shall be appointed by the commissioner and shall
include, at a minimum:
                                             
 (a) A health professional with extensive experience and
leadership in POLST issues.
                                             
 (b) A physician who has worked with emergency medical services
providers and who has extensive experience in POLST issues.
                                             
 (c) A representative from the hospital community with extensive
experience in POLST issues.
                                             
 (d) A representative from the long-term care community with
extensive experience in POLST issues.
                                             
 (e) A representative from the hospice community with extensive
experience in POLST issues.
                                             
 (f) An emergency medical services provider actively involved in
providing emergency medical services.
                                             
 (g) Two members of the public with active interest in end-of-life
treatment preferences, at least one of whom represents the interests of
minorities.
                                             
 (h) The director of the division of fire standards and training
and emergency medical services, or designee, shall serve as a voting ex
officio member of the committee.
                                             
 II. Except for the director of the division of fire standards and
training and emergency medical services or designee, the term of office
of each member shall be 3 years and until a successor is appointed and
qualified. Initial members of the committee under subparagraphs I(a)-(g)
shall serve staggered terms. Vacancies shall be filled in the same
manner and for the unexpired terms. The committee shall meet as
necessary but at least 4 times per year at a time and place specified by
the commissioner. Four members of the committee shall constitute a
quorum. The department shall provide necessary staff support to the
committee.
                                             
 III. The commissioner shall consult with the committee in drafting
rules required under this chapter.

**Source.** 2014, 328:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 137-L:6

 **137-L:6 Application of Chapter. –** Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed to require an individual to have a POLST or to require a
health professional to authorize or execute a POLST. A POLST may be
revoked at any time by the patient.

**Source.** 2014, 328:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 137-L:7

 **137-L:7 Confidentiality. –** Except as provided in RSA 137-L:3,
all information collected or developed by the POLST registry that
identifies or could be used to identify a patient, or health care
provider or facility shall be confidential and shall not be subject to
civil or administrative subpoena or to discovery, in a civil action,
including but not limited to a judicial, administrative, arbitration, or
mediation proceeding.

**Source.** 2014, 328:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 137-L:8

 **137-L:8 Immunity. –** Any person reporting information to the
POLST registry or acting on information obtained from the POLST registry
in good faith shall be immune from any civil or criminal liability that
might otherwise be incurred or imposed with respect to the reporting of
information to the POLST registry or acting on information obtained from
the POLST registry.

**Source.** 2014, 328:1, eff. July 1, 2015.
