---
title: 'CHAPTER 137-K BRAIN AND SPINAL CORD INJURIES'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 137-K
                                             
BRAIN AND SPINAL CORD INJURIES
------------------------------

### Section 137-K:1

 **137-K:1 Purpose. –** The purpose of this chapter is to support
injury prevention efforts and to help meet the needs of individuals who
have sustained brain and spinal cord injuries, who would otherwise be
dependent on the public for their care and rehabilitation.

**Source.** 1997, 262:2, eff. June 19, 1997.

### Section 137-K:1-a

 **137-K:1-a Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Brain and spinal cord injury'' means any injury to the brain or
spinal cord which causes death or requires medical care and treatment or
results in long-term disability.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 IV. "Prevention services'' means organized activities which are
capable of reducing the incidence and prevalence of brain and spinal
cord injuries.
                                             
 V. "Risk assessment'' means the measurement and evaluation of the
threat resulting from these injuries.
                                             
 VI. "Facility'' means a governmental or private agency, department,
institution, clinic, laboratory, hospital, health maintenance
organization, association, physician, or other similar unit diagnosing
or providing treatment for brain and spinal cord injuries.

**Source.** 1999, 349:2, eff. Jan. 21, 2000.

### Section 137-K:2

 **137-K:2 Advisory Council. –**
                                             
 I. There is established the New Hampshire brain and spinal cord
injury advisory council in the department.
                                             
 II. (a) The advisory council shall consist of the following voting
members:
                                             
 (1) Two members of the Spinal Cord Injury Association,
appointed by such association.
                                             
 (2) Two members of the Brain Injury Association of New
Hampshire, appointed by such association.
                                             
 (3) Two members of the professional community, one of whom
shall be in a neurological specialty, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (4) Two brain and spinal cord injury survivors, appointed by
the governor.
                                             
 (5) Two family members of victims of brain and spinal cord
injuries, appointed by the governor.
                                             
 (6) One member involved in injury prevention, appointed by the
commissioner of the department of health and human services.
                                             
 (7) One member of the house of representatives, appointed by
the speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (8) One member of the senate, appointed by the senate
president.
                                             
 (9) One vocational rehabilitation instructor, appointed by the
commissioner of the department of education.
                                             
 (10) One educator, appointed by the commissioner of the
department of education.
                                             
 (b) The following persons or their designees shall serve as
ex-officio, non-voting members of the council:
                                             
 (1) The commissioner of the department of health and human
services and any division administrators of the department of health and
human services designated by the commissioner.
                                             
 (2) The chief of the special education bureau of the
department of education.
                                             
 (3) The administrator of the division of vocational
rehabilitation services of the department of education.
                                             
 (4) The president or executive director of the Brain Injury
Association of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (5) The president or executive director, New Hampshire chapter
of the National Spinal Cord Injury Association.
                                             
 (6) The administrator of brain injury services, division of
developmental services, department of health and human services.
                                             
 (7) The administrator of the HCBC/ECI waiver, division of
elderly and adult services, department of health and human services.
                                             
 (8) The president or executive director of Granite State
Independent Living.
                                             
 (9) The president or executive director of the New Hampshire
Developmental Disabilities Council.
                                             
 (10) Representatives of other related agencies or
organizations as approved by the council.
                                             
 III. Members should be appointed with consideration given to
statewide geographic representation.
                                             
 IV. Advisory council appointments shall be for 3 years. Terms shall
be staggered so that 1/3 of the positions are elected each year. Upon
the completion of 2 consecutive 3-year terms, a council member shall be
ineligible to serve on the council for one year. A vacancy shall be
filled in the same manner as the original appointment. Such appointment
shall complete the original member's term.
                                             
 V. The advisory council shall have the authority to draft and adopt
by-laws addressing concerns such as attendance, presentations, and
notice of council meetings.
                                             
 VI. The advisory council shall meet at least quarterly. At the last
meeting of the state fiscal year, the regular meetings of the following
state fiscal year shall be scheduled. Special meetings may be held if
necessary at the call of the advisory council chair.
                                             
 VII. The advisory council shall:
                                             
 (a) Identify unmet needs which should be considered for support.
                                             
 (b) Investigate the needs of citizens with brain and spinal cord
injuries, identifying the gaps in services to these citizens, and issue
an annual report to the governor, the speaker of the house, the senate
president, and the commissioner of health and human services by November
1 of each year.
                                             
 (c) Recommend to the commissioner priorities and criteria for
disbursement of any moneys received under paragraph VIII.
                                             
 (d) Hold at least 2 public hearings annually, in different
regions of the state, to generate input from the public on unmet needs.
                                             
 (e) Consider the feasibility of establishing a brain and spinal
cord injury trust fund.
                                             
 (f) Review the status of the brain injury program, established
under RSA 137-K:9, and recommend to the commissioner priorities and
criteria for disbursement of appropriations available to the program.
                                             
 VIII. The advisory council is authorized to solicit and receive any
gifts, grants, or donations made for the purposes of this chapter, and
the commissioner may disburse and administer the same for the purposes
of this chapter.

**Source.** 1997, 262:2. 1999, 349:3. 2002, 245:1. 2006, 184:1, eff. May
25, 2006.

### Section 137-K:3

 **137-K:3 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall, after consultation
with the advisory council established in RSA 137-K:2, adopt rules under
RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 I. Direct assistance, service coordination, family support
activities for individuals with serious brain or spinal cord injuries
and their families, and injury prevention activities which may be
supported by any grants received under this chapter.
                                             
 II. Eligibility criteria for direct assistance and family support
services.
                                             
 III. Procedures for disbursements of grants.
                                             
 IV. Eligibility criteria and service requirements for care and
rehabilitation services for individuals with serious brain and spinal
cord injuries provided by the department through existing programs.
                                             
 V. Conducting prevention and screening services and delivering
education programs.
                                             
 VI. Content and design of all forms and reports required by this
chapter.
                                             
 VII. Procedures for disclosure of information gathered by the brain
and spinal cord registry, by monitoring and evaluating health data, and
from completed risk assessments.
                                             
 VIII. Eligibility criteria and objectives for the brain injury
program, established under RSA 137-K:9.
                                             
 IX. The protection of the rights, dignity, autonomy, and integrity
of persons who have sustained brain and spinal cord injuries, including
specific procedures to protect such rights.

**Source.** 1997, 262:2. 1999, 349:4, 5. 2002, 245:2. 2012, 171:7, eff.
Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 137-K:4

 **137-K:4 Duties. –** The commissioner shall:
                                             
 I. Educate the public regarding factors associated with the risk of
brain and spinal cord injuries.
                                             
 II. Monitor the morbidity and mortality of brain and spinal cord
injuries.
                                             
 III. Evaluate available health data for use in delivering prevention
services.
                                             
 IV. Offer prevention services to population groups at risk of
developing brain and spinal cord injuries.
                                             
 V. Undertake risk assessment activities.

**Source.** 1999, 349:6, eff. Jan. 21, 2000.

### Section 137-K:5

 **137-K:5 Brain and Spinal Cord Injury Registry Established. –**
There shall be established in the department a brain and spinal cord
injury registry for compilation and analysis of information relating to
the incidence, diagnosis, and treatment of brain and spinal cord
injuries.

**Source.** 1999, 349:6, eff. Jan. 21, 2000.

### Section 137-K:6

 **137-K:6 Reporting. –** All facilities shall provide a report to
the brain and spinal cord injury registry containing information
regarding a brain and spinal cord injury diagnosed or being treated.

**Source.** 1999, 349:6, eff. Jan. 21, 2000.

### Section 137-K:7

 **137-K:7 Disclosure; Confidentiality. –**
                                             
 I. A report provided to the brain and spinal cord injury registry
disclosing the identity of an individual, who was reported as having a
brain and spinal cord injury, shall only be released to persons
demonstrating a need which is essential to health-related research,
except that the release shall be conditioned upon the individual
granting authority to release the information and personal identities
remaining confidential.
                                             
 II. Analyses and compilations of data prepared under RSA 137-K:4
which do not disclose the identity of an individual and which cannot be
used to surmise an identity shall be available to the public under RSA
91-A.
                                             
 III. The physician-patient privilege shall not apply to reports
prepared pursuant to RSA 137-K:6.

**Source.** 1999, 349:6, eff. Jan. 21, 2000.

### Section 137-K:8

 **137-K:8 Maintenance of Reports. –** Reports provided to the brain
and spinal cord injury registry under RSA 137-K:6, and analyses and data
prepared under RSA 137-K:4 shall be maintained by the department in a
manner suitable for brain and spinal cord injury research purposes, and
shall be available to persons as prescribed in RSA 137-K:7.

**Source.** 1999, 349:6, eff. Jan. 21, 2000.

### Section 137-K:9

 **137-K:9 Brain Injury Program Established. –** There shall be
established in the department a brain injury program to provide direct
services on behalf of individuals and their families affected by brain
injuries, including, but not limited to, community resource
coordination, support of a statewide toll-free number for information
and assistance, family support, advocacy and vocational support; to
administer the brain and spinal cord injury registry; and to fund the
injury prevention effort.

**Source.** 2002, 245:3, eff. May 17, 2002.
