---
title: |
    CHAPTER 137-J WRITTEN DIRECTIVES FOR MEDICAL DECISION MAKING FOR ADULTS
    WITHOUT CAPACITY TO MAKE HEALTH CARE DECISIONS
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 137-J
                                             
WRITTEN DIRECTIVES FOR MEDICAL DECISION MAKING FOR ADULTS WITHOUT CAPACITY TO MAKE HEALTH CARE DECISIONS
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 137-J:1

 **137-J:1 Purpose and Policy. –**
                                             
 I. The state of New Hampshire recognizes that a person has a right,
founded in the autonomy and sanctity of the person, to control the
decisions relating to the rendering of his or her own medical care. In
order that the rights of persons may be respected even after such
persons lack the capacity to make health care decisions for themselves,
and to encourage communication between patients and their attending
physicians or APRNs, the general court declares that the laws of this
state shall recognize the right of a competent person to make a written
directive:
                                             
 (a) Delegating to an agent the authority to make health care
decisions on the person's behalf, in the event such person is unable to
make those decisions for himself or herself, either due to permanent or
temporary lack of capacity to make health care decisions;
                                             
 (b) Instructing his or her attending physician or APRN to
provide, withhold, or withdraw life-sustaining treatment, in the event
such person is near death or is permanently unconscious.
                                             
 II. All persons have a right to make health care decisions,
including the right to refuse cardiopulmonary resuscitation. It is the
purpose of the "Do Not Resuscitate'' provisions of this chapter to
ensure that the right of a person to self-determination relating to
cardiopulmonary resuscitation is protected, and to give direction to
emergency services personnel and other health care providers in regard
to the performance of cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
                                             
 III. While all persons have a right to make a written directive, not
all take advantage of that right, and it is the purpose of the surrogacy
provisions of this chapter to ensure that health care decisions can be
made in a timely manner by a person's next of kin or loved one without
involving court action. This chapter specifies a process to establish a
surrogate decision-maker when there is no valid advance directive or a
guardian, as defined in RSA 464-A, to make health care decisions.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:4. 2014, 239:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 137-J:2

 **137-J:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Advance directive'' means a directive allowing a person to give
directions about future medical care or to designate another person to
make medical decisions if he or she should lose the capacity to make
health care decisions. The term "advance directives'' shall include
living wills and durable powers of attorney for health care.
                                             
 II. "Advanced practice registered nurse '' or " APRN'' means a
registered nurse who is licensed in good standing in the state of New
Hampshire as having specialized clinical qualifications.
                                             
 III. "Agent'' means an adult to whom authority to make health care
decisions is delegated under an advance directive.
                                             
 IV. "Attending physician or APRN'' means the physician or advanced
practice registered nurse, selected by or assigned to a patient, who has
primary responsibility for the treatment and care of the patient. If
more than one physician or advanced practice registered nurse shares
that responsibility, any one of those physicians or advanced practice
registered nurses may act as the attending physician or APRN under the
provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 V. "Capacity to make health care decisions'' means the ability to
understand and appreciate generally the nature and consequences of a
health care decision, including the significant benefits and harms of
and reasonable alternatives to any proposed health care. The fact that a
person has been diagnosed with mental illness, brain injury, or
intellectual disability shall not mean that the person necessarily lacks
the capacity to make health care decisions.
                                             
 VI. "Cardiopulmonary resuscitation'' means those measures used to
restore or support cardiac or respiratory function in the event of a
cardiac or respiratory arrest.
                                             
 VI-a. "Close friend'' means any person 21 years of age or older who
presents an affidavit to the attending physician stating that he or she
is a close friend of the patient, is willing and able to become involved
in the patient's health care, and has maintained such regular contact
with the patient as to be familiar with the patient's activities,
health, and religious and moral beliefs. The affidavit shall also state
facts and circumstances that demonstrate such familiarity with the
patient.
                                             
 VII. "Do not resuscitate identification'' means a standardized
identification necklace, bracelet, card, or written medical order that
signifies that a "Do Not Resuscitate Order'' has been issued for the
principal.
                                             
 VIII. "Do not resuscitate order'' or "DNR order'' (also known as "Do
not attempt resuscitation order'' or "DNAR order'') means an order that,
in the event of an actual or imminent cardiac or respiratory arrest,
chest compression and ventricular defibrillation will not be performed,
the patient will not be intubated or manually ventilated, and there will
be no administration of resuscitation drugs.
                                             
 IX. "Durable power of attorney for health care'' means a document
delegating to an agent the authority to make health care decisions
executed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. It shall not
mean forms routinely required by health and residential care providers
for admissions and consent to treatment.
                                             
 X. "Emergency services personnel'' means paid or volunteer
firefighters, law-enforcement officers, emergency medical technicians,
paramedics or other emergency services personnel, providers, or entities
acting within the usual course of their professions.
                                             
 XI. "Health care decision'' means informed consent, refusal to give
informed consent, or withdrawal of informed consent to any type of
health care, treatment, admission to a health care facility, any service
or procedure to maintain, diagnose, or treat an individual's physical or
mental condition except as prohibited in this chapter or otherwise by
law.
                                             
 XII. "Health care provider'' means an individual or facility
licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized or permitted by law to
administer health care, for profit or otherwise, in the ordinary course
of business or professional practice.
                                             
 XIII. "Life-sustaining treatment'' means any medical procedures or
interventions which utilize mechanical or other medically administered
means to sustain, restore, or supplant a vital function which, in the
written judgment of the attending physician or APRN, would serve only to
artificially postpone the moment of death, and where the person is near
death or is permanently unconscious. "Life-sustaining treatment''
includes, but is not limited to, the following: medically administered
nutrition and hydration, mechanical respiration, kidney dialysis, or the
use of other external mechanical or technological devices. Life
sustaining treatment may include drugs to maintain blood pressure, blood
transfusions, and antibiotics. "Life-sustaining treatment'' shall not
include the administration of medication, natural ingestion of food or
fluids by eating and drinking, or the performance of any medical
procedure deemed necessary to provide comfort or to alleviate pain.
                                             
 XIV. "Living will'' means a directive which, when duly executed,
contains the express direction that no life-sustaining treatment be
given when the person executing said directive has been diagnosed and
certified in writing by the attending physician or APRN to be near death
or permanently unconscious, without hope of recovery from such condition
and is unable to actively participate in the decision-making process.
                                             
 XV. "Medically administered nutrition and hydration'' means invasive
procedures such as, but not limited to the following: Nasogastric tubes;
gastrostomy tubes; intravenous feeding or hydration; and
hyperalimentation. It shall not include the natural ingestion of food or
fluids by eating and drinking.
                                             
 XVI. "Near death'' means an incurable condition caused by injury,
disease, or illness which is such that death is imminent and the
application of life-sustaining treatment would, to a reasonable degree
of medical certainty, as determined by 2 physicians or a physician and
an APRN, only postpone the moment of death.
                                             
 XVII. "Permanently unconscious'' means a lasting condition,
indefinitely without improvement, in which thought, awareness of self
and environment, and other indicators of consciousness are absent as
determined by an appropriate neurological assessment by a physician in
consultation with the attending physician or an appropriate neurological
assessment by a physician in consultation with an APRN.
                                             
 XVIII. "Physician'' means a medical doctor licensed in good standing
to practice in the state of New Hampshire pursuant to RSA 329.
                                             
 XIX. "Principal'' means a person 18 years of age or older who has
executed an advance directive pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
                                             
 XX. "Qualified patient'' means a patient who has executed an advance
directive in accordance with this chapter and who has been certified in
writing by the attending physician or APRN to lack the capacity to make
health care decisions.
                                             
 XXI. "Reasonable degree of medical certainty'' means a medical
judgment that is made by a physician or APRN who is knowledgeable about
the case and the treatment possibilities with respect to the medical
conditions involved.
                                             
 XXII. "Residential care provider'' means a "facility'' as defined in
RSA 161-F:11, IV, a "nursing home'' as defined in RSA 151-A:1, IV, or
any individual or facility licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized
or permitted by law to operate, for profit or otherwise, a residential
care facility for adults, including but not limited to those operating
pursuant to RSA 420-D.
                                             
 XXII-a. "Surrogate decision-maker'' or "surrogate'' means an adult
individual who has health care decision-making capacity, is available
upon reasonable inquiry, is willing to make health care decisions on
behalf of a patient who lacks health care decision-making capacity, and
is identified by the attending physician or APRN in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter as the person who is to make those decisions
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 XXIII. "Witness'' means a competent person 18 years or older who is
present when the principal signs an advance directive.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:1. 2013, 224:1. 2014, 239:2-4, eff.
Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 137-J:3

 **137-J:3 Freedom From Influence; Notice Required. –**
                                             
 I. No health care provider or residential care provider, and no
health care service plan, insurer issuing disability insurance,
self-insured employee welfare benefit plan, or nonprofit hospital
service plan shall charge a person a different rate because of the
existence or non-existence of an advance directive or do not resuscitate
order, or require any person to execute an advance directive or require
the issuance of a do not resuscitate order as a condition of admission
to a hospital, nursing home, or residential care home, or as a condition
of being insured for, or receiving, health or residential care services.
Health or residential care services shall not be refused because a
person is known to have executed an advance directive or have a do not
resuscitate order.
                                             
 II. The execution of an advance directive pursuant to this chapter
shall not affect in any manner the sale, procurement, or issuance of any
policy of life insurance, nor shall it be deemed to modify the terms of
an existing policy of life insurance. No policy of life insurance shall
be legally impaired, modified or invalidated in any manner by the
withholding or withdrawal of life-sustaining treatment from an insured
person notwithstanding any term of the policy to the contrary.
                                             
 III. Any health care provider or residential care provider which
does not recognize DNR's or living wills shall post at every place of
admission, a notice which shall be a minimum size of 8 1/2" x 11"
stating the following in legible print: "This hospital/facility does not
honor Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) or Living Will documents.''

**Source.** 2006, 302:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 137-J:4

 **137-J:4 Severability. –** If any provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid for
any reason, such invalidity shall not affect any other provisions or
applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
chapter are severable.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

Advance Directives
------------------

### Section 137-J:5

 **137-J:5 Scope and Duration of Agent's Authority. –**
                                             
 I. Subject to the provisions of this chapter and any express
limitations set forth by the principal in an advance directive, the
agent shall have the authority to make any and all health care decisions
on the principal's behalf that the principal could make.
                                             
 II. An agent's or surrogate's authority under an advance directive
shall be in effect only when the principal lacks capacity to make health
care decisions, as certified in writing by the principal's attending
physician or APRN, and filed with the name of the agent or surrogate in
the principal's medical record. When and if the principal regains
capacity to make health care decisions, such event shall be certified in
writing by the principal's attending physician or APRN, noted in the
principal's medical record, the agent's or surrogate's authority shall
terminate, and the authority to make health care decisions shall revert
to the principal.
                                             
 III. If the principal has no attending physician or APRN for reasons
based on the principal's religious or moral beliefs as specified in his
or her advance directive, the advance directive may include a provision
that a person designated by the principal in the advance directive may
certify in writing, acknowledged before a notary or justice of the
peace, as to the lack of decisional capacity of the principal. The
person so designated by the principal shall not be the agent, or a
person ineligible to be the agent.
                                             
 IV. The principal's attending physician or APRN shall make
reasonable efforts to inform the principal of any proposed treatment, or
of any proposal to withdraw or withhold treatment. Notwithstanding that
an advance directive or a surrogacy is in effect and irrespective of the
principal's lack of capacity to make health care decisions at the time,
treatment may not be given to or withheld from the principal over the
principal's objection unless the principal's advance directive includes
the following statement initialed by the principal, "Even if I am
incapacitated and I object to treatment, treatment may be given to me
against my objection.''
                                             
 V. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to give an agent or
surrogate authority to:
                                             
 (a) Consent to voluntary admission to any state institution;
                                             
 (b) Consent to a voluntary sterilization;
                                             
 (c) Consent to withholding life-sustaining treatment from a
pregnant principal, unless, to a reasonable degree of medical certainty,
as certified on the principal's medical record by the attending
physician or APRN and an obstetrician who has examined the principal,
such treatment or procedures will not maintain the principal in such a
way as to permit the continuing development and live birth of the fetus
or will be physically harmful to the principal or prolong severe pain
which cannot be alleviated by medication; or
                                             
 (d) Consent to psychosurgery, electro-convulsive shock therapy,
sterilization, or an experimental treatment of any kind.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:4. 2014, 239:5, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 137-J:6

 **137-J:6 Requirement to Act in Accordance With Principal's Wishes
and Best Interests. –** After consultation with the attending physician
or APRN and other health care providers, the agent or surrogate shall
make health care decisions in accordance with the agent's or surrogate's
knowledge of the principal's wishes and religious or moral beliefs, as
stated orally or otherwise communicated by the principal, or, if the
principal's wishes are unknown, in accordance with the agent's or
surrogate's assessment of the principal's best interests and in
accordance with accepted medical practice.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:4. 2014, 239:14, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 137-J:7

 **137-J:7 Physician, APRN, and Provider's Responsibilities. –**
                                             
 I. A qualified patient's attending physician or APRN, or a qualified
patient's health care provider or residential care provider, and
employees thereof, having knowledge of the qualified patient's advance
directive shall be bound to follow, as applicable, the dictates of the
qualified patient's living will and/or the directives of a qualified
patient's designated agent to the extent they are consistent with this
chapter and the advance directive, and to the extent they are within the
bounds of responsible medical practice.
                                             
 (a) An attending physician or APRN, or other health care provider
or residential care provider, who is requested to do so by the principal
shall make the principal's advance directive or a copy of such document
a part of the principal's medical record.
                                             
 (b) Any person having in his or her possession a duly executed
advance directive or a revocation thereof, if it becomes known to that
person that the principal executing the same is in such circumstances
that the terms of the advance directive might become applicable (such as
when the principal becomes a "qualified patient''), shall forthwith
deliver an original or copy of the same to the health care provider or
residential care provider with which the principal is a patient.
                                             
 (c) The principal's attending physician or APRN, or any other
physician or APRN, who is aware of the principal's execution of an
advance directive shall, without delay, take the necessary steps to
provide for written verification of the principal's lack of capacity to
make health care decisions (in other words, to certify that the
principal is a "qualified patient''), and/or the principal's near death
or permanently unconscious condition, as defined in this chapter and as
appropriate to the principal's medical condition, so that the attending
physician or APRN and the principal's agent may be authorized to act
pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 (d) If a physician or an APRN, because of his or her personal
beliefs or conscience, is unable to comply with the terms of the advance
directive or surrogate's decision, he or she shall immediately inform
the qualified patient, the qualified patient's family, or the qualified
patient's agent. The qualified patient, or the qualified patient's agent
or family, may then request that the case be referred to another
physician or APRN.
                                             
 II. An attending physician or APRN who, because of personal beliefs
or conscience, is unable to comply with the advance directive or the
surrogate's decision pursuant to this chapter shall, without delay, make
the necessary arrangements to effect the transfer of a qualified patient
and the appropriate medical records that document the qualified
patient's lack of capacity to make health care decisions to another
physician or APRN who has been chosen by the qualified patient, by the
qualified patient's agent or surrogate, or by the qualified patient's
family, provided, that pending the completion of the transfer, the
attending physician or APRN shall not deny health care treatment,
nutrition, or hydration which denial would, within a reasonable degree
of medical certainty, result in or hasten the qualified patient's death
against the express will of the qualified patient, the advance
directive, or the agent or surrogate.
                                             
 III. Medically administered nutrition and hydration and life
sustaining treatment shall not be withdrawn or withheld under this
chapter unless:
                                             
 (a) There is a clear expression of such intent in the directive;
                                             
 (b) The principal objects pursuant to RSA 137-J:5, IV; or
                                             
 (c) Such treatment would have the unintended consequence of
hastening death or causing irreparable harm as certified by an attending
physician and a physician knowledgeable about the patient's condition.
                                             
 IV. When the direction of an agent or instruction under a living
will requires an act or omission contrary to the moral or ethical
principles or other standards of a health care provider or residential
care provider of which the principal is a patient or resident, the
health care provider shall allow for the transfer of the principal and
the appropriate medical records to another health care provider chosen
by the principal or by the agent and shall incur no liability for its
refusal to carry out the terms of the direction by the agent; provided,
that, pending the completion of the transfer, the health care provider
or residential care provider shall not deny health care treatment,
nutrition, hydration, or life sustaining treatment which denial would
with a reasonable degree of medical certainty result in or hasten the
principal's death against the expressed will of the principal, the
principal's advance directive, or the agent; and further provided, that,
the health care provider or residential care provider shall inform the
agent of its decision not to participate in such an act or omission.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:4. 2014, 239:6, 7, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 137-J:8

 **137-J:8 Restrictions on Who May Act as Agent or Surrogate. –** A
person may not exercise the authority of an agent or a surrogate while
serving in one of the following capacities:
                                             
 I. The principal's health care provider or residential care
provider.
                                             
 II. A nonrelative of the principal who is an employee of the
principal's health care provider or residential care provider.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2014, 239:8, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 137-J:9

 **137-J:9 Confidentiality and Access to Protected Health
Information. –**
                                             
 I. Health care providers, residential care providers, and persons
acting for such providers or under their control, shall be authorized
to;
                                             
 (a) Communicate to an agent any medical information about the
principal, if the principal lacks the capacity to make health care
decisions, necessary for the purpose of assisting the agent in making
health care decisions on the principal's behalf.
                                             
 (b) Provide copies of the principal's advance directives as
necessary to facilitate treatment of the principal.
                                             
 II. Subject to any limitations set forth in the advance directive by
the principal, an agent whose authority is in effect shall be
authorized, for the purpose of making health care decisions, to:
                                             
 (a) Request, review, and receive any information, oral or
written, regarding the principal's physical or mental health, including,
but not limited to, medical and hospital records.
                                             
 (b) Execute any releases or other documents which may be required
in order to obtain such medical information.
                                             
 (c) Consent to the disclosure of such medical information.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 137-J:10

 **137-J:10 Withholding or Withdrawal of Life-Sustaining Treatment.
–**
                                             
 I. In the event a health care decision to withhold or withdraw
life-sustaining treatment, including medically administered nutrition
and hydration, is to be made by an agent or surrogate, and the principal
has not executed the "living will'' of the advance directive, the
following additional conditions shall apply:
                                             
 (a) The principal's attending physician or APRN shall certify in
writing that the principal lacks the capacity to make health care
decisions.
                                             
 (b) Two physicians or a physician and an APRN shall certify in
writing that the principal is near death or is permanently unconscious.
                                             
 (c) Notwithstanding the capacity of an agent or surrogate to act,
the agent or surrogate shall make a good faith effort to explore all
avenues reasonably available to discern the desires of the principal
including, but not limited to, the principal's advance directive, the
principal's written or spoken expressions of wishes, and the principal's
known religious or moral beliefs.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding paragraph I, medically administered nutrition
and hydration and life-sustaining treatment shall not be withdrawn or
withheld under an advance directive unless:
                                             
 (a) There is a clear expression of such intent in the directive;
                                             
 (b) The principal objects pursuant to RSA 137-J:5, IV; or
                                             
 (c) Such treatment would have the unintended consequence of
hastening death or causing irreparable harm as certified by an attending
physician and a physician knowledgeable about the patient's condition.
                                             
 III. The withholding or withdrawal of life-sustaining treatment
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall at no time be construed
as a suicide or murder for any legal purpose. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to constitute, condone, authorize, or approve
suicide, assisted suicide, mercy killing, or euthanasia, or permit any
affirmative or deliberate act or omission to end one's own life or to
end the life of another other than either to permit the natural process
of dying of a patient near death or the removal of life-sustaining
treatment from a patient in a permanently unconscious condition as
provided in this chapter. The withholding or withdrawal of
life-sustaining treatment in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, however, shall not relieve any individual of responsibility for
any criminal acts that may have caused the principal's condition.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to condone,
authorize, or approve:
                                             
 (a) The consent to withhold or withdraw life-sustaining treatment
from a pregnant principal, unless, to a reasonable degree of medical
certainty, as certified on the principal's medical record by the
attending physician or APRN and an obstetrician who has examined the
principal, such treatment or procedures will not maintain the principal
in such a way as to permit the continuing development and live birth of
the fetus or will be physically harmful to the principal or prolong
severe pain which cannot be alleviated by medication.
                                             
 (b) The withholding or withdrawing of medically administered
nutrition and hydration or life-sustaining treatment from a mentally
incompetent or developmentally disabled person, unless such person has a
validly executed advance directive or such action is authorized by an
existing guardianship or other court order, or, in the absence of such
directive, authorization, or order, such action is taken in accordance
with the standard protocol of a health care facility licensed under RSA
151 as applicable to its general patient population.
                                             
 V. Nothing in this chapter shall impair or supersede any other legal
right or responsibility which any person may have to effect
life-sustaining treatment in any lawful manner; provided, that this
paragraph shall not be construed to authorize any violation of RSA
137-J:7, II or III.
                                             
 VI. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to revoke or
adversely affect the privileges or immunities of health care providers
or residential care providers and others to provide treatment to persons
in need thereof in an emergency, as provided for under New Hampshire
law.
                                             
 VII. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to create a
presumption that in the absence of an advance directive, a person wants
life-sustaining treatment to be either taken or withdrawn. This chapter
shall also not be construed to supplant any existing rights and
responsibilities under the law of this state governing the conduct of
physicians or APRNs in consultation with patients or their families or
legal guardians in the absence of an advance directive.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:4. 2012, 251:1. 2014, 239:9, eff. Jan.
1, 2015.

### Section 137-J:11

 **137-J:11 Liability for Health Care Costs. –** Liability for the
cost of health care provided pursuant to the agent's decision shall be
the same as if the health care were provided pursuant to the principal's
decision.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 137-J:12

 **137-J:12 Immunity. –**
                                             
 I. No person acting as agent pursuant to an advance directive or as
a surrogate shall be subjected to criminal or civil liability for making
a health care decision on behalf of the principal in good faith pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter and the terms of the advance directive
if such person exercised such power in a manner consistent with the
requirements of this chapter and New Hampshire law.
                                             
 II. No health care provider or residential care provider, or any
other person acting for the provider or under the provider's control,
shall be subjected to civil or criminal liability or be deemed to have
engaged in unprofessional conduct for:
                                             
 (a) Any act or intentional failure to act, if the act or
intentional failure to act is done pursuant to the dictates of an
advance directive, the directives of the principal's agent or surrogate,
and the provisions of this chapter, and said act or intentional failure
to act is done in good faith and in keeping with reasonable medical
standards pursuant to the advance directive or a surrogacy and in
accordance with this chapter; or
                                             
 (b) Failure to follow the directive of an agent or surrogate if
the health care provider or residential care provider or other such
person believes in good faith and in keeping with reasonable medical
standards that such directive exceeds the scope of or conflicts with the
authority of the agent or surrogate under this chapter or the contents
of the principal's advance directive; provided, that this subparagraph
shall not be construed to authorize any violation of RSA 137-J:7, II or
III.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this section shall be construed to establish
immunity for the failure to exercise due care in the provision of
services or for actions contrary to the requirements of this chapter or
other laws of the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 IV. For purposes of this section, "good faith'' means honesty in
fact in the conduct of the transaction concerned.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2014, 239:10, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 137-J:13

 **137-J:13 Use of Statutory Forms. –**
                                             
 I. Every person wishing to execute an advance directive shall be
provided with a disclosure statement substantially in the form set forth
in RSA 137-J:19 prior to execution. The principal shall be required to
sign a statement acknowledging that he or she has received the
disclosure statement and has read and understands its contents.
                                             
 II. An advance directive executed on or after the effective date of
this chapter shall be substantially in the form set forth in RSA
137-J:20.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2013, 224:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 137-J:14

 **137-J:14 Execution and Witnesses. –**
                                             
 I. The advance directive shall be signed by the principal in the
presence of either of the following:
                                             
 (a) Two or more subscribing witnesses, neither of whom shall, at
the time of execution, be the agent, the principal's spouse or heir at
law, or a person entitled to any part of the estate of the principal
upon death of the principal under a will, trust, or other testamentary
instrument or deed in existence or by operation of law, or attending
physician or APRN, or person acting under the direction or control of
the attending physician or APRN. No more than one such witness may be
the principal's health or residential care provider or such provider's
employee. The witnesses shall affirm that the principal appeared to be
of sound mind and free from duress at the time the advance directive was
signed and that the principal affirmed that he or she was aware of the
nature of the document and signed it freely and voluntarily; or
                                             
 (b) A notary public or justice of the peace, who shall
acknowledge the principal's signature pursuant to the provisions of RSA
456 or RSA 456-A.
                                             
 II. If the principal is physically unable to sign, the advance
directive may be signed by the principal's name written by some other
person in the principal's presence and at the principal's express
direction.
                                             
 III. A principal's decision to exclude or strike references to APRNs
and the powers granted to APRNs in his or her advance directive shall be
honored.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:4, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 137-J:15

 **137-J:15 Revocation. –**
                                             
 I. An advance directive or surrogacy consistent with the provisions
of this chapter shall be revoked:
                                             
 (a) By written revocation delivered to the agent or surrogate or
to a health care provider or residential care provider expressing the
principal's intent to revoke, signed and dated by the principal; by oral
revocation in the presence of 2 or more witnesses, none of whom shall be
the principal's spouse or heir at law; or by any other act evidencing a
specific intent to revoke the power, such as by burning, tearing, or
obliterating the same or causing the same to be done by some other
person at the principal's direction and in the principal's presence;
                                             
 (b) By execution by the principal of a subsequent advance
directive;
                                             
 (c) By the filing of an action for divorce, legal separation,
annulment or protective order, where both the agent and the principal
are parties to such action, except when there is an alternate agent
designated, in which case the designation of the primary agent shall be
revoked and the alternate designation shall become effective.
Re-execution or written re-affirmation of the advance directive
following a filing of an action for divorce, legal separation,
annulment, or protective order shall make effective the original
designation of the primary agent under the advance directive; or
                                             
 (d) By a determination by a court under RSA 506:7 that the
agent's authority has been revoked.
                                             
 II. A principal's health or residential care provider who is
informed of or provided with a revocation of an advance directive or
surrogacy shall immediately record the revocation, and the time and date
when he or she received the revocation, in the principal's medical
record and notify the agent, the attending physician or APRN, and staff
responsible for the principal's care of the revocation. An agent or
surrogate who becomes aware of such revocation shall inform the
principal's health or residential care provider of such revocation.
Revocation shall become effective upon communication to the attending
physician or APRN.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:4. 2014, 239:11, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 137-J:16

 **137-J:16 Documents Executed Prior to Enactment. –** Nothing in
this chapter limits the enforceability of an advance directive or
similar instrument validly executed under prior New Hampshire law.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 137-J:17

 **137-J:17 Reciprocity. –** An advance directive, living will, or
similar document executed in another state, and valid according to the
laws of the state where it was executed, shall be as effective in this
state as it would have been if executed according to the laws of this
state.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2012, 252:1, eff. June 18, 2012.

### Section 137-J:18

 **137-J:18 Naming of Multiple Agents. –** If the principal lists
more than one person as the agent in a durable power of attorney for
health care directive, the agents shall have authority in priority of
the order in which their names are listed on the document, unless the
method of joint agency is expressly included.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 137-J:19

 **137-J:19 Durable Power of Attorney; Disclosure Statement. –** The
disclosure statement which must accompany a durable power of attorney
for health care shall be in substantially the following form:

INFORMATION CONCERNING THE DURABLE POWER OF ATTORNEY FOR HEALTH CARE


                                             
 THIS IS AN IMPORTANT LEGAL DOCUMENT. BEFORE SIGNING IT, YOU SHOULD
KNOW THESE IMPORTANT FACTS:
                                             
 Except if you say otherwise in the directive, this directive gives
the person you name as your health care agent the power to make any and
all health care decisions for you when you lack the capacity to make
health care decisions for yourself (in other words, you no longer have
the ability to understand and appreciate generally the nature and
consequences of a health care decision, including the significant
benefits and harms of and reasonable alternatives to any proposed health
care). "Health care'' means any treatment, service or procedure to
maintain, diagnose or treat your physical or mental condition. Your
health care agent, therefore, will have the power to make a wide range
of health care decisions for you. Your health care agent may consent (in
other words, give permission), refuse to consent, or withdraw consent to
medical treatment, and may make decisions about withdrawing or
withholding life-sustaining treatment. Your health care agent cannot
consent to or direct any of the following: commitment to a state
institution, sterilization, or termination of treatment if you are
pregnant and if the withdrawal of that treatment is deemed likely to
terminate the pregnancy, unless the treatment will be physically harmful
to you or prolong severe pain which cannot be alleviated by medication.
                                             
 You may state in this directive any treatment you do not want, or
any treatment you want to be sure you receive. Your health care agent's
power will begin when your doctor certifies that you lack the capacity
to make health care decisions (in other words, that you are not able to
make health care decisions). If for moral or religious reasons you do
not want to be treated by a doctor or to be examined by a doctor to
certify that you lack capacity, you must say so in the directive and you
must name someone who can certify your lack of capacity. That person
cannot be your health care agent or alternate health care agent or any
person who is not eligible to be your health care agent. You may attach
additional pages to the document if you need more space to complete your
statement.
                                             
 Under no conditions will your health care agent be able to direct
the withholding of food and drink that you are able to eat and drink
normally.
                                             
 Your agent shall be directed by your written instructions in this
document when making decisions on your behalf, and as further guided by
your medical condition or prognosis. Unless you state otherwise in the
directive, your agent will have the same power to make decisions about
your health care as you would have made, if those decisions by your
health care agent are made consistent with state law.
                                             
 It is important that you discuss this directive with your doctor or
other health care providers before you sign it, to make sure that you
understand the nature and range of decisions which could be made for you
by your health care agent. If you do not have a health care provider,
you should talk with someone else who is knowledgeable about these
issues and can answer your questions. Check with your community hospital
or hospice for trained staff. You do not need a lawyer's assistance to
complete this directive, but if there is anything in this directive that
you do not understand, you should ask a lawyer to explain it to you.
                                             
 The person you choose as your health care agent should be someone
you know and trust, and he or she must be at least 18 years old. If you
choose your health or residential care provider (such as your doctor,
advanced practice registered nurse, or an employee of a hospital,
nursing home, home health agency, or residential care home, other than a
relative), that person will have to choose between acting as your health
care agent or as your health or residential care provider, because the
law does not allow a person to do both at the same time.
                                             
 You should consider choosing an alternate health care agent, in case
your health care agent is unwilling, unable, unavailable or not eligible
to act as your health care agent. Any alternate health care agent you
choose will then have the same authority to make health care decisions
for you.
                                             
 You should tell the person you choose that you want him or her to be
your health care agent. You should talk about this directive with your
health care agent and your doctor or advanced practice registered nurse
and give each one a signed copy. You should write on the directive
itself the people and institutions who will have signed copies. Your
health care agent will not be liable for health care decisions made in
good faith on your behalf.
                                             
 EVEN AFTER YOU HAVE SIGNED THIS DIRECTIVE, YOU HAVE THE RIGHT TO
MAKE HEALTH CARE DECISIONS FOR YOURSELF AS LONG AS YOU ARE ABLE TO DO
SO, AND TREATMENT CANNOT BE GIVEN TO YOU OR STOPPED OVER YOUR CLEAR
OBJECTION. You have the right to revoke the power given to your health
care agent by telling him or her, or by telling your health care
provider, orally or in writing, that you no longer want that person to
be your health care agent.
                                             
 YOU HAVE THE RIGHT TO EXCLUDE OR STRIKE REFERENCES TO APRNS IN YOUR
ADVANCE DIRECTIVE AND IF YOU DO SO, YOUR ADVANCE DIRECTIVE SHALL STILL
BE VALID AND ENFORCEABLE.
                                             
 Once this directive is executed it cannot be changed or modified. If
you want to make changes, you must make an entirely new directive.
                                             
 THIS POWER OF ATTORNEY WILL NOT BE VALID UNLESS IT IS SIGNED IN THE
PRESENCE OF A NOTARY PUBLIC OR JUSTICE OF THE PEACE OR TWO (2) OR MORE
QUALIFIED WITNESSES, WHO MUST BOTH BE PRESENT WHEN YOU SIGN AND WHO WILL
ACKNOWLEDGE YOUR SIGNATURE ON THE DOCUMENT. THE FOLLOWING PERSONS MAY
NOT ACT AS WITNESSES:
                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _The person you have designated as your health care agent;
                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _Your spouse or heir at law;
                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _Your attending physician or APRN, or person acting under
the direction or control of the attending physician or APRN;
                                             
 ONLY ONE OF THE TWO WITNESSES MAY BE YOUR HEALTH OR RESIDENTIAL CARE
PROVIDER OR ONE OF YOUR PROVIDER'S EMPLOYEES.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:4, 5. 2014, 239:13, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 137-J:20

 **137-J:20 Advance Directive; Durable Power of Attorney and Living
Will; Form. –** An advance directive in its individual "Durable Power of
Attorney for Health Care''; and "Living Will''; components shall be in
substantially the following form:

NEW HAMPSHIRE ADVANCE DIRECTIVE

NOTE: This form has two sections.

You may complete both sections, or only one section.

I. DURABLE POWER OF ATTORNEY FOR HEALTH CARE


                                             
 I, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, hereby appoint 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ of

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (Please choose only one person. If you choose more
than one agent, they will have authority in priority of the order their
names are listed, unless you indicate another form of decision making.)
as my agent to make any and all health care decisions for me, except to
the extent I state otherwise in this directive or as prohibited by law.
This durable power of attorney for health care shall take effect in the
event I lack the capacity to make my own health care decisions.
                                             
 In the event the person I appoint above is unable, unwilling or
unavailable, or ineligible to act as my health care agent, I hereby
appoint 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ as alternate agent.
(Please choose only one person. If you choose more than one alternate
agent, they will have authority in priority of the order their names are
listed.)
                                             
 STATEMENT OF DESIRES, SPECIAL PROVISIONS, AND LIMITATIONS REGARDING
HEALTH CARE DECISIONS.
                                             
 For your convenience in expressing your wishes, some general
statements concerning the withholding or removal of life-sustaining
treatment are set forth below. (Life-sustaining treatment is defined as
procedures without which a person would die, such as but not limited to
the following: mechanical respiration, kidney dialysis or the use of
other external mechanical and technological devices, drugs to maintain
blood pressure, blood transfusions, and antibiotics.) There is also a
section which allows you to set forth specific directions for these or
other matters. If you wish, you may indicate your agreement or
disagreement with any of the following statements and give your agent
power to act in those specific circumstances.
                                             
 A. LIFE-SUSTAINING TREATMENT.
                                             
 1. If I am near death and lack the capacity to make health care
decisions, I authorize my agent to direct that:
                                             
 (Initial beside your choice of (a) or (b).)
                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _(a) life-sustaining treatment not be started, or if
started, be discontinued.

-or-


                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _(b) life-sustaining treatment continue to be given to me.
                                             
 2. Whether near death or not, if I become permanently unconscious
and life-sustaining treatment has no reasonable hope of benefit, I
authorize my agent to direct that:
                                             
 (Initial beside your choice of (a) or (b).)
                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _(a) life-sustaining treatment not be started, or if
started, be discontinued.

-or-


                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _(b) life-sustaining treatment continue to be given to me.
                                             
 B. ADDITIONAL INSTRUCTIONS.
                                             
 Here you may include any specific desires or limitations you deem
appropriate, such as your preferences concerning medically administered
nutrition and hydration, when or what life-sustaining treatment you
would want used or withheld, or instructions about refusing any specific
types of treatment that are inconsistent with your religious beliefs or
are unacceptable to you for any other reason. You may leave this
question blank if you desire.
                                             
 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
 (attach additional pages as necessary)
                                             
 I hereby acknowledge that I have been provided with a disclosure
statement explaining the effect of this directive. I have read and
understand the information contained in the disclosure statement.
                                             
 The original of this directive will be kept at 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
and the following persons and institutions will have signed copies:
                                             
 Signed this 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, 20
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
 Principal's Signature: 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
 
                                             [If you are physically unable to sign, this directive may be signed
by someone else writing your name, in your presence and at your express
direction.
                                             ]
                                             
 THIS POWER OF ATTORNEY DIRECTIVE MUST BE SIGNED BY TWO WITNESSES OR
A NOTARY PUBLIC OR A JUSTICE OF THE PEACE.
                                             
 We declare that the principal appears to be of sound mind and free
from duress at the time the durable power of attorney for health care is
signed and that the principal affirms that he or she is aware of the
nature of the directive and is signing it freely and voluntarily.
                                             
Witness: 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ Address:

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
Witness: 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ Address:

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
                                             
COUNTY OF 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
 The foregoing durable power of attorney for health care was
acknowledged before me this 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _,
20
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, by 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ ("the Principal'').

  ------------------------------------------
  
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
  ------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------
  Notary Public/Justice of the Peace
  ------------------------------------

  ------------------------
  My commission expires:
  ------------------------

II
                                             . LIVING WILL


                                             
 Declaration made this 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, 20
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _.
                                             
 I, 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, being of sound mind, willfully and
voluntarily make known my desire that my dying shall not be artificially
prolonged under the circumstances set forth below, do hereby declare:
                                             
 If at any time I should have an incurable injury, disease, or
illness and I am certified to be near death or in a permanently
unconscious condition by 2 physicians or a physician and an APRN, and 2
physicians or a physician and an APRN have determined that my death is
imminent whether or not life-sustaining treatment is utilized and where
the application of life-sustaining treatment would serve only to
artificially prolong the dying process, or that I will remain in a
permanently unconscious condition, I direct that such procedures be
withheld or withdrawn, and that I be permitted to die naturally with
only the administration of medication, the natural ingestion of food or
fluids by eating and drinking, or the performance of any medical
procedure deemed necessary to provide me with comfort care. I realize
that situations could arise in which the only way to allow me to die
would be to discontinue medically administered nutrition and hydration.
                                             
 ***(Initial below if it is your choice)***
                                             
 In carrying out any instruction I have given under this section, I
authorize that even if all other forms of life-sustaining treatment have
been withdrawn, medically administered nutrition and hydration continue
to be given to me. 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
 In the absence of my ability to give directions regarding the use of
such life-sustaining treatment, it is my intention that this declaration
shall be honored by my family and health care providers as the final
expression of my right to refuse medical or surgical treatment and
accept the consequences of such refusal.
                                             
 I understand the full import of this declaration, and I am
emotionally and mentally competent to make this declaration.
                                             
 Signed this 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, 2
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _.
                                             
 Principal's Signature: 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
 
                                             [If you are physically unable to sign, this directive may be signed
by someone else writing your name, in your presence and at your express
direction.
                                             ]
                                             
 THIS LIVING WILL DIRECTIVE MUST BE SIGNED BY TWO WITNESSES OR A
NOTARY PUBLIC OR A JUSTICE OF THE PEACE.
                                             
 We declare that the principal appears to be of sound mind and free
from duress at the time the living will is signed and that the principal
affirms that he or she is aware of the nature of the directive and is
signing it freely and voluntarily.
                                             
Witness: 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ Address:

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
Witness: 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ Address:

                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
                                             
COUNTY OF 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             
 The foregoing living will was acknowledged before me this 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ day
of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, 20
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, by 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (the
"Principal'').

  ------------------------------------------
  
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
  ------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------
  Notary Public/Justice of the Peace
  ------------------------------------

  ------------------------
  My commission expires:
  ------------------------

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:4. 2013, 224:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.

### Section 137-J:21

 **137-J:21 Effect of Appointment of Guardian; Inconsistency. –**
                                             
 I. On motion filed in connection with a petition for appointment of
a guardian or on petition of a guardian if one has been appointed, the
probate court shall consider whether the authority of an agent
designated pursuant to an advance directive should be suspended or
revoked. In making its determination, the probate court shall take into
consideration the preferences of the principal as expressed in the
advance directive. No such consideration shall change the procedures or
burden of proof involved in the guardianship process as otherwise
provided by law or procedures. In such consideration, the advance
directive and agent appointed shall be presumed to be in the best
interest of the principal and valid, absent clear and convincing
evidence to the contrary.
                                             
 II. To the extent that a durable power of attorney for health care,
or such component of an advance directive as set forth in RSA 137-J:20,
conflicts with a terminal care document or living will, or such
component of an advance directive as set forth in RSA 137-J:20, the
durable power of attorney for health care shall control.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 137-J:22

 **137-J:22 Civil Action. –**
                                             
 I. The principal or any person who is a near relative of the
principal, or who is a responsible adult who is directly interested in
the principal by personal knowledge and acquaintance, including, but not
limited to a guardian, social worker, physician, or clergy, may file an
action in the probate court of the county where the principal is located
at the time:
                                             
 (a) Requesting that the authority granted to an agent by an
advance directive be revoked on the grounds that the principal was not
of sound mind or was under duress, fraud, or undue influence when the
advance directive was executed, and shall have all the rights and
remedies provided by RSA 506:7 which shall apply to directives executed
under this chapter and persons acting pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Challenging the right of any agent who is acting or who
proposes to act as such pursuant to this chapter and naming another
person, who agrees to so act, to be appointed guardian over the person
of the principal for the sole purpose of making health care decisions,
as provided for in RSA 464-A.
                                             
 II. A copy of any such action shall be given in hand to the
principal's attending physician or APRN and, as applicable, to the
principal's health care provider or residential care provider. To the
extent they are not irreversibly implemented, health care decisions made
by a challenged agent shall not thereafter be implemented without an
order of the probate court or a withdrawal or dismissal of the court
action; provided, that this paragraph shall not be construed to
authorize any violation of RSA 137-J:7, II or III.
                                             
 III. The probate court in which such a petition is filed shall hold
a hearing as expeditiously as possible.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:4, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 137-J:23

 **137-J:23 Penalty. –** A person who knowingly and falsely makes,
alters, forges, or counterfeits, or knowingly and falsely causes to be
made, altered, forged, or counterfeited, or procures, aids or counsels
the making, altering, forging, or counterfeiting, of an advance
directive or revocation of same with the intent to injure or defraud a
person shall be guilty of a class B felony, notwithstanding any
provisions in title LXII.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

Do Not Resuscitate
------------------

### Section 137-J:24

 **137-J:24 Applicability. –** The provisions of this subdivision
apply to all persons regardless of whether or not they have completed an
advance directive.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 137-J:25

 **137-J:25 Presumed Consent to Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation; Health
Care Providers and Residential Care Providers Not Required to Expand to
Provide Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation. –**
                                             
 I. Every person shall be presumed to consent to the administration
of cardiopulmonary resuscitation in the event of cardiac or respiratory
arrest, unless one or more of the following conditions, of which the
health care provider or residential care provider has actual knowledge,
apply:
                                             
 (a) A do not resuscitate order in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter has been issued for that person;
                                             
 (b) A completed advance directive for that person is in effect,
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, in which the person
indicated that he or she does not wish to receive cardiopulmonary
resuscitation, or his or her agent has determined that the person would
not wish to receive cardiopulmonary resuscitation;
                                             
 (c) A person who lacks capacity to make health care decisions is
near death and admitted to a health care facility, and the person's
agent is not available and the facility has made diligent efforts to
contact the agent without success, or the person's agent is not legally
capable of making health care decisions for the person, and the
attending physician or APRN and a physician knowledgeable about the
patient's condition, have determined that the provision of
cardiopulmonary resuscitation would be contrary to accepted medical
standards and would cause unnecessary harm to the person, and the
attending physician or APRN has completed a do not resuscitate order;
or
                                             
 (d) A person is under treatment solely by spiritual means through
prayer in accordance with the tenets and practices of a recognized
church or religious denomination by a duly accredited practitioner
thereof.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this section shall be construed to revoke any
statute, regulation, or law otherwise requiring or exempting a health
care provider or residential care provider from instituting or
maintaining the ability to provide cardiopulmonary resuscitation or
expanding its existing equipment, facilities, or personnel to provide
cardiopulmonary resuscitation.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:4, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 137-J:26

 **137-J:26 Issuance of a Do Not Resuscitate Order; Order to be
Written by the Attending Physician or APRN. –**
                                             
 I. An attending physician or APRN may issue a do not resuscitate
order for a person if the person, or the person's agent, has consented
to the order. A do not resuscitate order shall be issued in writing in
the form as described in this section for a person not present or
residing in a health care facility. For persons present in health care
facilities, a do not resuscitate order shall be issued in accordance
with the policies and procedures of the health care facility and in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 II. A person may request that his or her attending physician or APRN
issue a do not resuscitate order for the person.
                                             
 III. An agent may consent to a do not resuscitate order for a person
who lacks the capacity to make health care decisions if the advance
directive signed by the principal grants such authority. A do not
resuscitate order written by the attending physician or APRN for such a
person with the consent of the agent is valid and shall be respected by
health care providers and residential care providers.
                                             
 IV. If an agent is not reasonably available and the facility has
made diligent efforts to contact the agent without success, or the agent
is not legally capable of making a decision regarding a do not
resuscitate order, an attending physician or APRN may issue a do not
resuscitate order for a person who lacks capacity to make health care
decisions, who is near death, and who is admitted to a health care
facility if a second physician who has personally examined the person
concurs in the opinion of the attending physician or APRN that the
provision of cardiopulmonary resuscitation would be contrary to accepted
medical standards and would cause unnecessary harm to the person.
                                             
 V. For persons not present or residing in a health care facility,
the do not resuscitate order shall be noted on a medical orders form or
in substantially the following form on a card suitable for carrying on
the person:

Do Not Resuscitate Order

> As attending physician or APRN of 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ and as a
> licensed physician or advanced practice registered nurse, I order that
> this person SHALL NOT BE RESUSCITATED in the event of cardiac or
> respiratory arrest.

> This order has been discussed with 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _ (or, if
> applicable, with his/ her agent,) 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _, who has given
> consent as evidenced by his/her signature below.

> Attending physician or APRN Name

> Attending physician or APRN Signature

> Address

> Person Signature

> Address

> Agent Signature (*if applicable*)

> 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _

> Address 
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _
                                             _


                                             
 VI. For persons residing in a health care facility, the do not
resuscitate order shall be reflected in at least one of the following
forms:
                                             
 (a) Forms required by the policies and procedures of the health
care facility in compliance with this chapter;
                                             
 (b) The do not resuscitate card as set forth in paragraph V; or
                                             
 (c) The medical orders form in compliance with this chapter.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:4, 5, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 137-J:27

 **137-J:27 Compliance With a Do Not Resuscitate Order. –**
                                             
 I. Health care providers and residential care providers shall comply
with the do not resuscitate order when presented with one of the
following:
                                             
 (a) A do not resuscitate order completed by the attending
physician or APRN on a form as specified in RSA 137-J:26;
                                             
 (b) A do not resuscitate order for a person present or residing
in a health care facility issued in accordance with the health care
facility's policies and procedures in compliance with the chapter; or
                                             
 (c) A medical orders form on which the attending physician or
APRN has documented a do not resuscitate order in compliance with this
chapter.
                                             
 (d) Do not resuscitate identification as set forth in RSA
137-J:33.
                                             
 II. Pursuant to this chapter, health care providers shall respect do
not resuscitate orders for persons in health care facilities,
ambulances, homes, and communities within this state.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:4, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 137-J:28

 **137-J:28 Protection of Persons Carrying Out in Good Faith a Do Not
Resuscitate Order; Notification of Agent by Attending Physician or APRN
Refusing to Comply With Do Not Resuscitate Order. –**
                                             
 I. No health care provider or residential care provider, or any
other person acting for the provider or under the provider's control,
shall be subjected to criminal or civil liability, or be deemed to have
engaged in unprofessional conduct, for carrying out in good faith a do
not resuscitate order authorized by this chapter on behalf of a person
as instructed by the person, or the person's agent, or for those actions
taken in compliance with the standards and procedures set forth in this
chapter.
                                             
 II. No health care provider or residential care provider, or any
other person acting for the provider or under the provider's control, or
other individual who witnesses a cardiac or respiratory arrest shall be
subjected to criminal or civil liability for providing cardiopulmonary
resuscitation to a person for whom a do not resuscitate order has been
issued; provided, that such provider or individual:
                                             
 (a) Reasonably and in good faith is unaware of the issuance of a
do not resuscitate order; or
                                             
 (b) Reasonably and in good faith believed that consent to the do
not resuscitate order has been revoked or canceled.
                                             
 III. (a) Any attending physician or APRN who, because of personal
beliefs or conscience, refuses to issue a do not resuscitate order at a
person's request or to comply with a do not resuscitate order issued
pursuant to this chapter shall take reasonable steps to advise promptly
the person or agent of the person that such attending physician or APRN
is unwilling to effectuate the order. The attending physician or APRN
shall thereafter at the election of the person or agent permit the
person or agent to obtain another attending physician or APRN.
                                             
 (b) If a physician or APRN, because of his or her personal
beliefs or conscience, is unable to comply with the terms of a do not
resuscitate order, he or she shall immediately inform the person, the
person's agent, or the person's family. The person, the person's agent,
or the person's family may then request that the case be referred to
another physician or APRN, as set forth in RSA 137-J:7, II and III.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:4, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 137-J:29

 **137-J:29 Revocation of Do Not Resuscitate Order. –**
                                             
 I. At any time a person in a health care facility may revoke his or
her previous request for or consent to a do not resuscitate order by
making either a written, oral, or other act of communication to the
attending physician or APRN or other professional staff of the health
care facility.
                                             
 II. At any time a person residing at home may revoke his or her do
not resuscitate order by destroying such order and removing do not
resuscitate identification on his or her person. The person is
responsible for notifying his or her attending physician or APRN of the
revocation.
                                             
 III. At any time an agent may revoke his or her consent to a do not
resuscitate order for a person who lacks capacity to make health care
decisions who is admitted to a health care facility by notifying the
attending physician or APRN or other professional staff of the health
care facility of the revocation of consent in writing, or by orally
notifying the attending physician or APRN in the presence of a witness
18 years of age or older.
                                             
 IV. At any time an agent may revoke his or her consent for a person
who lacks capacity to make health care decisions who is residing at home
by destroying such order and removing do not resuscitate identification
from the person. The agent is responsible for notifying the person's
attending physician or APRN of the revocation.
                                             
 V. The attending physician or APRN who is informed of or provided
with a revocation of consent pursuant to this section shall immediately
cancel the do not resuscitate order if the person is in a health care
facility and notify the professional staff of the health care facility
responsible for the person's care of the revocation and cancellation.
Any professional staff of the health care facility who is informed of or
provided with a revocation of consent pursuant to this section shall
immediately notify the attending physician or APRN of such revocation.
                                             
 VI. Only a physician or advanced practice registered nurse may
cancel the issuance of a do not resuscitate order.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:4, 5, eff. July 21, 2009.

### Section 137-J:30

 **137-J:30 Not Suicide or Murder. –** The withholding of
cardiopulmonary resuscitation from a person in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall not, for any purpose, constitute
suicide or murder. The withholding of cardiopulmonary resuscitation from
a person in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, however,
shall not relieve any individual of responsibility for any criminal acts
that may have caused the person's condition. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to legalize, condone, authorize, or approve mercy
killing or assisted suicide.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 137-J:31

 **137-J:31 Interinstitutional Transfers. –** If a person with a do
not resuscitate order is transferred from one health care facility to
another health care facility, the health care facility initiating the
transfer shall communicate the existence of a do not resuscitate order
to the receiving facility prior to the transfer. The written do not
resuscitate order, the do not resuscitate card as described in RSA
137-J:26, or the medical orders form shall accompany the person to the
health care facility receiving the person and shall remain effective
until a physician at the receiving facility issues admission orders. The
do not resuscitate card or the medical orders form shall be kept as the
first page in the person's transfer records.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 137-J:32

 **137-J:32 Preservation of Existing Rights. –**
                                             
 I. Nothing in this chapter shall impair or supersede any legal right
or legal responsibility which any person may have to effect the
withholding of cardiopulmonary resuscitation in any lawful manner. In
such respect, the provisions of this chapter are cumulative; provided,
that this paragraph shall not be construed to authorize any violation of
RSA 137-J:7, II or III.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude a court
of competent jurisdiction from approving the issuance of a do not
resuscitate order under circumstances other than those under which such
an order may be issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2007.

### Section 137-J:33

 **137-J:33 Do Not Resuscitate Identification. –** Do not resuscitate
identification as set forth in this chapter may consist of either a
medical condition bracelet or necklace with the inscription of the
person's name, date of birth in numerical form and "NH Do Not
Resuscitate'' or "NH DNR'' on it. Such identification shall be issued
only upon presentation of a properly executed do not resuscitate order
form as set forth in RSA 137-J:26, a medical orders form in which a
physician or advanced practice registered nurse has documented a do not
resuscitate order, or a do not resuscitate order properly executed in
accordance with a health care facility' s written policy and procedure.

**Source.** 2006, 302:2. 2009, 54:5, eff. July 21, 2009.

Surrogacy
---------

### Section 137-J:34

 **137-J:34 Applicability. –** The surrogacy provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to instances in which the patient has a valid
and unrevoked living will, or an authorized agent under a durable power
of attorney for health care and the patient's condition falls within the
coverage of such advance directives, as defined in this chapter. In
those instances, the living will or durable power of attorney for health
care shall be given effect according to its terms.

**Source.** 2014, 239:12, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 137-J:35

 **137-J:35 Surrogate Decision-making. –**
                                             
 I. When a patient lacks capacity to make health care decisions, the
physician or APRN shall make a reasonable inquiry pursuant to 137-J:7 as
to whether the patient has a valid advance directive and, to the extent
that the patient has designated an agent, whether such agent is
available, willing and able to act. When no health care agent is
authorized and available, the health care provider shall make a
reasonable inquiry as to the availability of possible surrogates listed
under this paragraph. A surrogate decision-maker may make medical
decisions on behalf of a patient without court order or judicial
involvement in the following order of priority:
                                             
 (a) The patient's spouse, or civil union partner or common law
spouse as defined by RSA 457:39, unless there is a divorce proceeding,
separation agreement, or restraining order limiting that person's
relationship with the patient.
                                             
 (b) Any adult son or daughter of the patient.
                                             
 (c) Either parent of the patient.
                                             
 (d) Any adult brother or sister of the patient.
                                             
 (e) Any adult grandchild of the patient.
                                             
 (f) Any grandparent of the patient.
                                             
 (g) Any adult aunt, uncle, niece, or nephew of the patient.
                                             
 (h) A close friend of the patient.
                                             
 (i) The agent with financial power of attorney or a conservator
appointed in accordance with RSA 464-A.
                                             
 (j) The guardian of the patient's estate.
                                             
 II. The physician or APRN may identify a surrogate from the list in
paragraph I if the physician or APRN determines he or she is able and
willing to act, and determines after reasonable inquiry that neither a
legal guardian, health care agent under a durable power of attorney for
health care, nor a surrogate of higher priority is available and able
and willing to act. The surrogate decision-maker, as identified by the
attending physician or APRN, may make health care decisions for the
patient. The surrogacy provisions of this chapter shall take effect when
the decision-maker names are recorded in the medical record. The
physician or APRN shall have the right to rely on any of the above
surrogates if the physician or APRN believes after reasonable inquiry
that neither a health care agent under a durable power of attorney for
health care or a surrogate of higher priority is available or able and
willing to act.

**Source.** 2014, 239:12, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 137-J:36

 **137-J:36 Determining Priority Among Multiple Surrogates. –**
                                             
 I. Where there are multiple surrogate decision-makers at the same
priority level in the hierarchy, it shall be the responsibility of those
surrogates to make reasonable efforts to reach a consensus as to their
decision on behalf of the patient regarding any health care decision. If
2 or more surrogates who are in the same category and have equal
priority indicate to the attending physician or APRN that they disagree
about the health care decision at issue, a majority of the available
persons in that category shall control, unless the minority or any other
interested party initiates guardianship proceedings in accordance with
RSA 464-A. There shall not be a recognized surrogate when a guardianship
proceeding has been initiated and a decision is pending. The person
initiating the petition for guardianship shall immediately provide
written notice of the initiation of the guardianship proceeding to the
health care facility where the patient is being treated. This process
shall not preempt the care of the patient. No health care provider or
other person shall be required to seek appointment of a guardian.
                                             
 II. After a surrogate has been identified, the name, address,
telephone number, and relationship of that person to the patient shall
be recorded in the patient's medical record.
                                             
 III. Any surrogate who becomes unavailable or unable or unwilling to
act for any reason may be replaced by applying the provisions of RSA
137-J:35 in the same manner as for the initial choice of surrogate.
                                             
 IV. In the event an individual of a higher priority to an identified
surrogate becomes available and is willing and able to be the surrogate,
the individual with higher priority may be identified as the surrogate.
In the event an individual in a higher, a lower, or the same priority
level or a health care provider seeks to challenge the priority or
ability of the surrogate or the life-sustaining treatment decision of
the recognized surrogate decision-maker, the challenging party may
initiate guardianship proceedings in accordance with RSA 464-A.

**Source.** 2014, 239:12, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.

### Section 137-J:37

 **137-J:37 Limitations of Surrogacy. –**
                                             
 I. A surrogate shall not be identified over the express objection of
the patient, and a surrogacy shall terminate if at any time a patient
for whom a surrogate has been appointed expresses objection to the
continuation of the surrogacy.
                                             
 II. No physician or APRN shall be required to identify a surrogate,
and may, in the event a surrogate has been identified, revoke the
surrogacy if the surrogate is unwilling or unable to act.
                                             
 III. A physician or APRN may, but shall not be required to, initiate
guardianship proceedings or encourage a family member or friend to seek
guardianship in the event a patient is determined to lack capacity to
make health care decisions and no guardian, agent under a health care
power of attorney, or surrogate has been appointed or named.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require a
physician or APRN to treat a patient who the physician or APRN
reasonably believes lacks health care decision-making capacity and for
whom no guardian, agent, or surrogate has been appointed.
                                             
 V. The surrogate may make health care decisions for a principal to
same extent as an agent under a durable power of attorney for health
care for up to 90 days after being identified in RSA 137-J:35, I, unless
the principal regains health care decision-making capacity or a guardian
is appointed or patient is determined to be near death, as defined in
RSA 137-J:2, XVI. The authority of the surrogate shall terminate after
90 days.

**Source.** 2014, 239:12, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.
