---
title: 'CHAPTER 137-F HEARING CARE PROVIDERS'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 137-F
                                             
HEARING CARE PROVIDERS
----------------------

### Section 137-F:1

 **137-F:1 Statement of Purpose. –** It is the policy of the state to
safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare; to protect the public
from being misled by incompetent, unscrupulous, and unprofessional
conduct by hearing care providers; and to assure the availability of the
highest possible quality hearing care services to the people of this
state. It is therefore necessary to regulate hearing aid dealers and
audiologists who provide hearing care services to the public.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:2

 **137-F:2 Definitions. –**
                                             
 I. "Audiologist'' means any person who renders or offers to render
to the public any service involving the application of principles,
methods, and procedures for the measurement of testing, identification,
appraisal, consultation, counseling, instruction, and research related
to the development and disorders of hearing and vestibular function for
the purpose of diagnosing, designing, and implementing programs for the
amelioration of such disorders and conditions.
                                             
 II. "Audiology'' means the application of principles, methods, and
procedures related to the development and disorders of human
communication, which disorders shall include any and all conditions
whether of organic or nonorganic origin, that impede the normal
processes of human communication and balance including, but not limited
to, disorders of hearing, vestibular function, and central auditory
processing.
                                             
 III. "Board'' means the board of hearing care providers.
                                             
 IV. "Hearing aid'' means any wearable instrument or device designed
for or offered for the purpose of or represented as aiding or
compensating for impaired human hearing and any parts or attachments,
including ear molds, but excluding batteries and cords or accessories
thereto, or equipment, devices, and attachments used in conjunction with
services provided by a public utility company.
                                             
 V. "Hearing aid dealer'' means any person engaged in the testing of
human hearing for the purpose of selecting, fitting, or otherwise
dealing in hearing aids.
                                             
 VI. "Otolaryngologist'' means a physician licensed in the state of
New Hampshire who specializes in medical problems of the ear, nose, and
throat, and is eligible for qualification by the American Board of
Otolaryngology as an otolaryngologist.
                                             
 VII. "Practice of audiology'' means, but shall not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) Screening, identifying, assessing, interpreting, diagnosing,
rehabilitating, and preventing hearing disorders.
                                             
 (b) Rendering to individuals or groups of individuals, who are
suspected of having hearing disorders, basic and comprehensive
audiological and vestibular site-of-lesion tests, including otoscopic
examinations, electrophysiologic test procedures, and auditory evoked
assessment.
                                             
 (c) Rendering basic and comprehensive auditory and vestibular
habilitative and rehabilitative services, including aural rehabilitative
assessment and therapy, vestibular rehabilitative assessment and
therapy, and speech and language screening.
                                             
 (d) Providing basic and comprehensive audiological and
psychoacoustic evaluations for the purpose of determining candidacy for
amplification or assistive alerting/listening devices; providing
tinnitus evaluations and therapy; providing hearing aid fitting and
orientation; taking ear impressions; and providing hearing aid product
dispensing, repair, and modification.
                                             
 (e) Providing preoperative evaluation and selection of cochlear
implant candidacy and post-implant rehabilitation.
                                             
 (f) Providing occupational hearing conservation.
                                             
 VIII. "Rental or selling of hearing aids'' means the selection,
adaptation, and sale or rental of hearing aids. Also included is the
making of impressions for ear molds and instruction pertaining to the
use of hearing aids.
                                             
 IX. "Sell'' or "sale'' means any transfer of title or of the right
of use by sale, conditional sales contract, lease bailments,
hire-purchase or any other means, excluding wholesale transactions of
dealers and distributors.
                                             
 X. "Days'' means Monday through Friday, excluding official holidays.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:3

 **137-F:3 Board of Hearing Care Providers; Administrative
Attachment. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be a board of hearing care providers, each to be
appointed by the governor, with the approval of the council.
                                             
 II. The board shall consist of 2 audiologists licensed to practice
audiology in the state, who have been practicing in this state for at
least one year immediately preceding appointment, except that the first
audiologist members appointed to the board shall meet the eligibility
requirements for licensure specified in this chapter; one licensed
otolaryngologist currently practicing in the state; 2 non-audiologist
hearing aid dealers registered to dispense hearing aids in the state,
who have been practicing in this state for at least one year immediately
preceding appointment, except that the first hearing aid members
appointed to the board shall meet the eligibility requirements for
registration specified in this chapter; and 2 members of the public who
are not associated with or financially interested in the practice or
business of audiology or the dispensing of hearing aids, who are not
members of allied or related professions or occupations.
                                             
 III. No member of the board shall serve concurrently in an elected,
appointed, or employed position in any other state-level organization
representing audiologists or hearing aid dealers, if it would present a
conflict of interest.
                                             
 IV. (a) Appointments to the board shall be for 2 years except that
one of the first 2 audiologists and one of the first 2 hearing aid
dealers shall serve one-year terms. A member shall hold office until a
successor has been appointed. No member may serve more than 2
consecutive terms.
                                             
 (b) The governor and council may remove any member of the board
for malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance pertaining to the duties of
the board.
                                             
 (c) The board shall review and take action on all applications
for licensure, renewal, and reinstatement licenses for audiologists.
                                             
 V. Members of the board shall receive mileage incurred while
conducting the business of the board.
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VII. A quorum of the board shall be 4 members.
                                             
 VIII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1996, 236:1. 2010, 118:2. 2014, 167:51, I, eff. July 1,
2014. 2015, 276:108, XXV, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 137-F:4

 **137-F:4 Board Subcommittees. –**
                                             
 I. There shall be 2 subcommittees of the board:
                                             
 (a) The hearing aid dealers subcommittee, which shall consist of
the 2 non-audiologist hearing aid dealer members of the board and one of
the public members.
                                             
 (b) The audiology subcommittee, which shall consist of the 2
audiologist board members, the otolaryngologist board member, and one of
the public members.
                                             
 II. Each subcommittee shall advise the board regarding rulemaking in
the subcommittee's area of expertise.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:5

 **137-F:5 Powers and Duties of the Board. –** The powers and duties
of the board include:
                                             
 I. Accepting applications for certificates of registration for
hearing aid dealers under this chapter, and approving or denying such
applications.
                                             
 II. Renewing certificates of registration for hearing aid dealers.
                                             
 III. Suspending or revoking certificates of registration for hearing
aid dealers upon the grounds listed in RSA 137-F:18, and conducting
investigations and hearings regarding the denial, suspension,
revocation, and renewal of certificates.
                                             
 IV. Accepting applications for licensure for audiologists under this
chapter, and approving or denying such applications.
                                             
 V. Renewing licenses for audiologists.
                                             
 VI. Suspending or revoking licenses for audiologists upon the
grounds listed in RSA 137-F:18, and conducting investigations and
hearings regarding the denial, suspension, revocation, and renewal of
certificates.
                                             
 VII. Accepting written complaints from the public against
registrants or licensees, and conducting necessary investigations of
such complaints.
                                             
 VIII. Publicizing the complaint procedure.
                                             
 IX. Reporting to the governor and council annually on the activities
conducted under this chapter.
                                             
 X. Imposing administrative fines against hearing care providers on
the grounds listed in RSA 137-F:18.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:6

 **137-F:6 Rulemaking. –** The board shall adopt rules, pursuant to
RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The form and content of audiologist license applications and
examinations.
                                             
 II. The form and content of hearing aid dealer registration
applications and examinations.
                                             
 III. Conditions of licensure under RSA 137-F:13.
                                             
 IV. Conditions of registration under RSA 137-F:9.
                                             
 V. Examination fees, and any other fees required under this
chapter.
                                             
 VI. The conditions under which an applicant from another
jurisdiction may be issued an audiologist license.
                                             
 VII. The conditions under which an applicant from another
jurisdiction may be issued a certificate of registration.
                                             
 VIII. Requirements for continuing professional education and
competency of audiologists.
                                             
 IX. Requirements for continuing professional education and
competency of hearing aid dealers.
                                             
 X. Expiration of licenses and registrations.
                                             
 XI. The sale and fitting of hearing aids.
                                             
 XII. The conduct of investigations and hearings under this chapter,
consistent with due process requirements.
                                             
 XIII. Procedures for notice and hearing prior to the imposition of
an administrative fine imposed under this chapter.
                                             
 XIV. A schedule of administrative fines which may be imposed for
violations of this chapter or the rules adopted pursuant to it.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1. 2014, 167:16, eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 137-F:7

 **137-F:7 Limitation of Authority. –** In the administration of this
chapter, the board shall have no authority to adopt rules other than
those specifically authorized in this chapter.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:8

 **137-F:8 Registration of Hearing Aid Dealers Required. –** No
person shall engage in the business of selling or offering for rent
hearing aids unless such person is registered in accordance with this
chapter and unless the registration of such person is current and valid.
The fee for an initial registration under this section is 
                                             $300. This
section includes the selling or renting of hearing aids by mail in this
state by a person outside the state. Registration certificates shall be
renewed biennially on or before June 30 upon payment of a 
                                             $300 renewal
fee.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1. 2014, 167:17, eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 229:2,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 137-F:9

 **137-F:9 Application for Registration; Fees. –**
                                             
 I. An application for a certificate of registration under this
chapter shall be filed with the board in such form and detail as
required in accordance with rules adopted under RSA 541-A, shall be duly
signed and verified, shall be available for public inspection, and shall
include, but not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) The name and the business address of the applicant; if an
individual, the name under which the person intends to conduct business;
if a partnership, the name and business address of each member thereof,
and the name under which the business is to be conducted; if a
corporation, the name of the corporation and the name and business
address of each of the officers of the corporation.
                                             
 (b) The place or places, including the complete address or
addresses, where the business is to be conducted.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1996, 236:1. 2007, 14:2, I, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 137-F:10

 **137-F:10 Issuance of Certificate. –** Except as provided in RSA
137-F:18, the board shall issue a certificate of registration to any
person who files an application for such certificate accompanied by the
required application and registration fees within 30 days after the
filing of such application.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:11

 **137-F:11 Audiology Licensure Required. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall practice audiology or represent oneself as an
audiologist in this state, unless such person is licensed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
                                             
 II. The board shall license each applicant who satisfies the
requirements of this chapter. Upon payment of a 
                                             $300 license fee, the
board shall issue to such person a certificate of licensure which shall
be evidence of the right to practice as an audiologist. The initial
license shall be valid for at least 2 years and expire on June 30.
Renewals shall be valid for 2 years from the date of renewal.
                                             
 III. No person may represent oneself or use the following words to
represent oneself: audiologist, audiology, audiometry, audiometrist,
audiological, audiometrics, hearing therapy, hearing therapist, hearing
clinic, hearing aid audiologist, or any other variation or synonym which
expresses, employs, or implies these terms or functions unless the
person has been duly licensed as an audiologist.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1. 2014, 167:18, eff. July 1, 2014. 2015, 43:2,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 137-F:12

 **137-F:12 Persons or Practices Affected. –**
                                             
 I. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit a student
enrolled in a school or courses in audiology, approved by the board in
cooperation with the American-Speech-Language-Hearing-Association, from
performing audiology which is incidental to a course of study of
supervised field work.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit persons registered or
otherwise licensed in this state under any other law from engaging in
the practice for which they are registered or licensed.
                                             
 III. Any person designated by the title intern, trainee, student, or
by any other such title clearly indicating the status appropriate to
such level of education shall be exempt from licensure requirements,
provided the person is under the supervision of a person licensed by
this state to practice audiology.
                                             
 IV. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or restrict the practice
of any physician licensed to practice medicine and surgery.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:13

 **137-F:13 License Requirements; Fees. –**
                                             
 I. To be eligible for licensure by the board as an audiologist, an
applicant shall:
                                             
 (a) Make application to the board, upon a form prescribed by the
audiology subcommittee.
                                             
 (b) Pay to the board the appropriate license fee.
                                             
 (c) Possess at least a master's degree in audiology from an
educational institution approved by the board which consists of course
work approved pursuant to rules adopted by the board pursuant to RSA
541-A.
                                             
 (d) Complete supervised clinical practicum experience at an
educational institution or its cooperation programs, approved pursuant
to rules adopted by the board pursuant to RSA 541-A.
                                             
 (e) Pass an examination specified by the board in rules adopted
under RSA 541-A.
                                             
 (f) Complete a supervised postgraduate professional experience.
                                             
 (g) Demonstrate sufficient evidence of good professional
character and reliability to satisfy the board that the applicant shall
faithfully and conscientiously avoid professional misconduct and
otherwise adhere to the requirements of this chapter.
                                             
 (h) If applicable, submit proof of licensure in another state in
which the licensure requirements are equivalent to or greater than those
in this chapter.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. (a) A license shall be restored after a period of nonrenewal of
less than 2 years, if the person pays to the board a restoration fee
consisting of the current renewal fee plus any late fee established by
rules adopted by the board pursuant to RSA 541-A and submits such
evidence of continued professional competence and eligibility for
licensure as the board may require.
                                             
 (b) Any person who fails to renew a license within 2 years after
its expiration date may apply for and obtain a new license upon meeting
the requirements of this chapter and paying to the board the appropriate
fee.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1. 2007, 14:2, II. 2014, 167:19, eff. July 1,
2014.

### Section 137-F:14

 **137-F:14 Interim License. –**
                                             
 I. An applicant who satisfies all requirements for licensure except
completion of a supervised postgraduate professional experience as
required by RSA 137-F:13, I(f) may apply for an interim license. Upon
receiving such an application the board shall issue an interim license,
which entitles the applicant to practice audiology under supervision of
a licensed audiologist while completing requirements for licensure.
                                             
 II. No interim license may be issued by the board under this section
unless the applicant shows to the satisfaction of the board that the
applicant shall be supervised and trained by a person who holds an
audiology license.
                                             
 III. The interim license shall be effective for one year and may be
renewed by the board.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:15

 **137-F:15 Temporary License. –**
                                             
 I. A temporary license may be granted for up to 120 days to a person
who has moved to this state from another jurisdiction, if the person
holds an audiologist's license in the other jurisdiction and the other
jurisdiction's requirements for licensure are greater than or equal to
the requirements in this state, and the person has applied for a license
under this chapter.
                                             
 II. A temporary license issued under this section shall expire no
later than 120 days after issuance. The date shall be stated on the
license.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:16

 **137-F:16 Persons From Other Jurisdictions; Licensure. –** The
board may waive licensure requirements for an applicant who:
                                             
 I. Is licensed by another jurisdiction where the requirements for
licensure are greater than or equal to those required in this state;
and
                                             
 II. Is practicing audiology 20 days or less in New Hampshire in any
calendar year.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:17

 **137-F:17 Prohibited Acts. –** No person shall:
                                             
 I. Practice audiology or act or advertise as an audiologist without
holding a license issued pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 II. Fail to comply with an order of the board issued pursuant to
this chapter.
                                             
 III. Fail to comply with a rule adopted pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 IV. Hire as an audiologist any person not holding a license issued
pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 V. Practice audiology in violation of this chapter.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:18

 **137-F:18 Refusal to Issue License or Registration; Revocation or
Suspension. –**
                                             
 I. After notice and opportunity for hearing, as provided under RSA
541-A, the board may revoke, suspend, or refuse to issue any license or
registration under this chapter if the licensee, registrant, or
applicant:
                                             
 (a) Violates this chapter or any rule adopted or order issued
under this chapter.
                                             
 (b) Endangers, or is likely to endanger, the public health,
safety, or welfare.
                                             
 (c) Knowingly makes any false statement:
                                             
 (1) Regarding the application or license under this chapter or
before any other professional licensing organization.
                                             
 (2) To a health care provider or the person's employer.
                                             
 (3) In any report the board may require.
                                             
 (d) Practices audiology or any audiology specialty in a grossly
or repeatedly negligent manner.
                                             
 (e) Is guilty of unprofessional, dishonest, or unethical conduct
including, but not limited to, conduct which violates the code of ethics
of the American Academy of Audiology.
                                             
 (f) Is convicted of a criminal offense which indicates to the
board that the licensee or registrant cannot be entrusted to serve the
public as an audiologist or hearing aid dealer.
                                             
 (g) Has violated any trade practice rule for the hearing aid
industry as adopted by the United States Federal Trade Commission, or
the United States Food and Drug Commission.
                                             
 II. A licensee, registrant, or applicant aggrieved by a final
decision of the board under this section may appeal such decision
pursuant to RSA 541.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:19

 **137-F:19 Reinstatement After Suspension. –** An audiologist
seeking reinstatement of a suspended license, or a hearing aid dealer
seeking reinstatement of a suspended registration, shall submit the
following to the board:
                                             
 I. A written request to the board explaining the appropriateness of
reinstatement of the license or registration.
                                             
 II. The required license or registration application and fee.
                                             
 III. Evidence of competency to practice as established by the board,
which shall include, for audiologists, continuing education, passage of
the standardized examination, and practice under the supervision of
another licensed audiologist for a period of time set by the board.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:20

 **137-F:20 License Renewal. –** A license issued under RSA 137-F:13
shall expire at 12:01 a.m. on July 1 of the odd year next succeeding its
date of issuance. Every person licensed under this chapter who wishes to
renew a license shall, on or before the expiration date, pay a 
                                             $300
renewal fee to the board. The board shall notify each person licensed
under this chapter of the date of expiration of such person's license
and the renewal fee required. The notice shall be mailed to such
person's last known address as provided to the board at least 60 days in
advance of the expiration of such license. Renewals are contingent upon
evidence of 20 hours or the equivalent in continuing education units,
including, but not limited to, attending professional meetings or
completing approved independent studies and regional in-service
programs, as determined by the board.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1. 2014, 167:20, eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 137-F:21

 **137-F:21 Investigatory Power of the Board; Complaints. –**
                                             
 I. All subpoenas, investigations, appointments of legal counsel,
experts, investigators, and other such investigatory provisions allowed
under this chapter shall be approved by the department of justice.
                                             
 II. The board shall investigate misconduct by licensees and any
other matters governed by the provisions of this chapter. Investigations
may be conducted with or without the issuance of a board order
establishing the general scope of the investigation. Board
investigations and any information obtained by the board pursuant to
such investigations shall be exempt from public disclosure provisions of
RSA 91-A unless such information subsequently becomes the subject of a
public disciplinary hearing. The board shall disclose information
obtained in an investigation to law enforcement or health licensing
agencies in this state or any other jurisdiction or in accordance with
specific statutory requirements or court orders. The board shall notify
any licensee being investigated of such investigation and the nature of
the misconduct within 10 days of the commencement of the investigation.
                                             
 III. The board may appoint legal counsel, audiology experts, hearing
aid dealer experts, hearing officers, or other investigators retained
through the office of professional licensure and certification to assist
with any investigation or with adjudicatory hearings.
                                             
 IV. The board may commence a formal or informal investigation, or an
adjudicative hearing concerning allegations of misconduct and other
matters within the scope of this chapter on its own motion or upon
written complaint of any person which charges that a person licensed by
the board has committed unprofessional conduct. The type of procedure
chosen shall be a matter reserved to the discretion of the board.
Investigations may be conducted on an ex parte basis.
                                             
 V. (a) The board may administer oaths or affirmations, preserve
testimony, and issue subpoenas for witnesses and for documents during
any formal investigation or adjudicatory hearing. The board may also
subpoena client records, as provided in paragraph VI, during formal
investigations.
                                             
 (b) The board shall serve any subpoena except as provided in
paragraph VI in accordance with the procedures and fee schedules
established by the superior court, except that:
                                             
 (1) Any person licensed by the board shall not be entitled to
a witness fee or mileage expenses for travel within the state.
                                             
 (2) The board shall not be required to tender witness fees and
mileage expenses in advance of the subpoena if the subpoena is
annotated, "fees guaranteed by the New Hampshire board of audiology''.
                                             
 (3) The respondent shall be allowed at least 48 hours to
comply with a subpoena issued under this chapter.
                                             
 VI. The board may at any time subpoena client records from hospitals
and other health care providers of facilities licensed by or certified
in this state. Such subpoenas shall be served by certified mail or by
personal delivery to the address shown on the licensee's current
license, and no witness or other fee shall be required.
                                             
 VII. At least 15 days' advance notice shall be allowed for complying
with a subpoena duces tecum issued under this chapter.
                                             
 VIII. Any complaint of misconduct by a licensee shall be in writing
and shall be treated as a petition for the commencement of a
disciplinary hearing. The board shall investigate all complaints to the
extent and in the manner warranted by the allegations. Any complaint
which fails to state a cause of action may summarily be denied in whole
or in part. Some or all of the allegations in the complaint may be
consolidated with another complaint or with issues which the board
decides to investigate or hear on its own motion. If an investigation of
a complaint results in an offer of settlement by the licensee, the board
may settle the allegations against the licensee without the consent of a
complainant, provided that material facts are not in dispute and the
complainant is given an opportunity to comment upon the terms of the
proposed settlement.
                                             
 IX. At the commencement of an adjudicatory proceeding, or at the
commencement of a formal or informal investigation, and without issuing
a subpoena, the board shall mail a statement of the issues being
investigated or heard to any licensee or other person who is a proper
subject of inquiry and require the licensee or other person to provide a
detailed and good faith written response to the allegations identified
by the board. The licensee or other person shall provide complete copies
of the licensee's office records concerning any patient whose treatment
is relevant to the matters at issue. The licensee shall respond to such
request within a time specified by the board, provided that such time
shall not be less than 15 days.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997. 2015, 276:98, eff. July 1,
2015.

### Section 137-F:22

 **137-F:22 Hearings, Decisions, and Appeals. –**
                                             
 I. An adjudicatory hearing shall be an open public proceeding. Any
member of the board may preside at such a hearing and may issue oaths or
affirmations to witnesses.
                                             
 II. The board shall furnish the licensee or any other respondent at
least 15 days' written notice of the date, time, and place of a hearing,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Such notice shall include
an itemization of the issues to be heard, and, in the case of a
disciplinary hearing, a statement as to whether the action has been
initiated by a written complaint or upon the board's own motion, or
both. If a written complaint is involved, the complainant shall also
receive a written copy of the hearing notice and shall be provided with
a reasonable opportunity to intervene as a party.
                                             
 III. Any person appearing at a board hearing or investigation may be
represented by legal counsel, but the board shall have no obligation or
authority to appoint or provide an attorney to any person appearing at a
board hearing or investigation.
                                             
 IV. The board may at any time dispose of issues or allegations at an
adjudicatory hearing, or investigation, by default, settlement
agreement, or consent order by issuing an order of dismissal for failing
to state a proper basis for disciplinary action or by summary judgment
order based upon undisputed material facts. In disciplinary hearings,
the board may hold pre-hearing conferences which shall be exempt from
the provisions of RSA 91-A, but all final disciplinary actions,
including those which occur without holding a public hearing, shall be
available to the public.
                                             
 V. Adjudicatory decisions and final disciplinary actions of the
board shall be by the majority of the board members participating in the
decision. Such decisions shall not be public until they have been
reduced to writing, signed by a representative of the board, and served
upon the parties.
                                             
 VI. Decisions of the board may be appealed to the supreme court
pursuant to RSA 541. The court shall not stay any disciplinary sanction
imposed by the board pending appeal, if the board has determined that
the sanction is required for the public safety and welfare. Any person
whose license has been revoked shall comply with the licensure
requirements of this chapter relative to license reinstatement.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:23

 **137-F:23 Temporary Suspension. –** The board may order suspension
of a license or privilege granted under this chapter pending hearing for
no more than 60 days if the board believes there is an imminent danger
to life or health. In such cases, the basis for the board's findings of
imminent danger to life or health shall be in writing and combined with
the notice requirements in RSA 541-A:30. The board's hearing may
commence no later than 30 days after the order suspending the license.
If the board does not commence the hearing within 30 days, the
suspension order shall be automatically vacated. A licensee shall be
allowed additional time to prepare for or complete a hearing under this
section only by agreeing to further suspension commensurate with the
additional time extended.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:24

 **137-F:24 Disclosure to Customers. –**
                                             
 I. No hearing aid dealer or audiologist shall sell a hearing aid
without presenting the purchaser an itemized receipt, which shall
include the following:
                                             
 (a) The name and address and signature of the purchaser.
                                             
 (b) The date of consummation of the sale.
                                             
 (c) The name and the regular place of business of the hearing aid
dealer or dealer's registration number or of the audiologist or
audiologist's license number, and signature of the registrant or
licensee.
                                             
 (d) The make, model, serial number, and purchase price of the
hearing aid and the terms of the warranty.
                                             
 (e) An itemization of the total purchase price, including but not
limited to the cost of the aid, ear mold, and batteries and other
accessories and any other services.
                                             
 (f) A statement as to whether the hearing aid is "new'', "used''
or "reconditioned''.
                                             
 (g) The complete terms of the sale, including a clear and precise
statement of the 30-day money back guarantee required under RSA
137-F:27.
                                             
 (h) The name, address and telephone number of the consumer
protection and antitrust bureau, division of public protection,
department of justice, with a statement that complaints which arise with
respect to the transaction may be submitted in writing to the consumer
protection and antitrust bureau.
                                             
 (i) The following statements in 10 point type or larger: 1) "This
hearing aid will not restore normal hearing nor will it prevent further
hearing loss;'' 2) "You have the right to cancel this purchase or rental
for any reason within 30 days after receiving the hearing aid.''
                                             
 II. Each registrant or licensee shall keep records of every customer
to whom such person renders services or sells hearing aids, including a
copy of the receipt as specified under paragraph I, a record of services
provided, any correspondence to or from a customer and any records
required under the rules for the hearing aid industry as promulgated by
the United States Federal Trade Commission on July 20, 1965, or as
amended, or any rules for the hearing aid industry promulgated by the
United States Food and Drug Administration. These records shall be
preserved for at least 3 years after the date of transaction.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:25

 **137-F:25 Unsolicited Home Sales Prohibited. –** No hearing aid
dealer or audiologist, employee or agent thereof, shall canvass either
in person or by telephone from house to house for the purpose of selling
or renting a hearing aid without prior request from the prospective
customer, a relative or friend of the prospective customer.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:26

 **137-F:26 Return of Hearing Aid; Cancellation Fee. –** No hearing
aid shall be sold to any person unless accompanied by a 30-day written
money back guarantee that if the person returns the hearing aid in the
same condition, ordinary wear and tear excluded, as when purchased,
within 30 days from the date of delivery, the hearing aid dealer or
audiologist may be entitled to a cancellation fee of 5 percent of the
purchase price. In computing the actual purchase price, all rebates,
discounts, and other similar allowances provided to the seller must be
considered. For the purpose of this section, any consumer who initiates
the return of a hearing aid within said 30-day period shall have
complied with this section. The addressing of any claimed deficiency or
return shall be resolved within 90 days from date of delivery.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:27

 **137-F:27 Deceptive Advertising Prohibited. –**
                                             
 I. No hearing aid dealer or audiologist, or employee or agent
thereof, shall use or cause to be used or promote the use of any
advertising matter, promotional literature, testimonial, guarantee,
warranty, label, brand, insignia, or other representation, however
disseminated or published, which is misleading, deceptive, or
untruthful. All advertising by mail which offers free hearing testing or
other services by a hearing aid dealer or audiologist shall clearly
state in such advertising that the offers are made by a hearing aid
dealer or audiologist.
                                             
 II. No hearing aid dealer, or employee or agent thereof, shall
represent that the services or advice of an individual licensed to
practice medicine or of an individual certified as an audiologist will
be used or made available in the selection, fitting, adjustment,
maintenance, or repair of hearing aids where that is not true; or use or
incorporate in any title or designation the words, "doctor,''
"otologist,'' "clinic,'' "clinical audiologist,'' "audiologist,'' "state
licensed clinic,'' "state certified,'' "state approved,'' "state
registered,'' "certified hearing aid audiologist,'' or any term,
abbreviation, or symbol which would give the false impression that one
is being treated medically or audiologically or that the registrant's
services have been recommended by the state.
                                             
 III. No hearing aid dealer or audiologist, or employee or agent
thereof, shall use any advertisement or any other representation which
has the effect of misleading or deceiving purchasers or prospective
purchasers in the belief that any hearing aid or device, or part or
accessory thereof, is a new invention or involves a new mechanical or
scientific principle when such is not the fact.
                                             
 IV. No hearing aid dealer or audiologist, or employee or agent
thereof, shall state or imply that the use of any hearing aid will
restore hearing to normal, or preserve hearing, or prevent or retard the
progression of a hearing impairment or make any false or misleading or
medically or audiologically unsupportable claims regarding the efficacy
or benefits of hearing aids.
                                             
 V. No hearing aid dealer or audiologist, or employee or agent
thereof, shall advertise a particular model, type, or kind of hearing
aid when the offer is not a bona fide effort to sell the product so
offered as advertised.
                                             
 VI. No hearing aid dealer or audiologist, or employee or agent
thereof, shall advertise that a hearing aid will be beneficial to
persons with hearing loss, regardless of the type of loss. No such
dealer, employee, or agent shall advertise that a hearing aid will
enable persons with hearing loss to consistently distinguish and
understand speech sounds in noisy situations.
                                             
 VII. No hearing aid shall be sold to any person unless the packaging
containing the hearing aid carries the following disclaimer in 10 point
type or larger: "This hearing aid will not restore normal hearing nor
will it prevent further hearing loss.''

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:28

 **137-F:28 Display of Certificate. –** Any person who has been
issued a license or certificate of registration under this chapter shall
conspicuously display such certificate in the principal place of
business for which such registration is issued.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:29

 **137-F:29 Record. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall maintain a record of its proceedings under this
chapter and a register of all persons licensed and registered under this
chapter. The register shall list the name, last known business address,
and the date and number of the license of each licensed audiologist and
certificate of registration of each registered hearing aid dealer.
                                             
 II. The board shall maintain and annually publish a list of licensed
audiologists, audiologists temporarily licensed under supervision, and
audiologists licensed and under investigation by the board. The board
shall also maintain and annually publish a list of registered hearing
aid dealers, and hearing aid dealers registered and under investigation
by the board.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:30

 **137-F:30 Out-of-State Sales Regulated. –**
                                             
 I. No person shall conduct or operate a business outside of the
state for the sale at retail of hearing aids to individuals within the
state unless such business is registered with a permit issued by the
board.
                                             
 II. The board shall issue a permit to such out-of-state business if
the business discloses and provides proof:
                                             
 (a) That the business is in compliance with all applicable laws
and rules in the state in which the business is located;
                                             
 (b) Of the operating locations and the names and titles of all
principal corporate officers;
                                             
 (c) That the business complies with all lawful directions and
requests for information from the board of all states in which it
conducts business; and
                                             
 (d) That the business agrees in writing to comply with all New
Hampshire laws and rules relating to the sale or dispensing of hearing
aids.
                                             
 III. The board shall assess fees as established by rules adopted by
the board pursuant to RSA 541-A for out-of-state hearing aid sales
companies.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1. 2007, 14:1, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 137-F:31

 **137-F:31 Administrative Fines. –** The board, after notice and
hearing, pursuant to rules adopted under RSA 541-A, may impose an
administrative fine not to exceed 
                                             $2,000 for each offense upon any
person who violates any provision of this chapter or rules adopted under
this chapter. Rehearings and appeals from a decision of the board shall
be in accordance with RSA 541. Any administrative fine imposed under
this section shall not preclude the imposition of further penalties or
administrative actions under this chapter. The board shall adopt rules
in accordance with RSA 541-A relative to administrative fines which
shall be scaled to reflect the scope and severity of the violation. The
sums obtained from the levying of administrative fines under this
chapter shall be forwarded to the state treasurer to be deposited into
the general fund.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.

### Section 137-F:32

 **137-F:32 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who shall practice or attempt to practice as an
audiologist or hearing aid dealer in this state without a license shall
be guilty of a class A misdemeanor if a natural person or guilty of a
felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Any person who violates any other provision of this chapter or
any rule adopted by the board under this chapter, or who knowingly makes
a false statement in an application for licensure or in response to any
inquiry of the board shall be guilty of a violation. Upon conviction of
a second or subsequent violation under this chapter, the person shall be
guilty of a class A misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1996, 236:1. 2006, 76:1, eff. July 1, 2006.
