---
title: 'CHAPTER 141-A CRITICAL HEALTH PROBLEMS REPORTING ACT'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 141-A
                                             
CRITICAL HEALTH PROBLEMS REPORTING ACT
--------------------------------------

### Section 141-A:1

 **141-A:1 Title. –** This chapter shall be known and may be cited as
the "critical health problems reporting act''.

**Source.** 1979, 339:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.

### Section 141-A:2

 **141-A:2 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Critical health problem'' means any of the following:
                                             
 (a) Lead poisoning.
                                             
 (b) Reye's syndrome.
                                             
 (c) A disease, condition, or procedure relating to public health
which is determined by the commissioner to be of particular concern or
importance as a critical health problem in this state, being in need of
greater research, study, and statistical analysis.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 III. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IV. "Facility'' means a governmental or private agency, department,
institution, clinic, laboratory, hospital, or a health maintenance
organization, association, or other similar unit designated by the
commissioner.

**Source.** 1979, 339:1. 1981, 460:7. 1983, 291:1, I. 1995, 310:91, 170,
IV, 183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 141-A:3

 **141-A:3 Determination of Problems. –** The commissioner shall
determine by rule a disease, condition, or procedure which constitutes a
critical health problem under RSA 141-A:2, I(c). A rule adopted under
this section shall cease to be effective 5 years after the date the rule
is adopted.

**Source.** 1979, 339:1. 1985, 190:67. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 141-A:4

 **141-A:4 Reports. –** An attending physician or other person
representing or employed by a facility as determined by the commissioner
shall report to the department the existence of a critical health
problem as prescribed by this chapter when the physician or person
determined by the commissioner diagnoses or confirms a critical health
problem. The report shall be made not more than 10 days after the
diagnosis or confirmation is made by the physician or other person.

**Source.** 1979, 339:1. 1995, 310:175, 183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 141-A:5

 **141-A:5 Form. –**
                                             
 I. The report prescribed in RSA 141-A:4 shall be designated as a
critical health problem report and shall contain social security
numbers, if persons were given the option at the original point of
collection to provide social security numbers voluntarily, and
information which the commissioner considers necessary to identify,
locate, and investigate the occurrence, frequency, incidence, cause,
effect, and prognosis of the critical health problem, and other relevant
data and findings with respect thereto.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall adopt rules regarding the form, content,
and manner of filing the report prescribed in RSA 141-A:4, which shall
be submitted to the department unless otherwise prescribed by the
commissioner. He shall adopt such other rules as may be necessary to
foster study, research, denomination, and control of critical health
problems.
                                             
 III. A report or other data relating to a critical health problem
which discloses the identity of an individual who was reported as having
a critical health problem shall be made available only to persons who
demonstrate a need for the report or other data which is essential to
health related research. A report or data which does not disclose the
identity of the individual shall be made available to the public in
compliance with RSA 91-A.
                                             
 IV. The physician-patient privilege shall not apply to a critical
health problem report prepared pursuant to paragraph I.

**Source.** 1979, 339:1. 1985, 190:68. 1995, 310:175, 183. 2003, 309:7,
eff. Sept. 19, 2003.

### Section 141-A:5-a

 **141-A:5-a Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Identifying critical health problems in this state as authorized
under RSA 141-A:2, I(c) and RSA 141-A:3.
                                             
 II. The manner of reporting critical health problems as authorized
under RSA 141-A:4.
                                             
 III. Form and content of the critical health reports under RSA
141-A:4 and RSA 141-A:5, II.
                                             
 IV. Maintaining critical health reports under RSA 141-A:6.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1985, 190:69. 1995, 310:183. 2012, 171:26, IV, eff. Aug. 10,
2012.

### Section 141-A:6

 **141-A:6 Maintenance of Reports. –** Critical health problem
reports and data shall be maintained by the department in a manner
suitable for use for research purposes, and shall be made available to
persons as prescribed in RSA 141-A:5.

**Source.** 1979, 339:1. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 141-A:7

 **141-A:7 Penalty. –** Whoever violates the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1979, 339:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.
