---
title: |
    CHAPTER 141-G NOTIFICATION OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE/PUBLIC SAFETY WORKERS
    AFTER EXPOSURE TO INFECTIOUS DISEASE
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 141-G
                                             
NOTIFICATION OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE/PUBLIC SAFETY WORKERS AFTER EXPOSURE TO INFECTIOUS DISEASE
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 141-G:1

 **141-G:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Blood or other potentially infectious material'' means human
blood, human blood components, products made from human blood, sputum or
any such other body fluid, tissue, or organ that may be designated by
the director by rule adopted under RSA 141-G:6.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of health and human
services.
                                             
 IV. "Emergency response/public safety worker'' means firefighters;
police officers; employees of any prison, jail, corrections institution,
or other detention facility where persons are held pending arraignment,
adjudication, or disposition of a criminal charge or in protective
custody, as defined in RSA 172-B:1, XIII; emergency care providers
licensed under RSA 153-A; persons using wreckers as defined in RSA
259:126 for towing purposes; and other similar care providers, whether
paid or volunteer.
                                             
 V. "Exposed worker'' means an emergency response/public safety
worker who sustains or suspects such worker has sustained an unprotected
exposure.
                                             
 VI. "Infectious disease'' means any infectious disease that is
designated by the commissioner by rule adopted under RSA 141-G:6.
                                             
 VII. "Source individual'' means any person whose blood, body fluids,
tissue, or organs were specifically identified as the source of an
exposure to an emergency response/public safety worker.
                                             
 VIII. "Unprotected exposure'' includes instances of direct
mouth-to-mouth resuscitation or the commingling of blood or other
potentially infectious material of a source individual and an emergency
response/public safety worker, which is capable of transmitting an
infectious disease or any other such type of exposure that may be
designated by the commissioner by rule adopted under RSA 141-G:6.

**Source.** 1989, 374:1. 1991, 175:2. 1993, 16:2. 1995, 310:98, 183.
1996, 145:1. 2008, 358:10, eff. Sept. 9, 2008.

### Section 141-G:2

 **141-G:2 Medical Referral Consultant. –**
                                             
 I. Each employer of emergency response/public safety workers shall
identify a medical referral consultant who has agreed to accept
referrals and to evaluate and follow up such workers' unprotected
exposures. The medical referral consultant shall be a licensed
physician, a registered nurse, advanced practice registered nurse or
licensed physician assistant. If none of these is available the employer
shall request written approval from the department for an alternate. For
purposes of this chapter, in such case involving an individual protected
under RSA 508:12 the department shall act as the medical referral
consultant.
                                             
 II. The medical referral consultant shall:
                                             
 (a) Receive emergency response/public safety worker incident
report forms.
                                             
 (b) Receive information from the infection control officer, the
exposed worker's private physician, or both, regarding the worker's
exposure to an infectious disease, as appropriate.
                                             
 (c) Conduct a medical examination, evaluate the exposure, and
give appropriate prophylactic treatment and follow-up treatment and
advice, or, if the medical referral consultant is not a licensed
physician, refer the exposed worker immediately to a licensed physician
for such examination, evaluation, treatment and advice.
                                             
 (d) Make all reasonable efforts to request and obtain a blood
specimen from a source individual when, in the opinion of the medical
referral consultant, a test on such blood specimen from a source
individual when, in the opinion of the medical referral consultant, a
test on such blood specimen is necessary in order to determine the
proper prophylactic treatment or advice for the exposed worker, provided
that the source individual or the source individual's legal guardian
consents to such test and the disclosure of such test results.
                                             
 (e) Maintain a record relating to any emergency response/public
safety worker's exposure to an infectious disease. The manner of
recordkeeping shall assure the confidentiality of all information.

**Source.** 1989, 374:1. 1995, 310:175. 1996, 145:2. 2009, 54:5. 2012,
152:4, eff. Jan. 1, 2013.

### Section 141-G:3

 **141-G:3 Infection Control Officer. –**
                                             
 I. The senior facility administrator of each health care facility
licensed under RSA 151 shall designate an infection control officer for
the purpose of carrying out this chapter. That person shall be the
infection control practitioner, hospital epidemiologist, hospital
infection control chairman or a licensed physician or registered nurse
who is knowledgeable of the facility's infection control policies and
procedures.
                                             
 II. When the source individual is transported to a health care
facility, the infection control officer shall:
                                             
 (a) Receive copies of emergency response/public safety worker
incident report forms and coordinate the acquisition of any source
individual information required for evaluating an emergency care
worker's possible exposure and for evaluating the possible exposure of
an individual protected under RSA 508:12, if any.
                                             
 (b) Review the incident report form and source individual medical
information.
                                             
 (c) Notify the medical referral consultant, in accordance with
RSA 141-G:5, of any source individual infection which, in the event that
an unprotected exposure occurred, may place an emergency response/public
safety worker at significant risk for disease.
                                             
 (d) Notify public health in accordance with RSA 141-C:7, of any
source individual infection which, in the event that an unprotected
exposure occurred, may place an individual protected under RSA 508:12 at
tangible risk for disease.

**Source.** 1989, 374:1. 2012, 152:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2013.

### Section 141-G:4

 **141-G:4 Notification by Emergency Response/Public Safety Workers.
–**
                                             
 I. Any emergency response/public safety worker who, while in the
line of duty, sustains an unprotected exposure to himself or herself or
another individual protected under RSA 508:12, or who suspects such an
exposure, shall, as soon as possible, provide a copy of the emergency
response/public safety worker incident report form to the worker's
medical referral consultant. If the source individual is transported to
a health care facility licensed under RSA 151, the exposed worker shall
also provide a copy of the incident report form to the infection control
officer of the facility as soon as possible after arrival of the source
individual at the facility.
                                             
 II. The department shall prepare and distribute the emergency
response/public safety worker incident report form. The form shall
include, at a minimum, the names of persons who believe they have
sustained an unprotected exposure, the manner in which the exposure
occurred, the name of the employer's medical referral consultant and
such other relevant information that the department may require by rule
adopted under RSA 141-G:6.
                                             
 III. Nothing in this section shall be construed as negating whatever
responsibility the fire department, police department, correctional
facility, or emergency medical services unit might have for the
protection and care of its employees, or the responsibility of any
emergency care worker to safeguard such emergency care worker's health
by using all appropriate protective equipment provided by the employer,
by following appropriate procedures, and by seeking medical advice and
attention when prudent.

**Source.** 1989, 374:1. 1993, 16:3. 1995, 310:175. 1996, 145:3, 4.
2012, 152:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2013.

### Section 141-G:5

 **141-G:5 Notification by Health Care Facilities; Duties of
Department; Confidentiality. –**
                                             
 I. When the source individual is transported to a health care
facility licensed under RSA 151, the infection control officer shall
receive and review a copy of the emergency response/public safety worker
incident report form. If the transported source individual is diagnosed
as having an infectious disease which could have been transmitted via
the unprotected exposure, the infection control officer shall orally
notify within 48 hours and in writing notify within 72 hours of the
determination, the medical referral consultant listed on the form. The
notice shall include, but not be limited to, the finding, if any, that
an unprotected exposure may have occurred and the identity of such
infectious disease. The infection control officer or health care
facility shall provide the source individual diagnosed as having the
infectious disease with the names of persons who were informed of the
source individual's condition.
                                             
 II. The department shall determine the method by which the written
notification of the incident report is conveyed to the medical referral
consultant.
                                             
 III. When the source individual is transported to a health care
facility licensed under RSA 151, the testing performed on the
transported source individual to complete the diagnosis under paragraph
I shall not be in addition to any testing which would be conducted
during the care and treatment of the individual, unless additional tests
are determined as necessary by the infection control officer and the
individual's attending physician because of the nature of the
unprotected exposure, and the individual consents to the tests.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, any drawing of
blood and testing carried out under this chapter for the presence of the
human immunodeficiency virus, any notifications of persons about such
test results, and the confidentiality of such test results shall be in
accordance with the provisions of RSA 141-F.

**Source.** 1989, 374:1. 1995, 310:175. 1996, 145:5, eff. July 23, 1996.

### Section 141-G:6

 **141-G:6 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner shall adopt rules under
RSA 541-A relative to:
                                             
 I. Form, content and distribution of the standardized emergency
response/public safety worker incident report form required under RSA
141-G:4.
                                             
 II. A definition of blood or other potentially infectious material.
                                             
 III. A definition of infectious disease.
                                             
 IV. Manner of recordkeeping to ensure confidentiality under RSA
141-G:2, II(e).
                                             
 V. Further definition of an unprotected exposure.
                                             
 VI. Content and format of all notices and forms required under this
chapter.
                                             
 VII. Minimal requirements for a medical referral consultant
alternate as required under RSA 141-G:2, I.
                                             
 VIII. Preparation and distribution of the incident report form as
required under RSA 141-G:4, II.

**Source.** 1989, 374:1. 1995, 310:183, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 141-G:7

 **141-G:7 Immunity From Civil Liability. –** No facility licensed
under RSA 151 or agent, employee, administrator, physician, official,
other representative of such facility, or emergency response/public
safety worker shall be held jointly or severally liable, either as a
facility or personally, for reporting as required under this chapter, if
such report was made in good faith and was in accordance with the
confidentiality procedures of the facility and RSA 141-F. All such
parties who have acted in good faith shall have total immunity from
civil or criminal liability for any act performed in the fulfillment of
the duties imposed by this chapter.

**Source.** 1989, 374:1. 2012, 152:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2013.
