---
title: 'CHAPTER 142-A MOSQUITO CONTROL POLICY FOR STATE AGENCIES'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 142-A
                                             
MOSQUITO CONTROL POLICY FOR STATE AGENCIES
------------------------------------------

### Section 142-A:1

 **142-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Best available science'' means findings of fact carefully and
impartially derived from the application of the scientific method and
based upon all of the available information, published and unpublished
alike. Best available science does not require that state agencies have
all of the data or perfect data before reaching a decision.
                                             
 II. "Best medical and public health practice'' means programs,
interventions, treatments, or policies that through experience and
experiment have been evaluated and shown to be generally applicable to
reducing the risk of human-acquired arboviral illness.
                                             
 III. "Best management practices'' mean techniques, methods,
processes, or activities that through experience and best available
science have proven to be the most effective and practical means of
managing mosquito populations, while minimizing adverse impacts.
                                             
 IV. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
health and human services.
                                             
 V. "Department'' means the department of health and human services.

**Source.** 2008, 290:2, eff. June 27, 2008.

### Section 142-A:2

 **142-A:2 Mosquito Control Policy; Principles. –**
                                             
 I. Mosquitoes can harbor organisms and infect people with diseases
that pose a serious risk to the public health. When an increased threat
of disease is discovered through surveillance, a state agency may select
targeted control of mosquitoes as a measure to reduce human health
risk.
                                             
 II. The mosquito control policy is based on the public health
principle of primary prevention, meaning that disease prevention through
public awareness, continuing education, and personal responsibility
shall take precedence over the use of pesticide-based mosquito control
measures.
                                             
 III. Because authority for monitoring and treatment of mosquito
populations exists at the local level, maximum benefit to the public is
achieved when local, state, and federal mosquito control policies are
applied in a clear, consistent, and coordinated manner.
                                             
 IV. The control of mosquitoes on state lands requires a careful
balance between the state's obligation to protect the health and
wellbeing of the public and the state's interest in protecting those
lands as expressed by the missions of the various state agencies that
have been assigned responsibilities for land management.
                                             
 V. Mosquito control should always be based on the best available
science. Recognizing that there are uncertainties in scientific
information, mosquito control shall be based on best medical and public
health practice.
                                             
 VI. The mosquito control policy for state agencies established in
this chapter is also intended to serve as a voluntary guideline for
mosquito control on lands held by other property owners.
                                             
 VII. State agencies managing land shall allow mosquito control and
abatement activities to occur in accordance with local mosquito control
plans developed pursuant to RSA 141-C when the department has notified
the appropriate agency managing state land that a public health threat
declaration under RSA 141-C:25 is in effect, or has previously been in
effect within the last 3 years, for the affected municipality or
mosquito control district in accordance with RSA 142-A:3.
                                             
 VIII. Notwithstanding RSA 142-A:3, VI, nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit state agencies managing land from considering, in accordance
with applicable law and rules, pesticides or other control measures not
specifically identified in RSA 142-A:3.

**Source.** 2008, 290:2. 2011, 260:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2011.

### Section 142-A:3

 **142-A:3 Mosquito Control Policy for State Agencies. –**
                                             
 I. Where feasible, state agencies managing land shall promote
primary prevention by providing on-site public outreach and education
that focuses on the health risks associated with mosquitoes and the
importance of personal protection, complementing that provided by the
department. Additionally, efforts may be taken by state agencies to
promote awareness and outreach to the public prior to on-site use of
state-owned lands to increase the likelihood that personal protection
methods will be used. Outreach and education efforts may include
awareness posters, disease and prevention fact sheets, on-site posting
highlighting the nature of the threat, and disease and prevention
reminders in seasonal correspondence and on agency websites.
                                             
 II. State agencies managing land shall encourage and allow mosquito
surveillance and monitoring on their lands by state and local public
health authorities or vector control agencies or their agents using
surveillance and monitoring methods approved by the department.
                                             
 III. When surveillance or monitoring occurs on state lands, the
state agency managing land may require that the municipality or its
contracted agent contact a designated representative of the agency no
less than 72 hours prior to deploying mosquito traps and within 24 hours
of a positive result attained from such traps.
                                             
 IV. State agencies managing land are encouraged to participate in
the development and implementation of local mosquito control plans
whenever a public health threat declared by the commissioner pursuant to
RSA 141-C includes lands held by that agency.
                                             
 V. State agencies managing land shall, when reasonable, mitigate or
otherwise manage man-made and other artificial mosquito breeding sites
as part of an overall integrated pest management approach.
                                             
 VI. State agencies managing land shall allow the use of biological
control agents, specifically Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis or
Bacillus sphaericus, to control mosquito larvae in natural wetlands and
water bodies on land they administer in accordance with applicable law
and rules as long as those wetlands and water bodies are located in
municipalities or mosquito control districts where a public health
threat is declared, or has been declared within the last 3 years, by the
commissioner pursuant to RSA 141-C and when the application is to be
made under a special permit issued by the department of agriculture,
markets and food, division of pesticide control.
                                             
 VII. State agencies managing land shall allow the use of pesticides
to control adult mosquitoes, in accordance with applicable law and
rules, in areas where a public health threat has been declared by the
commissioner pursuant to RSA 141-C and the land:
                                             
 (a) Is adjacent to areas of high public use;
                                             
 (b) Has areas where topographical and other conditions result in
high adult mosquito populations;
                                             
 (c) Is located within a focal area determined by the department
to have a risk of a human outbreak of arboviral disease which warrants
the use of pesticides to control adult mosquitoes as set forth in the
arboviral illness response plan adopted by the department; and
                                             
 (d) Is managed in accordance with general integrated pest
management practices.
                                             
 VIII. If an agency disagrees with the need to control mosquitoes as
set forth in paragraph VII, the commissioner, after consultation with
the commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food and the commissioner
or executive head of the agency managing the land, shall decide whether
or not the recommended mosquito control measures shall apply to the land
in question.
                                             
 IX. For state lands located in areas where a public health threat
declaration under RSA 141-C is not in effect, but public health threat
indicators, including topographical and other key environmental
conditions, exist for mosquito breeding, and proximity to positive
mosquito pools or human or mammal positive cases of arboviral illness
support the use of larvicides as a proactive means of preventing
arboviral illness, the commissioner, after consultation with the
commissioner of agriculture, markets, and food and the commissioner or
executive head of any relevant agency with land management
responsibilities, shall decide whether or not the recommended mosquito
control measures shall apply to the land in question.
                                             
 X. As a condition to allowing mosquito control to take place, state
agencies managing land may require advanced notice of treatment to allow
enough time to visit the site and to coordinate the appropriate signage
and possible access closures to prevent unintended human exposures to
pesticides and their residues.
                                             
 XI. State agencies managing land shall have discretion to allow
chemical or biological control of adult or larval mosquitoes on state
lands solely for the purpose of nuisance control.
                                             
 XII. State agencies managing land shall require proof of current
pesticide application licensure with the state and of indemnity
insurance before allowing chemical or biological control of adult or
larval mosquitoes by a third party on state lands.
                                             
 XIII. Notwithstanding paragraphs VI through IX, if deed restrictions
on a parcel of state-owned land prohibit the use of chemical or
biological measures to control adult or larval mosquitoes, agencies with
land management responsibility shall not allow the use of such control
methods.
                                             
 XIV. State agencies managing land shall encourage the investigation
of the feasibility and appropriateness of best management practices to
manage mosquito populations in both fresh and saltwater wetlands in the
long term.

**Source.** 2008, 290:2. 2011, 260:2, eff. Sept. 11, 2011.
