---
title: 'CHAPTER 146-D OIL DISCHARGE AND DISPOSAL CLEANUP FUND'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 146-D
                                             
OIL DISCHARGE AND DISPOSAL CLEANUP FUND
---------------------------------------

### Section 146-D:1

 **146-D:1 Purpose. –** The general court finds that gasoline,
gasoline ethers and tertiary butyl alcohol (TBA), diesel fuel, heating
oil, motor oil, and used motor oil, comprise a sufficiently distinct
class of property which represents a potential serious health and safety
problem to the citizens of New Hampshire. In particular, gasoline,
gasoline ethers, TBA and diesel fuel present a potential threat to the
quality of New Hampshire's groundwater, environment and public health of
its citizens, because of the speed with which these products are able to
flow into, and contaminate, valuable groundwater supplies. In addition,
the cost of cleanup of oil discharges is a significant economic burden
for which economic assistance is otherwise not available. The purpose of
this chapter is to establish financial responsibility for the cleanup of
oil discharges and disposal, and to establish a fund to be used in
addressing the costs incurred by the owners of public and private water
supplies, oil storage facilities, and potential contamination source
properties for the prevention and cleanup of oil discharges, to protect
groundwater, and for reimbursement of third party damages.

**Source.** 2015, 142:9, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 146-D:2

 **146-D:2 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Above ground storage facility'' means a location not regulated
under RSA 146-C, consisting of a system of storage tanks, pipes, pumps,
and appurtenant structures, singly or in any combination, with a total
storage capacity less than or equal to 1,100,000 gallons, which is or
has been used for the storage of gasoline and blends, diesel fuel and
blends, or oil for on-premise-use heating.
                                             
 II. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner of the department of
environmental services.
                                             
 III. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 IV. "Motor oil storage facility'' means a location consisting of a
system of storage tanks, pipes, pumps, and appurtenant structures which
is, or has been, used for the storage of motor oil or used motor oil.
                                             
 V. "Oil'' means "oil'' as defined in RSA 146-A:2, III.
                                             
 VI. "On-premises-use facility'' means a system of storage tanks,
pipes, pumps, and appurtenant structures, singly or in any combination,
which is or has been used for the storage of fuel oil for on-premise
heating.
                                             
 VII. "Potential contamination source'' means a "potential
contamination source'' as defined in RSA 485-C:7, II.
                                             
 VIII. "Underground storage facility'' means a location consisting of
a system of underground storage tanks, pipes, pumps, vaults, fixed
containers and appurtenant structures, singly or in any combination,
which are used or designated to be used for the storage, transmission,
or dispensing of oil, and which are within the size, capacity and other
specifications prescribed by rules adopted by the commissioner pursuant
to RSA 146-C:9, VI.

**Source.** 2015, 142:9, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 146-D:3

 **146-D:3 Fund Established. –**
                                             
 I. There is established an oil discharge and disposal cleanup fund.
This fund shall be used, consistent with the provisions of this chapter,
to reimburse costs incurred in cleaning up oil discharges in the
groundwater and surface waters and soils of the state and in paying
third party damages.
                                             
 II. The fund shall also be used to pay administrative, technical and
legal support required by the oil fund disbursement board in
administering the fund, including collection of import fees under RSA
146-A:11-b.
                                             
 III. Moneys in the fund not currently needed to meet the obligations
of the board under this chapter shall be deposited with the state
treasurer to the credit of said fund and may be invested as provided by
law. Interest received on such investment shall also be credited to the
fund.

**Source.** 2015, 142:9, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 146-D:4

 **146-D:4 Oil Fund Disbursement Board Established; Membership. –**
                                             
 I. There is established the oil fund disbursement board, to be
composed of the following members:
                                             
 (a) The commissioner of environmental services, or his designee.
                                             
 (b) The commissioner of safety, or designee.
                                             
 (c) Three members representing petroleum dealers, distributors,
and refiners, appointed by the governor with the consent of the
council.
                                             
 (d) One member, representing fuel oil dealers, appointed by the
governor with the consent of the council.
                                             
 (e) Two public members, appointed by the governor with the
consent of the council.
                                             
 (f) Two members of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (g) Two members of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 II. The board members shall serve without compensation, except that
all non-legislative members shall be reimbursed for mileage incurred on
board business at the state employee mileage rate. The legislative
members shall be reimbursed for mileage at the legislative rate. Such
reimbursements shall be a charge against the oil discharge and disposal
cleanup fund established under RSA 146-D:3, I.
                                             
 III. Any member of the board having an individual interest, or an
interest in another business, which may conflict with an issue under
consideration by the board, shall not participate in any deliberations
or vote of the board on the issue before the board.
                                             
 IV. Terms for state agency and legislative members shall be the same
as their terms in office. Board members appointed under subparagraphs
I(c), I(d) and I(e), shall have 3-year terms. Upon term expiration, each
appointed member shall hold office until a successor shall be appointed
and qualified. Board members may be reappointed to subsequent terms.

**Source.** 2015, 142:9, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 146-D:5

 **146-D:5 Board Powers and Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The board shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 (a) Organization and procedural rules.
                                             
 (b) Processing applications for reimbursement from the oil
discharge and disposal cleanup fund.
                                             
 (c) Procedures for verifying reimbursement claims presented under
this chapter.
                                             
 (d) Specifying costs in relation to reimbursements claimed.
                                             
 (e) Developing eligibility criteria in addition to the
requirements of RSA 146-D:6.
                                             
 II. The board shall submit an annual report of the status of the oil
discharge and disposal cleanup fund no later than October 1, to the
governor and council, speaker of the house, president of the senate,
house environment and agriculture committee and senate environment
committee.
                                             
 III. The board, with approval of the governor and council, may
employ legal counsel as necessary to perform its duties in administering
the oil discharge and disposal cleanup fund.
                                             
 IV. The board may request that the attorney general issue subpoenas,
examine witnesses, or request any other information on behalf of the
board for the purposes of determining eligibility for reimbursement
under this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 142:9, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 146-D:6

 **146-D:6 Eligible Expenses and Availability of Funds. –**
                                             
 I. The fund shall be available for reimbursement of costs incurred
by owners of public and private water supplies due to oil contamination
from an unknown source. This may include, but not be limited to, bottled
water and interim treatment systems, a proportioned share of the costs
of construction of the extension of public water mains and
appurtenances, the installation of replacement water supply wells and
appurtenances, or the installation of water treatment processes.
Operation and maintenance costs or annual user fees for new or upgraded
public water supply main extensions or treatment processes shall not be
eligible expenses under this paragraph.
                                             
 II. The fund shall be available for reimbursement of costs for
court-ordered damages to third parties or bodily injury or property
damage due to oil contamination incurred by owners of oil storage
facilities and owners of land where compliant oil storage facilities
were located, and for the costs of on-site and off-site cleanup of oil
contamination incurred by owners of oil storage facilities, owners of
land where compliant oil storage facilities were located, and owners of
potential contamination source properties.
                                             
 III. Owners of on-premises-use facilities who have demonstrated
financial need may apply for reimbursement of costs to meet local and
department operating standards in amounts not to exceed a total of

                                             $1,500, and may apply for reimbursement of underground storage tank
abandonment or removal costs in amounts not to exceed a total of

                                             $2,500.
                                             
 IV. Reimbursement under paragraph II of this section shall be
limited as follows:
                                             
 (a) Owners of oil storage facilities and potential contamination
source properties shall demonstrate compliance with department rules and
best management practices for facility operation.
                                             
 (b) Owners of on-premises-use facilities, or owners of land where
facilities are or were located, shall be eligible for reimbursement in
amounts not to exceed a total of 
                                             $500,000, incurred on or after October
1, 1992.
                                             
 (c) Owners of above ground and underground storage facilities or
land where facilities were located shall be eligible in amounts not to
exceed a total of 
                                             $1,500,000, incurred on or after July 1, 1988. After
the initial 
                                             $1,500,000 is reimbursed, owners may apply for
reimbursement of additional onsite and off-site cleanup costs in amounts
not to exceed a total of 
                                             $500,000.
                                             
 (d) Owners of motor oil storage facilities or land where
facilities were located shall be eligible in amounts not to exceed a
total of 
                                             $500,000, incurred on or after July 1, 1995.
                                             
 (e) Owners of potential contamination source properties shall be
eligible for costs incurred on or after July 1, 2001.
                                             
 V. (a) To the extent such amount is expended from the fund, or for
such lesser amount as is expended, owners of above ground storage
facilities, motor oil storage facilities, and underground storage
facilities shall be liable to the fund for the following:
                                             
 (1) The owner of from one to 3 facilities shall be responsible
for the initial 
                                             $5,000 of costs at each facility owned.
                                             
 (2) The owner of from 4 to 9 facilities shall be responsible
for the initial 
                                             $10,000 of costs at each facility owned.
                                             
 (3) The owner of from 10 to 19 facilities shall be responsible
for the initial 
                                             $20,000 of costs at each facility owned.
                                             
 (4) The owner of 20 or more facilities shall be responsible
for the initial 
                                             $30,000 of costs at each facility owned.
                                             
 (5) The owner of land where compliant facilities were located
shall be responsible for the lesser of the initial 
                                             $5,000 of cleanup
costs at each location owned or the balance of the prior facility
owner's initial cleanup cost liability at each such location.
                                             
 (b) This amount shall not be withheld from reimbursement when the
reimbursement is disbursed from the fund over to a party other than an
owner liable under this paragraph. The board may pursue the owner in an
independent legal action, and the owner shall be liable for interest
from the date that the disbursement is made and for legal fees and costs
incurred by the fund in obtaining and enforcing judgment under this
paragraph. All amounts recovered shall be paid into the fund.
                                             
 VI. Owners of on-premises-use facilities shall be liable to the fund
for the initial 
                                             $500 of cleanup costs at each facility owned. For
owners receiving financial assistance under paragraph III, the liability
for initial cleanup costs shall be 
                                             $100.
                                             
 VII. For owners of above ground storage facilities, motor oil
storage facilities, on-premise-use facilities and underground storage
facilities, the fund shall be deemed excess insurance over any other
valid and collectible insurance for the costs of cleanup and damages to
third parties. There shall be no right of recovery against the fund for
payments made under other insurance.
                                             
 VIII. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the board shall
not be liable to any eligible party if sufficient funds are not
available to meet the limits established in this section. Reimbursement
requests received for which sufficient funds are not available at the
time of receipt shall be held pending availability of funds and shall be
reviewed in the order in which they were received, in consideration of
environmental and human health risks.
                                             
 IX. All cleanup work plans approved by the department and
reimbursement requests approved for payment by the board shall be
considered an obligation against any balance in the fund not needed to
pay administrative, technical and legal support required by the board,
including collection of import fees under RSA 146-A:11-b.
                                             
 X. Upon payment from the fund for cleanup and corrective action
costs or for third party to liability costs pursuant to this chapter,
the right of an owner to recover any payment from any third party
potentially responsible for such costs shall be assumed by the board to
the extent of payment made from the fund. An owner shall not receive
multiple compensation for the same injury, and any such compensation
shall be repaid to the fund.
                                             
 XI. Costs of new tanks and associated piping, or repairs to existing
tanks and associated piping, for oil storage facilities regulated under
RSA 146-A and RSA 146-C shall not be considered eligible costs under
this chapter.

**Source.** 2015, 142:9, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 146-D:7

 **146-D:7 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the lien provisions provided in RSA 260:63 through RSA
260:65-a.
                                             
 I-a. Where any liability to the fund under RSA 146-D is not paid as
prescribed by the oil fund disbursement board, the amount, including
interest together with the costs that may accrue in addition thereto,
shall become a lien in favor of the board upon all property and rights
to property, whether real or personal, in the same manner as that
prescribed in RSA 260:63 through RSA 260:65-a, which provisions shall
govern the board's imposition and enforcement of the lien created by
this section.
                                             
 II. Any person who misrepresents any material fact or submits any
false material statement, information, or certification to the board
shall forfeit any right to reimbursement under this chapter.
                                             
 III. Any person who recklessly or knowingly misrepresents any
material fact or who recklessly or knowingly submits any false material
statement, information, or certification to the board shall be guilty of
a class B felony if a natural person and guilty of a felony if any other
person. Notwithstanding RSA 651:2, a person may, in addition to any
sentence of imprisonment, probation, or conditional discharge, be fined
not more than 
                                             $25,000 if found guilty of any violation under this
paragraph.

**Source.** 2015, 142:9, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 146-D:8

 **146-D:8 Board Administratively Attached. –** The oil fund
disbursement board shall be administratively attached to the department
of environmental services pursuant to RSA 21-G:10.

**Source.** 2015, 142:9, eff. July 1, 2015.
