---
title: 'CHAPTER 146-B DRUG PRODUCT SELECTION'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 146-B
                                             
DRUG PRODUCT SELECTION
----------------------

### Section 146-B:1

 **146-B:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Department'' means the department of health and human services.
                                             
 II. "Established name'' has the meaning given in section 502(e)(3)
of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 352(e)(3)).
                                             
 III. "Equivalent drug product'' means a therapeutically equivalent
drug product with the same established name, active ingredient strength,
quantity and dosage form as the drug product identified in the
prescription.
                                             
 IV. "Prescriber'' means a person licensed by the state to prescribe
drug products.

**Source.** 1981, 153:1. 1983, 291:1, I. 1995, 310:101, eff. Nov. 1,
1995.

### Section 146-B:2

 **146-B:2 Drug Product Selection. –**
                                             
 I. Unless instructed otherwise by the person receiving the drug
pursuant to the prescription, a pharmacist filling a prescription for a
drug product prescribed by its trade or brand name may select an
equivalent drug product listed in "Approved Prescription Drug Products
with Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations'' as published by the United
States Department of Health and Human Services.
                                             
 II. The pharmacist shall not select an equivalent drug product if
the prescriber handwrites "medically necessary'' on the written
prescription, or when ordering a prescription orally the prescriber
specifies that the prescribed drug product is medically necessary. The
designation of medical necessity shall not be preprinted or stamped on
the prescription. This paragraph shall not preclude a reminder of the
procedure required to prohibit selection of an equivalent drug product
from being preprinted on the prescription.
                                             
 III. The pharmacist shall not select an equivalent drug product
unless its price to the purchaser is less than the price of the
prescribed drug product.
                                             
 IV. The pharmacist or the pharmacist's agent, assistant or employee
shall inform the person receiving the drug pursuant to the prescription
of the selection of a lower-cost equivalent drug product and of the
person's right to refuse the product selected.

**Source.** 1981, 153:1. 1983, 43:1, eff. June 20, 1983.

### Section 146-B:3

 **146-B:3 Posting Drug Formulary. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1983, 43:2, eff.
June 20, 1983.
                                             ]

### Section 146-B:4

 **146-B:4 Prescription Label. –** Unless the prescriber instructs
otherwise, the label for every drug product dispensed shall include the
product's trade or brand name, if any, or its established name and the
name of the manufacturer, packer or distributor, using abbreviations if
necessary.

**Source.** 1981, 153:1, eff. July 28, 1981.

### Section 146-B:5

 **146-B:5 Prescription Record. –** The pharmacy file copy of every
prescription shall include the trade or brand name, if any, and the name
of the manufacturer, and the packer or distributor, of the drug product
dispensed, and any instructions as to medical necessity as noted by the
prescriber.

**Source.** 1981, 153:1, eff. July 28, 1981.

### Section 146-B:6

 **146-B:6 Public Education. –** The department shall assess the need
for and, if appropriate, provide for public education regarding the
provisions of this chapter. From time to time, the department shall
monitor the effects of this chapter.

**Source.** 1981, 153:1. 1995, 310:175, eff. Nov. 1, 1995.

### Section 146-B:7

 **146-B:7 Pharmacist Liability. –** A pharmacist who selects an
equivalent drug product pursuant to this chapter assumes no greater
liability for selecting the dispensed drug product than would be
incurred in filling a prescription for a drug product prescribed by its
established name.

**Source.** 1981, 153:1, eff. July 28, 1981.

### Section 146-B:8

 **146-B:8 Penalty. –** Any person who violates the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1981, 153:1, eff. July 28, 1981.
