---
title: 'CHAPTER 147-D HAZARDOUS WASTE FEE'
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 147-D
                                             
HAZARDOUS WASTE FEE
-------------------

### Section 147-D:1

 **147-D:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 I-a. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 II. "Disposal'' means the discharge, deposit, incineration,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any hazardous waste
into or onto any land or water so that the hazardous waste or any
constituent of the waste may enter the environment, be emitted into the
air, or be discharged into any waters including groundwaters.
                                             
 III. "Facility'' means any location to which hazardous waste which
requires a manifest under the hazardous waste management law is
transported for treatment, storage or disposal.
                                             
 IV. "Fee'' means the fee imposed under RSA 147-D:2.
                                             
 V. "Governing body'' means the board of selectmen, city council or
board of aldermen.
                                             
 VI. "Hazardous waste'' means a solid, semi-solid, liquid or
contained gaseous waste, or any combination of these wastes:
                                             
 (a) Which, because of either quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may:
                                             
 (1) Cause or contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
                                             
 (2) Pose a present or potential threat to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise mismanaged;
                                             
 (b) Or which has been identified as a hazardous waste by the
department using the criteria established under RSA 147-A:3, I or as
listed under RSA 147-A:3, II. Such wastes include, but are not limited
to, those which are reactive, toxic, corrosive, ignitable, irritants,
strong sensitizers or which generate pressure through decomposition,
heat or other means. Such wastes do not include radioactive substances
that are regulated by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.
                                             
 VI-a. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VII. "Person'' means any individual, trust, firm, joint stock
company, corporation (including a government corporation), partnership,
association, state, municipality, commission, United States government
or any agency thereof, political subdivision of the state, or any
interstate body.
                                             
 VIII. "Storage'' means the containment of hazardous waste, either on
a permanent basis or on a temporary basis or for a period of years, in
such a manner as not to constitute disposal of the hazardous waste.
                                             
 IX. "Treatment'' means any process, including neutralization,
designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of any hazardous waste so as to neutralize the waste or to
render the waste not hazardous, safer for transport, amenable to
recovery, amenable to storage or reduced in volume.

**Source.** 1981, 521:2. 1983, 227:9, 10, 20, I; 291:1, I. 1986, 202:6,
I(e), 29, VI. 1996, 228:38, 107, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 147-D:2

 **147-D:2 Hazardous Waste Fees. –**
                                             
 I. A town may, by bylaw, levy a fee on any hazardous waste facility
located in the town.
                                             
 II. The fee may not exceed 
                                             $.007 per kilogram (
                                             $.003 per pound).
                                             
 III. The fee shall be based on the amount of hazardous waste
received by the facility for treatment, storage or disposal for the
preceding quarter. The fee shall be paid within 15 days of the end of
the last month in the quarter.

**Source.** 1981, 521:2, eff. Aug. 28, 1981.

### Section 147-D:3

 **147-D:3 Payment of Fees; Report. –**
                                             
 I. The owner of the facility shall pay all fees to the town
treasurer for the use of the town.
                                             
 II. With each fee payment, the owner of the facility shall submit a
report on the amount of hazardous waste received and stored, treated or
disposed of at the facility during the quarter for which the fee is
paid. The report shall be made on a form prepared by the department.

**Source.** 1981, 521:2. 1983, 227:10. 1986, 202:6, I(e). 1996, 228:107,
eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 147-D:4

 **147-D:4 Fee Imposed by Department. –**
                                             
 I. If the owner of a facility stores, treats or disposes of
hazardous waste but does not pay a fee required under this chapter, the
governing body of the town may request the department to report to the
town the amount of hazardous waste stored, treated or disposed of at the
facility for any quarter.
                                             
 II. The town may then notify the owner of the facility of fees due
the town and shall provide documentation from the department to support
the claim. The operator of the facility shall pay all fees due upon
receipt of this notice.

**Source.** 1981, 521:2. 1983, 227:10. 1986, 202:6, I(e). 1996, 228:107,
eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 147-D:5

 **147-D:5 Proof of Insurance. –** When locating in a town, the owner
of the facility shall show to the local governing body proof of
insurance, including, but not limited to, environmental impairment
insurance and liability insurance.

**Source.** 1981, 521:2, eff. Aug. 28, 1981.

### Section 147-D:6

 **147-D:6 Penalty. –** Any person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
who:
                                             
 I. Does not pay a fee imposed under this chapter; or
                                             
 II. Knowingly gives or causes to be given any false information in
connection with any report required to be submitted to a town under this
chapter.

**Source.** 1981, 521:2, eff. Aug. 28, 1981.
