---
title: |
    CHAPTER 149-K NEW HAMPSHIRE-MASSACHUSETTS INTERSTATE SEWAGE AND WASTE
    DISPOSAL FACILITIES COMPACT
---

TITLE X
                                             
PUBLIC HEALTH
=============

CHAPTER 149-K
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE-MASSACHUSETTS INTERSTATE SEWAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITIES COMPACT
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 149-K:1

 **149-K:1 Compact. –** The state of New Hampshire enters into the
following compact with the commonwealth of Massachusetts subject to the
terms and conditions therein stated:

Article I

**General Provisions**


                                             
 A. Statement of Policy. It is recognized that in certain cases
municipalities in New Hampshire and Massachusetts may, in order to avoid
duplication of cost and effort, and in order to take advantage of
economies of scale, find it necessary or advisable to enter into
agreements whereby joint sewage and waste disposal facilities are
erected and maintained. The states of New Hampshire and Massachusetts
recognize the value of and need for such agreements, and adopt this
compact in order to authorize their establishment.
                                             
 B. Requirement of Congressional Approval. This compact shall not
become effective until approved by the United States Congress.
                                             
 C. Definitions.
                                             
 1. "Sewage and waste disposal facilities'' shall mean
publicly-owned sewers, interceptor sewers, sewerage facilities, sewage
treatment facilities and ancillary facilities whether qualifying for
grants in aid under Title II of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
as amended, or not.
                                             
 2. "Municipalities'' shall mean cities, towns, village districts
or other incorporated units of local government possessing authority to
construct, maintain and operate sewage and waste disposal facilities and
to raise revenue therefor by bonding and taxation, which may legally
impose and collect user charges and impose and enforce pretreatment
conditions upon users of sewage and waste disposal facilities.
                                             
 3. "Water pollution agency'' shall mean the agencies within New
Hampshire and Massachusetts possessing regulating authority over the
construction, maintenance and operation of sewage and waste disposal
facilities and the administration of grants in aid from their respective
state and under the Federal Water Pollution Act, as amended, for the
construction of such facilities.
                                             
 4. "Governing body'' shall mean the legislative body of the
municipality, including in the case of a town, the town meeting, and in
the case of a city, the city council, or the board of mayor and aldermen
or any similar body in any community not inconsistent with the intent of
this definition.

Article II

**Procedures and Conditions Governing Intergovernmental Agreements**


                                             
 A. Cooperative Agreements Authorized. Any 2 or more municipalities,
one or more located in New Hampshire and one or more located in
Massachusetts, may enter into cooperative agreements for the
construction, maintenance and operation of a single sewage and waste
disposal facility serving all the municipalities who are parties
thereto.
                                             
 B. Approval of Agreements. Any agreement entered into under this
compact shall, prior to becoming effective, be approved by the water
pollution agency of each state, and shall be in a form established
jointly by said agencies of both states.
                                             
 C. Method of Adopting Agreements. Agreements hereunder shall be
adopted by the governing body of each municipality in accordance with
existing statutory procedures for the adoption of intergovernmental
agreements between municipalities within each state.
                                             
 D. Review and Approval of Plans. The water pollution agency of the
state in which any part of a sewage and waste disposal facility which is
proposed under an agreement pursuant to this compact is proposed to be
or is located is hereby authorized and required, to the extent such
authority exists under its state law, to review and approve or
disapprove all reports, designs, plans and other engineering documents
required to apply for federal grants in aid or grants in aid from said
agency's state, and to supervise and regulate the planning, design,
construction, maintenance and operation of said part of the facility.
                                             
 E. Federal Grants and Financing.
                                             
 1. Application for federal grants in aid for the planning, design
and construction of sewage and waste disposal facilities other than
sewers shall be made jointly by the agreeing municipalities, with the
amount of the grant attributable to each state's allotment to be based
upon the relative total capacity reserves allocated to the
municipalities in the respective state determined jointly by the
respective state water pollution agencies. Each municipality shall be
responsible for applying for federal grants for sewers to be located
within the municipal boundaries.
                                             
 2. Municipalities are hereby authorized to raise and appropriate
revenue for the purpose of contributing pro rata to the planning, design
and construction cost of sewage and waste disposal facilities
constructed and operated as joint facilities pursuant to this compact.
                                             
 F. Contents of Agreements. Agreements entered into pursuant to this
compact shall contain the following:
                                             
 1. A uniform system of charges for industrial users of the joint
sewage and waste disposal facilities.
                                             
 2. A uniform set of pretreatment standards for industrial users
of the joint sewage and waste disposal facilities.
                                             
 3. A provision for the pro rata sharing of operating and
maintenance costs based upon the ratio of actual flows to the plant as
measured by devices installed to gauge such flows with reasonable
accuracy.
                                             
 4. A provision establishing a procedure for the arbitration and
resolution of disputes.
                                             
 5. A provision establishing a procedure for the carriage of
liability insurance, if such insurance is necessary under the laws of
either state.
                                             
 6. A provision establishing a procedure for the modification of
the agreement.
                                             
 7. A provision establishing a procedure for the adoption of
regulations for the use, operation and maintenance of the joint
facilities.
                                             
 8. A provision setting forth the means by which the municipality
that does not own the joint sewage and waste disposal facility will pay
the other municipality its share of the maintenance and operating costs
of said facility.
                                             
 G. Nothing in this compact shall be construed to authorize the
establishment of interstate districts, authorities, or any other new
governmental or quasi-governmental entity.

Article III

**Effective Date**


                                             
 This compact shall become effective when a bill of the Massachusetts
general court which incorporates the compact becomes a law in
Massachusetts and when it is approved by the United States Congress.

**Source.** RSA 252-C:1. 1979, 31:1. 1981, 87:2, eff. April 20, 1981.
