---
title: CHAPTER 284 HORSE AND DOG RACING
---

TITLE XXIV
                                             
GAMES, AMUSEMENTS, AND ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS
===========================================

CHAPTER 284
                                             
HORSE AND DOG RACING
--------------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 284:1

 **284:1 Limitation. –** This chapter shall be construed to apply
only to running or harness horse racing, whether live or simulcast, or
simulcast dog racing.

**Source.** 1935, 27:18. RL 171:20. RSA 284:1. 1971, 541:1. 2010, 272:1,
eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 284:2

 **284:2 Racing Funds. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1997, 27:11, I, eff. June 24,
1997.
                                             ]

### Section 284:3

 **284:3 Employees. –** At least 70 percent of the persons employed
by a person, association, or corporation conducting a racing plant or
simulcasting under the provisions hereof shall have resided in this
state for a period of not less than one year. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to the construction of a racing plant or its
equipment.

**Source.** 1935, 27:21. RL 171:23. 2009, 144:97, eff. July 1, 2009.

### Section 284:4

 **284:4 Member of the General Court. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1997, 50:1, eff.
July 18, 1997.
                                             ]

### Section 284:5

 **284:5 Enforcement of Chapter. –** It shall be the duty of the
attorney general with the aid of the county attorneys of the several
counties to enforce the provisions of this chapter upon notification
from the commission of any violations thereof.

**Source.** 1935, 27:26. RL 171:29.

Racing and Charitable Gaming
----------------------------

### Section 284:6

 **284:6 Established. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1982, 42:139, eff. June 29,
1982.
                                             ]

### Section 284:6-a

 **284:6-a Racing and Charitable Gaming; Lottery Commission. –**
                                             
 I. The regulation of racing and charitable gaming shall be under the
authority of the lottery commission established under RSA 284:21-a.
                                             
 II. The lottery commission shall assume the powers, rights, duties,
and responsibilities granted to the racing and charitable gaming
commission The lottery commission shall, in carrying out the purpose of
this chapter, use the applicable provisions for horse racing independent
of the applicable provisions for simulcast dog racing.
                                             
 III. The lottery commission shall have all the powers, duties, and
rights conferred upon state commissions under the United States
Interstate Horseracing Act of 1978 as it currently exists and as it may
be amended from time to time.
                                             
 IV. The lottery commission shall administer RSA 287-E relating to
bingo and lucky 7.


                                             [Paragraph IV-a effective September 14, 2016.
                                             ]


                                             
 IV-a. The lottery commission shall include a summary in its annual
report under RSA 284:11 regarding the financial impact of shared
carry-over coverall games to participating charities and the state, and
any recommendations it has regarding the continuation of shared
carry-over coverall games in New Hampshire.
                                             
 V. The lottery commission shall administer RSA 287-D, relating to
games of chance conducted by charitable organizations.
                                             
 VI. The lottery commission shall not authorize the use of any
electronic gaming device in connection with the acceptance of wagers on
running or harness horse racing, whether live or simulcast, or simulcast
dog racing, the type of which was not in use prior to January 1, 2011,
unless specific authorization for such electronic gaming device is
enacted by the general court. Electronic gaming devices shall mean and
include all electro-mechanical instruments and devices used for the
purposes of gaming, other than wagering on live or simulcast horse
racing or simulcast dog racing, whether in physical presence or through
the Internet, and such shall include, but not be limited to, video slot
machines and other gambling devices which function or are designed to
function to emulate a video slot machine or historic racing machine.
This section shall not be interpreted to prohibit licensees under RSA
284 from replacing equipment used in the conduct of wagering on live or
simulcast horse racing or simulcast dog racing, which type of equipment
was in service prior to January 1, 2011, with updated or new equipment
which are the functional equivalent of the machines which are being
replaced, provided the equipment is not an electronic gaming device as
described in the previous sentence. This section shall not be
interpreted as prohibiting licensees from accepting account wagers in
compliance with applicable rules and regulations.

**Source.** 1971, 541:18. 1982, 42:140. 1985, 58:1. 1991, 68:5. 1996,
157:2. 2004, 257:3. 2006, 311:2. 2007, 156:9. 2008, 25:1. 2010, 272:2.
2011, 259:25. 2015, 276:121, eff. July 1, 2015. 2016, 10:3, eff. Sept.
14, 2016.

### Section 284:6-b

 **284:6-b Games for Charity Study Commission. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2014,
329:5, eff. Dec. 15, 2015.
                                             ]

### Section 284:7

 **284:7 Office. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2015, 276:136, I, eff. July 1,
2015.
                                             ]

### Section 284:8

 **284:8 Assistants. –** The lottery commission is authorized to
employ such assistants and employees as it may deem necessary to provide
adequate policing and to carry out the purposes hereof at such
compensation per racing program as the lottery commission may prescribe,
subject to the regulations of the state personnel commission. The
lottery commission shall specify the duties to be performed by its
assistants and employees and it shall have authority, for cause, to
terminate the employment of any member of its personnel, subject to the
regulations of the state personnel commission. It shall be unlawful,
however, for the lottery commission to appoint to any position under its
jurisdiction any state, county, city, or town official or employee,
except police officers and public school teachers, whose total annual
salary or compensation from said state, county, city, or town exceeds

                                             $1,000.

**Source.** 1933, 62. 1935, 27:4. RL 171:4. 1947, 280:1. 1950, 9:1. RSA
284:8. 1975, 495:2. 1977, 235:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:9

 **284:9 Expenses. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2015, 276:136, II, eff. July 1,
2015.
                                             ]

### Section 284:10

 **284:10 Disbursements. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1997, 27:11, II, eff. June
24, 1997.
                                             ]

### Section 284:11

 **284:11 Report of the Commission. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2015, 276:136,
III, eff. July 1, 2015.
                                             ]

### Section 284:12

 **284:12 Rulemaking. –** The lottery commission shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Holding running or harness horse races or meets for public
exhibition.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 III. The operation of racetracks on which running or harness horse
race meets are held and the facilities where simulcast of running or
harness horse racing or dog racing are presented.
                                             
 IV. The sale of pari-mutuel pools as authorized under RSA 284:22 and
RSA 284:22-a.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. Rules of racing for running and harness horse races or meets as
provided in RSA 284:19.
                                             
 VII. Sanctions and penalties imposed on the trainer of record
provided in RSA 284:38-a.
                                             
 VIII. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 IX. Rules for bingo and lucky 7 as authorized under RSA 287-E.
                                             
 X. Rules for games of chance conducted by charitable organizations
under RSA 287-D.
                                             
 XI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1933, 62. 1935, 27:8. RL 171:8. 1947, 280:3. 1949, 226:2.
RSA 284:12. 1971, 498:1. 1985, 58:2. 1991, 68:4. 2004, 59:5; 257:4;
261:2. 2006, 311:3. 2008, 25:1. 2009, 144:98. 2010, 272:3, 21, I-III.
2011, 259:24. 2014, 329:3. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:12-a

 **284:12-a License Required; Investigation Fees. –**
                                             
 I. No person, association, corporation, or any other type of entity
shall hold any live running or harness race or meet, or shall conduct
any simulcast running or harness horse or dog race or meet, at which
pari-mutuel pools are sold without a license from the lottery
commission.
                                             
 II. Investigation fees shall be collected by the lottery commission
and shall be continually appropriated to the lottery commission and used
by the lottery commission to offset the costs of conducting background
checks and monitoring of license applicants and licensees as required
under this section, RSA 284:16, RSA 284:16-a, RSA 284:19, RSA 284:20,
RSA 284:22, and RSA 284:22-a. Funds received hereunder and not expended
for such investigations shall lapse to the special fund established in
RSA 284:21-j 2 years after receipt of such funds.

**Source.** 1971, 541:3. 1985, 58:3. 2006, 287:1. 2009, 144:99. 2010,
272:4. 2013, 264:6. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:13

 **284:13 Supervision and Hearings. –**
                                             
 I. The lottery commission shall have the power to conduct hearings
at which all matters pertaining to the administration of the affairs of
the commission and all activities conducted under its jurisdiction may
be investigated and determined and, under the hand of its chairperson,
to issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses at such hearings. The
lottery commission on its own motion or at the request of any party may
cause a complete record to be made of such hearings by a competent
reporter or by electronic recording which shall be transcribed at the
request and expense of any party desiring the same, and a copy of such
transcription shall be furnished to any other party upon the written
request and at the expense of such other party. If the record is not
transcribed, the lottery commission shall prepare a summary record of
the proceedings and evidence. Any member of the lottery commission, or
the commission's designee, may administer oaths and affirmations,
examine witnesses, and receive testimony and shall forward findings to
the full commission as part of the hearing. Disobedience of such
subpoenas or false swearing before the lottery commission shall be
attended with the same penalties as if such disobedience or false
swearing occurred in an action in the superior court. The lottery
commission shall have the power and authority to regulate, supervise and
check the making of pari-mutuel pools and the distributions therefrom.
It shall have the further power and authority to investigate as to the
direct and indirect ownership and control of any licensee, and any
expense incurred by the lottery commission in so doing shall be at the
expense of such licensee or of the applicant for a license. Any party
aggrieved by any final decision entered in proceedings before the
lottery commission may, within 10 days after such decision is entered,
appeal to the superior court by petition specifying the grounds upon
which the decision is claimed to be unreasonable or unlawful. Findings
and decisions by the lottery commission shall be deemed to be prima
facie lawful and reasonable, and shall not be set aside on appeal unless
found to be arbitrary, capricious, unreasonable, or unlawful.
                                             
 II. The lottery commission may, in accordance with the rules adopted
in accordance with RSA 541-A, appoint a hearings officer or hearings
officers, as necessary, to preside over such hearings as are required to
comply with federal and state statutes and federal or state rules or
regulations. The decision of the officer shall not be contrary to rules
adopted by the lottery commission pursuant to RSA 541-A. The officer's
decision shall be binding on all parties unless such decision is
overturned on appeal.

**Source.** 1933, 62. 1935, 27:22. RL 171:25. 1949, 226:8. RSA 284:13.
1975, 263:1. 1996, 157:4. 2015, 276:122, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:13-a

 **284:13-a Temporary Stay Orders. –**
                                             
 I. The lottery commission may issue a temporary stay order to stay
any ruling or penalty which would be incurred by the appellant if the
ruling, order, or decision of the judges is allowed to stand prior to a
decision in such matter by the lottery commission. The granting of a
temporary stay order by the lottery commission shall carry no
presumption that the decision of the judges is or may be invalid. The
lottery commission may dissolve a temporary stay order at any time.
                                             
 II. A bond of 
                                             $100 shall be filed with the lottery commission
before consideration shall be given to granting a stay. The bond shall
be forfeited if the lottery commission considers the appeal frivolous.
If the lottery commission does not find the appeal to be frivolous, then
the bond filed with the lottery commission shall be returned to the
appellant within a reasonable time.

**Source.** 1986, 164:3. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:14

 **284:14 Breeding of Horses. –** The lottery commission shall
encourage and promote the improvement of the breed of horses in New
Hampshire. It may accept donations of thoroughbred, standardbred, or
other well-bred stallions by licensees or others to the state for this
purpose. It may cooperate with and aid the officials of the University
of New Hampshire in furthering this program.

**Source.** 1933, 62. 1935, 27:23. RL 171:26. 2015, 276:127, eff. July
1, 2015.

### Section 284:14-a

 **284:14-a Breeding of Greyhounds. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 272:21, IV,
eff. Jan. 1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 284:14-b

 **284:14-b Public Greyhound Racing Kennels 
                                             [Omitted.
                                             ] –**

### Section 284:14-c

 **284:14-c Records of Greyhound Disposition. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010,
272:20, II, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.
                                             ]

### Section 284:14-d

 **284:14-d Records of Greyhound Injuries. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010,
272:20, I, eff. Jan. 1, 2015.
                                             ]

Licenses and Supervision
------------------------

### Section 284:15

 **284:15 License. –**
                                             
 I. Any person, association, or corporation desiring to hold or
simulcast a running or harness horse race or meet for public exhibition,
at or for which pari-mutuel pools are to be sold, shall apply to said
lottery commission for a license to do so. The application shall be
signed and sworn to by the person or executive officer of the
association or corporation and shall contain the following information:
                                             
 (a) The full name and address of the person, association, or
corporation.
                                             
 (b) If an association, the names and residences of the members of
the association.
                                             
 (c) If a corporation, the name of the state under which it is
incorporated with its principal place of business and the names and
addresses of its directors and stockholders.
                                             
 (d) The exact location where it is desired to conduct or hold
races or race meets.
                                             
 (e) Whether or not the racing plant is owned or leased, and if
leased, the name and residence of the fee owner, or if a corporation, of
the directors and stockholders thereof.
                                             
 (f) A statement of the assets and liabilities of the person,
association, or corporation making such application.
                                             
 (g) Such other information as the lottery commission may
require.
                                             
 II. It shall be the responsibility of any license applicant or
holder to inform the lottery commission immediately of any material
change or anticipated material change in the information required in
this section.
                                             
 III. The lottery commission shall have the power to require, at the
applicant's or holder's expense, that any financial information provided
under paragraphs I and II be verified by an audit performed by a
certified public accountant. The lottery commission shall have the
further power to require that as a condition of securing a license or of
continuing to hold a license the license applicant or holder make
available its books and records so as to permit the lottery commission
to perform such independent auditing or financial analysis as the
lottery commission may deem necessary. In so doing, the lottery
commission may employ certified public accountants and any other
financial analysts or investigators necessary to perform said auditing
and may bill the license applicant or holder for all costs associated
with the auditing.

**Source.** 1935, 27:10. RL 171:10. 1949, 226:4. RSA 284:15. 1977, 28:1.
2006, 287:2. 2009, 144:100. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:15-a

 **284:15-a Requirements for License to Simulcast Dog Racing. –**
                                             
 I. Subject to the provisions of RSA 284:15-a, V and VI, any person,
association, or corporation desiring to simulcast a dog race at or for
which pari-mutuel pools are sold, shall apply to the lottery commission
for a license to do so. The application shall be signed and sworn to by
the person or executive officer of the association or corporation and
shall contain the following information:
                                             
 (a) The full name and address of the person, association, or
corporation.
                                             
 (b) If an association, the names and residences of the members of
the association.
                                             
 (c) If a corporation, the name of the state under which it is
incorporated with its principal place of business and the names and
addresses of its directors and stockholders.
                                             
 (d) The location of the facility where it desires to conduct
simulcast dog racing, provided, however, the location of such facility
must be a place at which live dog racing was conducted in 2008 and the
operator of such facility was licensed by the lottery commission in 2010
to accept pari-mutuel wagers on simulcast races pursuant to RSA
284:22-a.
                                             
 (e) Whether or not the facility is owned or leased, and if
leased, the name and residence of the fee owner, or if a corporation, of
the directors and stockholders thereof.
                                             
 (f) A statement of the assets and liabilities of the person,
association, or corporation making such application.
                                             
 (g) Such other information as the lottery commission may
require.
                                             
 II. It shall be the responsibility of any license applicant or
holder to inform the lottery commission immediately of any material
change or anticipated material change in the information required in
this section.
                                             
 III. The lottery commission shall have the power to require, at the
applicant's or holder's expense, that any financial information provided
under paragraphs I and II be verified by an audit performed by a
certified public accountant. The lottery commission shall have the
further power to require that as a condition of securing a license or of
continuing to hold a license the license applicant or holder make
available its books and records to permit the lottery commission to
perform such independent auditing or financial analysis as the lottery
commission may deem necessary. In so doing, the lottery commission may
employ certified public accountants and any other financial analysts or
investigators necessary to perform auditing and may bill the license
applicant or holder for all costs associated with the auditing.
                                             
 IV. A person, association, or corporation which is issued a license
pursuant to RSA 284:16-a may, with the approval of the lottery
commission, accept wagers on simulcast running or harness horse racing.
                                             
 V. A person, association, or corporation which is issued a license
pursuant to RSA 284:16 may, with the approval of the lottery commission,
accept wagers on simulcast dog racing.
                                             
 VI. In the event that a simulcast signal of dog racing is
unavailable for an applicant under this section for any reason or cause,
such applicant may apply for a license to simulcast horse racing only
under this section and the lottery commission may issue such a license
under RSA 284:16-a allowing the applicant to simulcast horse racing
only.

**Source.** 1971, 541:5. 1995, 130:5. 2009, 144:101. 2010, 272:5. 2015,
276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:15-b

 **284:15-b Disclosure of Information; Expenses of Investigations.
–**
                                             
 I. Any person, association, corporation, or any other type of entity
applying for or holding a license issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall file annually, not later than December 31, with the
attorney general a complete and detailed written statement, signed under
oath, by the applicant or holder of such license, if an individual, or
by the officers of the applicant or holder, if a corporation or an
association, containing the following information:
                                             
 (a) The name, residence address, and nature of the ownership
interest, including where applicable the number of shares of stock held
and, if known, how obtained, of every person who possesses an ownership
interest in such license applicant or holder;
                                             
 (b) The name, address, present principal occupation or
employment, and the name and principal business of any corporation or
other organization in which such employment is carried on of every
director, officer, and holder of 10 percent or more ownership interest
in such license applicant or holder;
                                             
 (c) The name and all information which a license applicant or
holder has or might reasonably be expected to have as to any felony
convictions of any officer, director, or holder of an ownership interest
of any degree; provided, that if the license applicant or holder is an
association or corporation in which 25 or fewer individuals or
organizations hold an ownership interest or stock, then the information
required by subparagraphs (a) and (b) shall be provided by each such
interest holder or stockholder, who shall be further required to submit
a detailed statement of assets and liabilities on forms prescribed by
the attorney general; and
                                             
 (d) Such information as the commissioner may prescribe by rule or
rejection.
                                             
 II. The attorney general shall have the authority to conduct an
investigation on the attorney general's motion into the background of
the license applicant or holder, of any person included in paragraph I
or of any person or entity upon whom the license applicant or holder
relies for financial support. In addition, whenever the lottery
commission shall receive an application, it shall refer the application
to the attorney general who shall conduct such an investigation. The
investigation may be conducted through any appropriate state or federal
law enforcement system and may seek information as to the subject's
financial, criminal or business background, or any other information
which the attorney general, in the attorney general's sole discretion,
may find to bear on the subject's fitness to be associated with racing
in New Hampshire, including, but not limited to, the subject's
character, personal associations, and the extent to which the subject is
properly doing business in the manner in which it purports to operate.
When the lottery commission requests such an investigation, the attorney
general shall report the results of such investigation to the lottery
commission within 90 days after the receipt of the request.
Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the results of any such
investigation shall be confidential and shall not be subject to
disclosure or to public inspection, except that the attorney general
shall have sole discretion to determine the extent to which and the
manner in which the results may be reported to the lottery commission or
other state agency or official and, if reported, whether such results
are to retain their confidential character; provided, however, that
whenever the attorney general conducts such an investigation, the
attorney general shall notify the lottery commission whether or not in
the attorney general's opinion such person is fit to be associated with
racing in New Hampshire. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no
person shall be issued or hold a license if in the opinion of the
attorney general such person is not fit to be associated with racing in
this state.
                                             
 III. The expenses of the lottery commission and the office of
attorney general in conducting any investigation authorized in this
section, including the services of consultants, experts, accountants,
and other assistants, shall be a direct charge against the applicant or
holder. Total expenses under this paragraph shall not exceed 
                                             $50,000,
except with the approval of the fiscal committee of the general court.
                                             
 IV. In any investigation conducted pursuant to paragraph II, the
attorney general or any duly authorized justice department staff member
may require, by subpoena or otherwise, the attendance of witnesses and
the production of such correspondence, documents, books, and papers as
the attorney general or staff member deems advisable, and for purposes
of this section, may administer oaths and take the testimony of
witnesses. No person shall be excused from testifying or from producing
any book or paper in any investigation conducted pursuant to paragraph
II upon the ground that such testimony or documentary evidence might
tend to incriminate such person; provided that if, after a claim of
privilege, the attorney general, in writing, orders such person to
testify or produce documentary evidence, that person shall not be
prosecuted, punished, or subjected to any penalty or forfeiture for or
on account of any act, transaction, matter, or thing which such person,
under oath, disclosed or produced. No person so testifying shall be
exempt from prosecution or punishment for any perjury committed by such
person in such testimony.

**Source.** 1971, 541:22. 1972, 32:2. 1977, 28:2. 1981, 570:6, 7. 1996,
157:5. 2006, 287:3. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:15-c

 **284:15-c Local Option. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 272:21, V, eff. Jan.
1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 284:15-d

 **284:15-d Penalties. –** Any person who individually or as an
officer of a corporation or association knowingly conceals or assists in
the concealment, or fails to disclose, information required to be
provided as specified in RSA 284:15-b shall be fined not more than

                                             $5,000, or imprisoned for not more than one year or both.

**Source.** 1972, 32:1, eff. May 16, 1972.

### Section 284:16

 **284:16 Issuance of Licenses. –** If the lottery commission is
satisfied that all the provisions hereof and the rules and regulations
prescribed have been and will be complied with by the applicant and that
the financial backing upon which said application is predicated is sound
and is committed in support of said application, it may issue a license
which shall expire on the thirty-first day of December. The license
shall set forth the name of the licensee, the place where the races or
race meets or simulcastings are to be held, and the time and number of
days during which racing or simulcasting may be conducted by said
licensee. Any license issued shall not be transferable nor assignable.
Said lottery commission shall have power to revoke any license for good
cause upon reasonable notice and hearing. The lottery commission may at
any time for cause require the removal of any employee or official
employed by any licensee hereunder. The license of any corporation shall
automatically cease upon the change in ownership, legal or equitable, of
50 percent or more of the voting stock of the corporation and the
corporation shall not hold a running or harness horse race or meet for
public exhibition without a new license.

**Source.** 1935, 27:11. RL 171:11. 1947, 280:2. RSA 284:16. 1977, 28:3.
2009, 144:102. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:16-a

 **284:16-a Issuance of Licenses. –** If the lottery commission is
satisfied that all the provisions hereof and the rules and regulations
prescribed have been and will be complied with by the applicant and that
the financial backing upon which said application is predicated is sound
and is committed in support of said application, it may issue a license
which shall expire on the thirty-first day of December. The license
shall set forth the name of the licensee, the place where the simulcast
races or race meets are to be held, and the time and number of days
during which simulcast racing may be conducted by said licensee. Any
license issued shall not be transferable nor assignable. Said lottery
commission shall have power to revoke any license for good cause upon
reasonable notice and hearing. The lottery commission may at any time
for cause require the removal of any employee or official employed by
any licensee hereunder. The license of any corporation shall
automatically cease upon the change in ownership, legal or equitable, of
50 percent or more of the voting stock of the corporation and the
corporation shall not simulcast any racing without a new license.

**Source.** 1971, 541:7. 1977, 28:4. 1995, 130:5. 2004, 59:1. 2009,
144:103. 2010, 272:6. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:16-b

 **284:16-b Condition of Licensee. –**
                                             
 I. The lottery commission shall monitor the condition of its
licensees on a continuing basis and shall have the power to revoke,
after hearing, any license if in its judgment the condition of the
holder thereof does not warrant a continuation of said license, or, in
lieu of revocation, to impose such conditions upon the continued
possession of the license as the lottery commission deems reasonably
necessary.
                                             
 II. The lottery commission, after conducting a hearing, may require
a licensee to divest itself of any partner, person, sub-corporation,
shareholder, or any other entity of the licensee if the lottery
commission determines that any partner, person, sub-corporation,
shareholder, or any other entity of the licensee is not fit to be
associated with racing in this state.
                                             
 III. The licensee shall notify the lottery commission of any change
of, or transfer of any of the owners of the voting stock or other voting
interest, if the licensee is privately held. In the case of a
publicly-traded entity holding the license, the lottery commission shall
be notified of any changes to the board of directors, or when more than
10 percent of the publicly-held shares or other voting interest are
closely held by one entity. The licensee shall provide such notice to
the lottery commission in writing within 10 days of the occurrence of
any such event. On receipt of such notice, the lottery commission shall
assess whether the change in ownership affects the licensee's
qualifications for continued licensure.

**Source.** 1977, 28:5. 2006, 287:4. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:16-c

 **284:16-c License Restricted. –** Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, the lottery commission shall not issue a license
pursuant to RSA 284:16-a to any applicant if the place where the
simulcast dog races are to be presented is within a radius of 40 miles
of Belmont, Salem, or Seabrook, New Hampshire, provided that the
facilities at which simulcast dog racing was licensed by the lottery
commission are exempt from this restriction.

**Source.** 1981, 570:4. 2010, 272:7. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:17

 **284:17 Restriction on. –** On and after June 1, 1947, no license
shall be issued by the lottery commission under the provisions hereof
for holding a race meet in any town unless and until the town at an
annual or special meeting called for the purpose has by majority vote
approved of the issuance of said license in said town. Provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed or apply to
the issuances of licenses by the lottery commission in towns where
licensed race meets have heretofore been held under the provisions of
this chapter.

**Source.** 1947, 155:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:17-a

 **284:17-a Restriction on Sunday Racing. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010,
272:21, VI, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 284:17-b

 **284:17-b Sunday Races. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1986, 164:2, eff. May 28,
1986.
                                             ]

### Section 284:17-c

 **284:17-c Restriction on Gambling. –** Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, except as provided in RSA 284:22-a and in the
introductory paragraph of RSA 284:22, no licensee who holds running
horse races shall at the same facility hold any other kinds of races or
permit any other type of gambling except harness horse races and
activities licensed by the lottery commission.

**Source.** 1981, 570:3. 1985, 58:4. 1987, 69:1, I. 1991, 68:3. 2004,
97:8. 2006, 156:1. 2008, 25:1. 2015, 276:123, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:18

 **284:18 Bond of Licensee. –**
                                             
 I. Every person, association, or corporation licensed under the
provisions of the preceding sections hereof, shall, before said license
is issued, give a bond to the state in such reasonable sum not exceeding

                                             $300,000, as may be fixed by the lottery commission, with a surety or
sureties to be approved by the lottery commission, conditioned to
faithfully make the payments prescribed hereby, including the payment of
unclaimed ticket money and vouchers and the compensation of stewards,
veterinarians, or judges employed by the state of New Hampshire at any
race or meet and that such reimbursement shall include the employer's
share of old age survivors insurance (OASI) taxes, and to keep its books
and records and make reports as herein provided and to conduct its
racing in conformity with this chapter and with the rules and
regulations prescribed by the lottery commission.
                                             
 II. Every person, association, or corporation licensed under the
provisions of the preceding sections hereof, shall, before said licensee
adopts an account wagering plan on any pari-mutuel pool, give a bond to
the state in such reasonable sum not exceeding 
                                             $300,000, as may be
fixed by the lottery commission, with a surety or sureties to be
approved by the lottery commission, conditioned to faithfully make the
payments prescribed hereby.

**Source.** 1935, 27:12. RL 171:12. 1949, 226:5. RSA 284:18. 1977, 28:6.
1982, 42:145. 2010, 190:2. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:18-a

 **284:18-a Rules of Racing. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 272:21, VII, eff.
Jan. 1, 2011.
                                             ]

### Section 284:19

 **284:19 Rules of Racing. –** The lottery commission shall have the
power to make and adopt rules of racing including rules providing for
the licensing, supervising, disciplining, suspending, fining and barring
from racing, on any tracks under the jurisdiction of the lottery
commission, of horses, owners, breeders, authorized agents, sub-agents,
nominators, trainers, jockeys, jockey apprentices, jockey agents, and
any other persons, organizations, associations, or corporations, the
activities of whom affect the conduct and operation of running or
harness horse races at racetracks under the jurisdiction of the lottery
commission. At such tracks no person shall enter a horse or participate
in any running or harness horse race or meet as an owner, agent,
nominator, trainer, jockey, jockey apprentice, or jockey agent within
the state without having first procured from the lottery commission a
license so to act, and paying such fees as the lottery commission may
determine to be reasonable and proper. The lottery commission, for
proper cause, may issue a temporary license for a period not to exceed
10 days to any person to enable such person on behalf of an owner who is
not present in this state to enter a horse or so participate in any
running or harness horse race or meet. Such licenses may be revoked by
the lottery commission at any time for cause.

**Source.** 1949, 226:6, par. 12-a. RSA 284:19. 1975, 140:1. 1996,
157:6. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:19-a

 **284:19-a Prohibition. –** No person, association, or corporation
shall knowingly employ in any capacity at race tracks under the
jurisdiction of the commission any person who has been convicted of
violating any state or federal law relative to gambling within a period
of 10 years prior to the application for employment. Whoever knowingly
violates any of the provisions of this section shall, if a natural
person, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any other person shall be guilty
of a felony.

**Source.** 1967, 293:1. 1973, 528:180, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

### Section 284:20

 **284:20 Stewards. –** There shall be at least 3 stewards to
supervise each running or harness horse race or meet, conducted under
the provisions of this chapter, at which pari-mutuel pools are sold. One
of such stewards shall be the official steward of the lottery
commission, and the remaining stewards shall be appointed by the person,
association, corporation, or any other type of entity conducting the
race or meet, subject to the approval of the lottery commission. Said
stewards shall be authorized to assess fines and suspend licenses and
shall exercise such other powers and perform such duties at each race
meet as may be prescribed by the rules and regulations of the lottery
commission. Any person who has been assessed a fine or whose license has
been suspended may appeal any fine or suspension imposed by the stewards
under this section to the lottery commission.

**Source.** 1949, 226:6 par. 12-b. 2006, 287:5. 2015, 276:124, 127, eff.
July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:20-a

 **284:20-a Rights Protected. –** No licensee conducting a race or
meet under this chapter, no member of the lottery commission, no
steward, judge, or assistant official appointed to act as such pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for damages to any
person, association or corporation for any cause whatsoever arising out
of or from the performance by such licensee, commissioner, steward,
judge or assistant official of such person's duties and exercise of
discretion with respect to such duties, so long as such person acted in
good faith, without malice or improper motive.

**Source.** 1969, 265:1. 1996, 157:7. 2015, 276:125, 127, eff. July 1,
2015.

### Section 284:20-b

 **284:20-b Judges. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2010, 272:21, VIII, eff. Jan. 1,
2011.
                                             ]

### Section 284:20-c

 **284:20-c Veterinarians Appointed. –** There shall be a
veterinarian appointed by the lottery commission at each race or meet
conducted under the provisions of this chapter at which pari-mutuel
pools are sold. The governor and council shall approve a rate per
performance to be paid to such veterinarians. Said veterinarians shall
not be eligible for state fringe benefits. Veterinarians appointed under
this section shall exercise such powers and perform such duties at each
race or meet as may be prescribed by the rules of the lottery
commission.

**Source.** 1982, 42:144. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:20-d

 **284:20-d Compensation of Stewards, Judges, and Veterinarians. –**
Compensation of the lottery commission veterinarian, and of the official
state steward or associate judges of the lottery commission shall be
reimbursed to the state by the person, association, corporation, or any
other type of entity conducting the race or meet, and such reimbursement
shall include the employer's share of OASI taxes. The lottery commission
may establish the salaries of the state steward and associate judges.
Payments to the state required under this section shall be made no later
than 30 calendar days after receipt of billing from the lottery
commission. Failure to make payments in the time prescribed shall
subject the licensee to a civil forfeiture of up to 
                                             $50 for each day
the payments are overdue, at the discretion of the lottery commission.

**Source.** 1982, 42:144. 1990, 259:1. 2006, 287:7. 2008, 25:1. 2015,
276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:20-e

 **284:20-e Payment for Laboratory Testing. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2007,
263:166, eff. April 1, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 284:20-f

 **284:20-f Background and Criminal Records Check. –**
                                             
 I. Each applicant for a license pursuant to this chapter and rules
adopted by the lottery commission shall submit to the lottery commission
with his or her license application a background and criminal record
release authorization form provided or approved by the lottery
commission.
                                             
 II. Upon receipt of an applicant's background and criminal record
information, the lottery commission shall make a determination of
eligibility for licensure.

**Source.** 2006, 287:8. 2008, 25:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:20-g

 **284:20-g Contracting and Payment for Laboratory Testing. –**
                                             
 I. Beginning April 1, 2008, the lottery commission shall contract
with a qualified laboratory to provide laboratory testing services for
the lottery commission on horses that perform live at racetracks
authorized to conduct live racing in the state. The lottery commission
shall issue a request for proposals for such services that sets forth
the terms and conditions of the proposed service contract, including the
requirements of this section, laboratory qualifications, cost per test,
and such other information determined to be relevant by the lottery
commission. The lottery commission shall present the contract to the
attorney general for review and, upon approval by the attorney general,
the proposal shall be submitted to the governor and council for
approval. The contract shall expire no later than June 30 of the second
year of a biennium. Such laboratory test service agreement shall provide
that the laboratory shall send each licensee an invoice for such testing
in accordance with paragraph III.
                                             
 II. The total cost of any contract under this section shall not
exceed 
                                             $300,000 annually. In the event that the aggregate cost of
testing exceeds 
                                             $300,000 based solely upon an increase in live racing
within the state, the lottery commission may request an increase in the
maximum contract amount from the governor and council.
                                             
 III. Each licensee shall pay the laboratory for the cost of each
laboratory test conducted pursuant to the laboratory test service
contract on the horse that performed live at the licensee's track. The
laboratory shall provide the licensee with an invoice for such costs
within 10 days after the end of each month in which the licensee
conducts live racing and the licensee shall pay the invoice within 30
days after receipt of that invoice. Each invoice shall specify the
number of tests conducted during the prior month, the identity of the
animal tested, the results of each test, and the cost of each test.

**Source.** 2007, 263:165. 2008, 25:1. 2010, 272:8. 2015, 276:127, eff.
July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:21

 **284:21 Penalty. –** Except in cases when another penalty is
provided in this chapter, any person, association, or corporation
holding or conducting, or any person or persons aiding or abetting in
the holding or conducting, of any running or harness horse race, whether
live or simulcast, or simulcast dog race or meet for public exhibition,
at which pari-mutuel pools are sold, without a license duly issued by
the lottery commission, or any person, association, or corporation who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or who violates any of
the rules and regulations prescribed by the lottery commission, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if
any other person.

**Source.** 1935, 27:13. RL 171:13. 1949, 226:7. RSA 284:21. 1971,
541:6. 1973, 528:181. 2010, 272:9. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

Lottery
-------

### Section 284:21-a

 **284:21-a State Lottery Commission. –** There shall be and hereby
is created a state lottery commission consisting of 3 members who shall
be appointed and may be removed for cause by the governor with the
advice and consent of the council. One member shall be appointed for one
year, one for 2 years and one for 3 years, and upon the expiration of
their terms of office their successors shall be appointed for a term of
3 years. Any vacancy shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired
term. No member of the commission shall have any pecuniary or other
interest in any supplier or agent to the commission or in any licensee
licensed under the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1963, 52:1. 1985, 295:4. 2004, 97:8; 257:6. 2007, 156:10,
eff. Aug. 17, 2007.

### Section 284:21-b

 **284:21-b Organization. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioners shall select one from their number to be
chairperson and another to be secretary of the commission. Two of the
members of the commission shall constitute a quorum to do business. It
shall be the duty of the secretary to keep a record of all proceedings
of the commission and to preserve all books, documents, papers and
records addressed to its care.
                                             
 II. The commissioners shall appoint an executive director who shall
receive the annual salary prescribed by RSA 94:1-a. The lottery
executive director shall hold office for a term of 4 years. If a vacancy
shall occur, it shall be filled for the remainder of the term. The
lottery executive director may be removed by the commission for cause.
Upon the effective date of this paragraph, the person who was the
executive director shall commence the beginning of the first 4-year
term, subject to renewal.

**Source.** 1963, 52:1. 1996, 157:8. 2015, 276:196, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:21-c

 **284:21-c Bond. –** Members of the commission shall give bond to
the state in such amount as shall be determined under the provisions of
RSA 93-B.

**Source.** 1963, 52:1; 200:2. 2007, 112:2, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 284:21-d

 **284:21-d Compensation. –** Each member of the commission shall
receive a salary in accordance with RSA 94:1-a, II and shall be allowed
reasonable expenses, including transportation, incurred in the
performance of the member's duties.

**Source.** 1963, 52:1. 1996, 157:9. 2007, 112:1, eff. Aug. 10, 2007.

### Section 284:21-e

 **284:21-e Office. –** The commission shall have an office in
Concord or in a municipality that borders Concord.

**Source.** 1963, 52:1. 2007, 292:1, eff. Sept. 1, 2007.

### Section 284:21-f

 **284:21-f Disbursements. –** The compensation of the commissioners,
expenses of the commissioners, compensation of assistants and other
necessary expenses of the commission, including suitable furniture,
equipment, supplies and office expense shall be charged to and paid out
of the funds received under the provisions of this subdivision, provided
that no payment shall be made until sufficient money has been received
under the provisions of this subdivision to cover said payments. The
state lottery commission shall submit an operating budget based on
accounting units or other budgetary units required by the general court.
The commission shall submit its budget in the same format and at the
same time as other state agencies. However, the commission is authorized
to transfer funds between line items within and among any budgetary
unit. The commission shall submit reports annually 60 days after the
close of each fiscal year to the fiscal committee of the general court
detailing all transfers made during the last fiscal year and the reasons
for them.

**Source.** 1963, 52:1. 2007, 292:2. 2012, 247:4, 27, eff. Aug. 17,
2012.

### Section 284:21-g

 **284:21-g Report of the Commission. –** The commission shall make
an annual report to the governor including therein an account of its
actions, receipts derived under the provisions of this subdivision, the
practical effects of the application thereof, and any recommendation for
legislation which the commission deems advisable. Such report shall be
submitted on or before February 1 and the commission shall not be
required to submit a separate report under RSA 20:7.

**Source.** 1963, 52:1. 2007, 112:3. 2015, 259:19, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:21-h

 **284:21-h Authorization; Sale of Tickets; Advertising. –**
                                             
 I. The lottery commission is hereby authorized:
                                             
 (a) To conduct public drawings at such intervals and in such
places within the state as the commission may determine.
                                             
 (b) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (c) To conduct pure lotteries if the commission determines that
such program will best accomplish the purposes of this subdivision.
                                             
 (d) To participate in any international, national, or multistate
pure lotteries.
                                             
 II. Tickets for such pure lotteries:
                                             
 (a) Shall be sold by the lottery commission (1) in state liquor
stores and the state liquor commission is hereby directed to cooperate
with the lottery commission in the sale of such tickets, and (2) within
the enclosure of any track where a race or race meet is conducted by
license issued under this chapter and the lottery commission is
authorized to request and accept cooperation of the licensee in the sale
of such tickets therein.
                                             
 (b) May be sold by the lottery commission in the following
locations: Branch offices of the commission, to be established at the
information area adjacent to the Hampton toll station and the Hooksett
toll station, and commission's office in Concord. Each branch office at
the Hooksett and Hampton toll stations will be in a new building to be
constructed by the department of transportation in accordance with their
design and specifications. The lottery commission is hereby authorized
to contract with the department of transportation for the construction
of these buildings, the cost of which will be a charge against lottery
revenue. Tickets sold at any of the locations provided for by this
subparagraph shall be sold only by lottery commission employees or
through automatic ticket dispensing machines.
                                             
 (c) May be sold by the lottery commission in the following
locations:
                                             
 (1) At, within, or upon the following premises owned or
controlled by the state: Franconia State Park, Hampton Beach State Park,
Mount Sunapee State Park, and Crawford Notch State Park. The state
agency responsible for the operation of these locations shall have
regulatory powers over the sales and advertising of lottery tickets at
the above locations.
                                             
 (2) At, within, or upon the following premises owned or
controlled by a political subdivision of the state: Weirs Beach,
provided, however, that the voters of the city of Laconia have signified
their approval of the sale of lottery tickets in said city pursuant to
the provisions of RSA 284:21-k at the biennial election of November,
1966 and so signify biennially thereafter. The lottery commission shall
obtain prior permission from the administrative authorities for this
location before selling tickets at, within, or upon these premises.
                                             
 (d) May be sold by or for the lottery commission at designated
locations, other than grounds and campuses of public and private
schools, colleges, and universities, by persons, whether natural,
associate, or corporate, authorized to sell such tickets on a 5 percent
commission basis for services rendered. The commission shall pay a 10
percent commission on those sales made during a fiscal year which exceed
the sales made during the previous fiscal year. The lottery commission
shall report quarterly to the fiscal committee of the general court on
commissions paid under this subparagraph. All sales shall be subject to
the rules and regulations of the commission provided:
                                             
 (1) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (2) That voters of the towns and cities in which sales outlets
are located, have signified approval of lottery ticket sales pursuant to
RSA 284:21-k.
                                             
 (e) Owners of retail establishments who have been convicted of a
felony within the previous 10 years which has not been annulled by a
court, or a misdemeanor involving falsehood or dishonesty within the
previous 5 years which has not been annulled by a court, shall not be
allowed to sell lottery tickets in their retail establishment.
                                             
 III. No tickets shall be sold at any locations to minors.
                                             
 III-a. (a) Any owner of a retail establishment or sale outlet who
sells or distributes any substance containing a synthetic drug as
defined in RSA 359-O:2 shall be guilty of a violation.
                                             
 (b) The lottery commission shall deny an application for issuance
or renewal of a license, or suspend or revoke a license, when the
commission finds that the applicant or owner of a retail establishment
or sale outlet is guilty of selling or distributing any substance
containing a synthetic drug. In case of an appeal, the license of an
owner of a retail establishment or sale outlet may be suspended at the
discretion of the commission during the pendency of such appeal.
                                             
 IV. The lottery commission is authorized to advertise the sale of
tickets at each sales location and through other advertising media as
the commission deems necessary to increase lottery sales.
                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. The commission shall not authorize the use of any electronic
gaming device in any game, lottery, or other offering which was not in
use by the commission on or before January 1, 2011, unless specific
authorization for such electronic gaming device is enacted by the
general court. Electronic gaming devices shall mean and include all
electro-mechanical instruments and device used for the purpose of
gaming, whether in physical presence or through the Internet, and shall
include video slot machines and other gambling devices which function or
are designed to emulate a video slot machine or other gambling machine,
historic racing machine, and computer technology to reveal instant
ticket winners. This section shall not be interpreted to prohibit the
commission from replacing offerings, games, or equipment which were in
service prior to January 1, 2011 with new offerings, games, or equipment
which are the functional equivalent of those offerings, games, or
equipment which are being replaced.
                                             
 VII. The lottery commission may develop and implement an employee
recognition program for monetary incentives to promote increased sales
and compensate lottery sales representatives based upon performance and
funded from an existing lottery budget line item. The incentive program
shall be implemented through rules adopted by the lottery commission in
accordance with RSA 541-A. The lottery commission shall report quarterly
to the fiscal committee of the general court on the status of the
incentive program.

**Source.** 1963, 52:1; 200:3. 1965, 200:1. 1967, 42:1; 304:1. 1971,
287:2; 536:1, 2; 573:1. 1973, 484:1. 1975, 361:1. 1977, 462:1, 2. 1995,
308:95. 2002, 108:1. 2004, 97:4, 8; 257:34. 2005, 277:1. 2006, 233:1-3,
7, I. 2007, 112:4-9; 311:1, 2. 2011, 224:90; 259:26. 2015, 204:4, eff.
July 6, 2015; 276:17, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:21-hh

 **284:21-hh Insurance Authorized. –** The commission is hereby
authorized to purchase such insurance as it may deem necessary or
desirable to insure itself, the state of New Hampshire and its ticket
sales agents against any claims which may arise out of the acts or
omissions of any such agent in connection with or in any way related to
the sale of tickets. Such insurance shall be purchased on behalf of the
commission by the department of administrative services, division of
procurement and support services.

**Source.** 1979, 491:1. 2014, 327:66, eff. Aug. 2, 2014.

### Section 284:21-i

 **284:21-i Administrative and Rulemaking Provisions. –**
                                             
 I. The lottery commission shall be empowered to employ such
technical assistants and employees to carry out the provisions of this
subdivision as the governor and council shall authorize. Such assistants
and employees shall receive compensation at rates to be established by
the personnel commission. No employee of the commission shall have any
pecuniary or other interest in any supplier or agent to the commission
or in any licensee licensed under this chapter.
                                             
 II. The lottery commission shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A after
public hearing relative to:
                                             
 (a) Holding and conducting drawings and the sale of tickets for
such drawings;
                                             
 (b) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (c) Establishing:
                                             
 (1) The price for which tickets for drawings shall be sold;
not to exceed 
                                             $30 per ticket.
                                             
 (2) The method by which tickets sold for drawings shall be
determined to be winning tickets.
                                             
 (3) The money or prizes to be awarded holders of winning
tickets.


                                             [Paragraph II(c)(4) contingently repealed by 1996, 157:14, I, effective
as provided by 1996, 157:14, I(a), I(b).
                                             ]


                                             
 (4) The assignment ability of winning tickets, including
appropriate consumer protection provisions.
                                             
 III. In establishing the money or prizes to be awarded the holders
of winning tickets, the lottery commission shall be governed by the
primary purpose of the lottery and sweepstakes, to raise revenue for the
benefit of public education. They shall conduct such studies and make
such investigations, either directly or through their agents, as will
apprise them of prizes and money awarded to the holders of winning
tickets in similar drawings wherever held. They shall fix the prizes and
amounts of money to be awarded winners in such manner as will yield the
largest net revenue for the benefit of public education, bearing in mind
the expenses to be incurred, and all other factors which tend to
influence net revenue.
                                             
 IV. The commission shall adopt a uniform set of rules under RSA
541-A and after public hearing applicable to all instant sweeps games,
including, but not limited to, how prizes are claimed and how tickets
are validated. The commission may establish the following requirements
without adopting rules under RSA 541-A, provided such requirements are
printed clearly on the tickets issued by the commission:
                                             
 (a) The name of the game;
                                             
 (b) The cost of the ticket;
                                             
 (c) The amount of instant prizes;
                                             
 (d) The method for determining winning tickets which is unique to
that particular game.
                                             
 V. (a) The commission shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A and after
public hearing relative to daily numbers games, including, but not
limited to:
                                             
 (1) Rules of the game.
                                             
 (2) Types of bets.
                                             
 (3) Prize payments for each type of bet.
                                             
 (4) Ticket validity, including the appeal process to the
commission for decisions made by representatives of the commission
appointed by the commission to carry out its rules.
                                             
 (5) Requirements of ticket agents.
                                             
 (b) The commission or its designee may establish the following
requirements relative to daily numbers games without adopting rules
under RSA 541-A, provided that the commission or its designee gives
notice of said requirements in a newspaper or daily statewide
publication at least 24 hours in advance of taking any action:
                                             
 (1) Limitation on the number of bets.
                                             
 (2) Conduct of drawings, including cancellation and
rescheduling of drawings.
                                             
 (3) Cost of tickets.
                                             
 VI. The lottery commission shall adopt a uniform set of rules under
RSA 541-A and after public hearing applicable to all games administered
by the Multi-State Lottery Association, including, but not limited to,
how prizes are claimed and how tickets are validated. The commission may
establish the following characteristics without adopting rules under RSA
541-A, provided that the commission or its designee gives notice of said
characteristics in a public announcement at least 10 business days in
advance of taking any action:
                                             
 (a) Conduct of drawings.
                                             
 (b) The numbers and or symbols chosen from a set or sets of
designated numbers or symbols to determine prize winners.
                                             
 (c) Prize value of each prize category for standard or
promotional drawings.
                                             
 (d) The price of each bet.
                                             
 (e) The frequency of the drawings.

**Source.** 1963, 52:1; 200:1. 1967, 304:2. 1977, 462:3. 1985, 295:3.
1986, 164:4. 1996, 157:10. 2000, 217:1. 2004, 97:5; 257:7. 2005, 82:1.
2006, 233:4-6, 7, II. 2007, 263:4, 5. 2009, 117:1, eff. Aug. 21, 2009.

### Section 284:21-ii

 **284:21-ii Rules and Regulations; Lucky 7 Tickets. –** 
                                             [Repealed
1981, 444:4, eff. July 1, 1981.
                                             ]

### Section 284:21-j

 **284:21-j Establishment. –**
                                             
 I. The state treasurer shall credit all moneys received from the
lottery commission under RSA 284, RSA 287-D, and RSA 287-E, and interest
received on such moneys, to a special fund from which the treasurer
shall pay all expenses of the commission incident to the administration
of this subdivision and all administration and enforcement expenses of
racing and charitable gaming under RSA 284, RSA 287-D, and RSA 287-E.
Any balance left in such fund after such expenses are paid shall be
deposited in the education trust fund established under RSA 198:39.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the expenditure
of additional funds over budget estimates is necessary for the proper
functioning of the lottery commission, the commission may request, with
prior approval of the legislative fiscal committee, that the governor
and council authorize the transfer of funds from the sweepstakes fund
for expenses related to retirement and health benefits.

**Source.** 1963, 52:1. 1965, 239:15. 1967, 421:1. 1973, 148:1. 1981,
444:3. 1983, 417:3. 1985, 244:9. 1987, 201:1. 1989, 414:2. 1997, 137:1.
1999, 17:45. 2002, 224:1. 2004, 97:6; 257:8. 2006, 311:4. 2008, 25:1.
2011, 224:87. 2015, 276:126, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:21-jj

 **284:21-jj Lottery Commission Funds. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, in order to
allow the lottery commission to efficiently handle its funds, the
commission is authorized to have service fees paid to banks and sales
outlets deducted from lottery receipts and, with the approval of
governor and council, to have prizes paid by sales outlets from lottery
receipts so long as full accountability is assured. The commission is
authorized to enter into agreements with banks as to the charges for
services rendered. Lottery funds shall be deposited in commercial banks
throughout the state. These funds shall be transferred on a weekly basis
to the state treasurer.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, in order
to allow the lottery commission to efficiently distribute instant
tickets, the commission may have instant ticket delivery fees deducted
from lottery receipts. The commission is authorized to enter into
agreements or contracts with third parties for instant ticket delivery
service. Such agreements or contracts shall have the prior approval of
governor and council.

**Source.** 1977, 129:1. 2004, 97:8. 2005, 177:59, eff. July 1, 2005.

### Section 284:21-k

 **284:21-k Sale; Local Option. –**
                                             
 I. Whether or not the lottery commission may continue to sell
tickets in a city or town shall be determined as provided in RSA 663:7
and 8.
                                             
 II. Recounts of any votes taken pursuant to RSA 663:7 shall be
subject to RSA 660:13 through 15.

**Source.** 1963, 52:1. 1967, 304:3. 1971, 287:1. 1979, 436:6. 2004,
97:8, eff. July 10, 2004.

### Section 284:21-kk

 **284:21-kk Recount. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1979, 436:7, III, eff. July 1,
1979.
                                             ]

### Section 284:21-l

 **284:21-l Effect on Other Laws. –** All acts and parts of acts
inconsistent with the provisions of this subdivision are hereby amended
to the extent of the provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1963, 52:1, eff. June 29, 1963.

### Section 284:21-m

 **284:21-m Special Taxes. –** If the governor and council so
authorize, the lottery commission may add to the selling price
authorized under RSA 284:21-i an amount not in excess of the amount of
any tax levied against the proceeds in the hands of said commission, and
the commission may pay such taxes out of such proceeds, but only under
protest. In paying any such tax the commission is instructed to assert
with its protest, in addition to such other reasons as it may deem
appropriate, the contention of the state of New Hampshire that taxes may
not lawfully be imposed upon the type of state revenue raising measures
for educational purposes as is represented by the provisions of this
subdivision.

**Source.** 1963, 200:4. 2004, 97:8, eff. July 10, 2004.

### Section 284:21-n

 **284:21-n Constitutionality. –** If any clause, sentence, paragraph
or part of this subdivision shall, for any reason, be judged invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder
thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph, or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which
such judgment shall have been rendered.

**Source.** 1963, 200:4, eff. July 1, 1963.

### Section 284:21-o

 **284:21-o Purchase of Tickets for a Fee Prohibited. –** No person
shall engage in the business of purchasing or offering to purchase a
sweepstakes or lottery ticket or tickets for, in behalf of, or in the
name of another for a fee or service charge which shall make the
ultimate cost of such ticket or tickets to the registered owner thereof
greater than the legal price of such ticket or tickets as established by
the lottery commission under the authority of this subdivision. Whoever
violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1965, 63:1. 1967, 304:4. 1973, 528:182. 2004, 97:7. eff.
July 10, 2004.

### Section 284:21-p

 **284:21-p Effect on Other Laws. –** RSA 647 shall not apply to the
sale of lottery and sweepstakes tickets provided for by this
subdivision.

**Source.** 1965, 63:1. 1967, 304:5. 1973, 40:2, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 284:21-q

 **284:21-q Unclaimed Prize Money. –** The lottery commission shall
hold unclaimed prize money on a winning ticket for one year after the
prize money is awarded. If there is no claim to the money during the one
year, or if the lottery commission is unable to locate the holder of a
winning ticket during the one year, the lottery commission shall pay the
money to the state treasurer at the end of the one year. The state
treasurer shall deposit the money into the special fund set up under RSA
284:21-j. A person who has a claim on the prize money after the money
has been paid to the treasurer shall make a claim to the legislature for
payment.

**Source.** 1965, 230:1. 1971, 536:3. 1996, 157:11. 2004, 97:8, eff.
July 10, 2004.

### Section 284:21-r

 **284:21-r Winnings Tax Exempt. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2009, 144:251, eff.
July 1, 2009.
                                             ]

### Section 284:21-rr

 **284:21-rr Winnings Tax Exempt. –** Notwithstanding any other
provisions of law to the contrary, a recipient of any money or prize
awarded pursuant to the provisions of RSA 284:21-i shall be exempt from
any tax imposed thereon by the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 2011, 47:2, eff. May 23, 2011.

### Section 284:21-s

 **284:21-s Incentive Awards for Ticket Sellers. –** The lottery
commission is authorized to pay cash incentives, at a rate established
by the commission but not to exceed 
                                             $75,000 for a winning ticket, as an
inducement to employees and agents authorized to sell tickets pursuant
to RSA 284:21-h, II(d).

**Source.** 1973, 484:2. 1977, 455:1. 1997, 137:2. 2004, 97:8. 2007,
311:3, eff. Sept. 11, 2007. 2016, 231:1, eff. Aug. 8, 2016.

### Section 284:21-t

 **284:21-t Lucky 7 Tickets. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1981, 444:4, eff. July 1,
1981.
                                             ]

### Section 284:21-u


                                             


                                             [RSA 284:21-u repealed by 2016, 148:1, I, effective January 1, 2017.
                                             ]

 **284:21-u Prohibition on Future Employment. –**
                                             
 I. No commissioner, executive director, assistant director, or games
manager of the lottery commission shall accept any employment, including
work as a consultant or lobbyist, with any ticket or on-line vendor
holding a valid contract with the commission or any such vendor bidding
on a contract with the commission until 2 years after such person shall
become separated from the commission.
                                             
 II. No ticket or on-line vendor holding a valid contract with the
commission or bidding on a contract with the commission shall employ any
commissioner, executive director, assistant director, or games manager
of the commission until 2 years after such employee has become separated
from the commission. Any such vendor who violates the provisions of this
paragraph shall be barred from bidding on any future contract with the
commission for 5 years after such violation.

**Source.** 1987, 57:1. 1996, 157:12. 2004, 97:8, eff. July 10, 2004.

### Section 284:21-v

 **284:21-v Child Support Intercept. –** The lottery commission and
the department of health and human services shall initiate an on-line
data system to effect the withholding of child support arrearages from
all lottery prizes subject to Federal Tax Form W-2g reporting
requirements. The full cost of such on-line data system shall be borne
by the department of health and human services. Upon notice from the
department of health and human services that an arrearage amount exists,
the lottery commission shall withhold such amount from any lottery prize
payments and redirect such payments to the department of health and
human services in full or partial satisfaction of the arrearage. The
lottery commission and the department of health and human services shall
adopt rules under RSA 541-A after public hearing relative to withholding
prize money from lottery claimants having child support arrearages. The
lottery commission shall also provide, by rule, safeguards against the
disclosure or inappropriate use of any personally identifiable
information regarding any person obtained pursuant to this section.

**Source.** 1993, 85:1. 1995, 310:181. 2004, 97:8, eff. July 10, 2004.

Pari-Mutuel Pools, and Distribution of Tax Thereon
--------------------------------------------------

### Section 284:22

 **284:22 Pari-Mutuel Pools. –** During the calendar years of
1941-2029, a licensee under this chapter may sell pari-mutuel pools in
accordance with this chapter and rules adopted by the lottery
commission. Pari-mutuel pools shall be sold within the enclosure of the
racetrack where a licensed race or race meet is held or as provided in
RSA 284:22-a, and not elsewhere.
                                             
 I. The lottery commission on all win, place, and show pari-mutuel
pools at tracks or race meets at which running horse races are conducted
for public exhibition shall be uniform throughout the state at the rate
of 19 percent of each dollar wagered in such pools, and the lottery
commission on all other pari-mutuel pools at such tracks or race meets
shall be at the rate of not less than 26 percent of each dollar wagered
in such pools and not more than 27 percent of each dollar wagered in
such pools as determined from time to time by the licensee which
conducts live running horse races after written notice to the lottery
commission and, in the absence of written notice, at the rate of 26
percent of each dollar wagered in such pools. Except as provided in RSA
284:22-a, the amount of the purse at such tracks or race meets at which
running horse races are conducted shall be 8 1/4 percent of each dollar
wagered in all pari-mutuel pools, said 8 1/4 percent to be paid by the
licensee out of the lottery commission on such pools. In addition to the
above lottery commission, 1/2 of the odd cents of all redistribution
based on each dollar wagered exceeding a sum equal to the next lowest
multiple of 10, known as "breakage'', shall be retained by the licensee,
1/4 paid to the state treasury for the use of the state in accordance
with the provisions of RSA 284:2 and 1/4 shall be paid to the lottery
commission. The lottery commission shall distribute such breakage to the
licensee which paid such breakage to supplement purses of live races
conducted by the licensee at the location from which such breakage was
paid. Each licensee shall pay the tax provided for in RSA 284:23.
                                             
 II. The lottery commission on all win, place, and show pari-mutuel
pools at tracks or race meets at which harness horse races are conducted
for public exhibition, including those conducted by agricultural fairs,
shall be uniform throughout the state at the rate of 19 percent of each
dollar wagered in such pools, and the lottery commission on all other
pari-mutuel pools at such tracks or race meets shall be at the rate of
not less than 25 percent of each dollar wagered in such pools and not
more than 26 percent of each dollar wagered in such pools as determined
from time to time by the licensee which conducts live harness horse
racing after written notice to the lottery commission and, in the
absence of such written notice, at the rate of 25 percent of each dollar
wagered in such pools. In addition to the above lottery commission, 1/2
of the odd cents of all redistribution based on each dollar wagered
exceeding a sum equal to the next lowest multiple of 10, known as
"breakage'', shall be retained by the licensee, 1/4 paid to the state
treasury for the use of the state in accordance with the provisions of
RSA 284:2 and 1/4 shall be paid to the lottery commission. The lottery
commission shall distribute such breakage to the licensee which paid
such breakage. Each licensee shall pay the tax provided for in RSA
284:23.
                                             
 III. For the purposes set forth in this section, an "agricultural
fair'' means an association which provides for and pays premiums of

                                             $5,000 or more, annually, as is determined by the commissioner of
agriculture, markets, and food, in accordance with RSA 284:25.
                                             
 IV. Subject to the provisions of RSA 284:22-a, V, the lottery
commission on all win, place, and show pari-mutuel pools at tracks or
race meets at which simulcast dog races are conducted for public
exhibition shall be uniform throughout the state at the rate of 19
percent of each dollar wagered in such pools; and the lottery commission
on all other pari-mutuel pools at such tracks or race meets shall be at
the rate of 27 percent of each dollar wagered in such pools. In addition
to the above lottery commission, 1/2 of the odd cents of all
redistribution based on each dollar wagered exceeding a sum equal to the
next lowest multiple of 10, known as "breakage,'' shall be retained by
the licensee, 1/4 paid to the state treasury for the use of the state
and 1/4 shall be paid to the lottery commission. Each licensee shall pay
the tax provided for in RSA 284:23.

**Source.** 1935, 27:14. 1939, 15:1. 1941, 155:1. RL 171:15. 1943, 83:1.
1945, 117:1. 1949, 24:1; 190:1. 1953, 117:1. RSA 284:22. 1955, 74:1.
1957, 122:1. 1961, 34:1. 1967, 53:1. 1970, 5:14. 1971, 173:1; 498:2;
541:11. 1973, 306:1, 2, 4, I, II. 1974, 13:1; 42:2, 4. 1976, 52:1, 5, I.
1977, 93:1, 2. 1979, 119:1. 1981, 570:5. 1985, 58:5, 6; 282:2. 1986,
4:1. 1987, 69:2. 1988, 92:1; 291:1, 2. 1989, 219:1-3. 1991, 68:1. 1992,
16:1; 185:3. 1993, 358:83-85. 1994, 5:1, 2. 1995, 130:5. 1997, 27:1-5;
351:64. 2004, 59:2. 2008, 25:1. 2010, 272:10, 22. 2015, 276:127, eff.
July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:22-a

 **284:22-a Pari-Mutuel Pools on Simulcast Racing. –**
                                             
 I. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "State'' means each state of the United States, the District
of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and any territory or
possession of the United States.
                                             
 (b) "Simulcast'' means a licensee's receipt of the transmission
of races conducted at a racetrack other than the licensee's racetrack
and which races are exhibited simultaneously at the licensee's racetrack
by television or other means of electronic reproduction with the conduct
of such races at the point of origin and on which races the licensee
sells pari-mutuel pools.
                                             
 (c) "Licensee'' means
                                             
 (1) Any individual, association, partnership, joint venture,
corporation, or other organization or other entity which holds a license
under RSA 284 to conduct a live running or harness horse race meet, or
if the election is made pursuant to RSA 284:22-a, II(c), licensee means
the individual, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or
other organization or entity which applies for a license under RSA 284
to conduct simulcasting at a facility at which live running or harness
horse racing was conducted in 2008, or
                                             
 (2) The individual, association, partnership, joint venture,
corporation, or other organization or other entity which applies for a
license pursuant to RSA 284:15-a to conduct simulcasting at a facility
at which live dog racing was conducted in 2008 and at which facility a
license was issued to an applicant for 2010 to simulcast running and
harness horse racing and dog racing.
                                             
 II. (a) During the calendar years 1941-2029, a licensee may sell
pari-mutuel pools on races held at racetracks other than at the facility
of the licensee, if any, provided:
                                             
 (1) Such sales are within the enclosure of the facility at
which the licensee holds a license;
                                             
 (2) Wagers are made on races which are exhibited by television
or other electronic reproduction at licensee's facility simultaneously
with the conduct of each such race at its point of origin with the
agreement or approval of the racetrack which provides the transmission
of the races to be simulcast and the racetrack which conducts the races
to be simulcast;
                                             
 (3) Unless the licensee makes the election pursuant to RSA
284:22-a, II(c), the licensee which holds a license to conduct live
harness or running horse racing has scheduled at least 50 calendar days
of live harness and/or running horse racing in the calendar year such
licensee simulcasts; and
                                             
 (4) The licensee obtains the consents and approvals set forth
in RSA 284:22-a, III.
                                             
 (b) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (c) Notwithstanding subparagraph II(a), an individual,
association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other
organization or entity may be issued a license to conduct simulcasting
without conducting live racing provided such person or entity makes such
election with the approval of the commission and such person or entity
either held a license on January 1, 2009 under this chapter to conduct a
race meet or seeks to conduct simulcasting without conducting live
racing at a facility at which live racing was authorized to be conducted
in 2009.
                                             
 (d) Notwithstanding subparagraph II(a), an individual,
association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other
organization or entity may be issued a license to conduct simulcasting
without conducting live horse racing at a location in Cheshire county,
provided such person or entity applies for, and is issued, a license to
conduct live horse racing at such location in Cheshire county, complies
with other provisions of this chapter with regard to application and
issuance of such license, makes such election with the approval of the
commission, and such person or entity has submitted an economic
development plan to the commission to conduct a live horse racing meet
in Cheshire county within 36 months of the granting of a license. If no
live horse racing is conducted within the 36-month period the license to
receive simulcast wagers shall be revoked. The commission shall adopt
regulations regarding the criteria of the proposed economic development
plan prior to issuance of any approval.
                                             
 III. A licensee may sell pari-mutuel pools on races held at other
appropriately licensed racetracks, whether such racetracks are in the
state of New Hampshire or outside the state of New Hampshire with the
agreement or approval of the racetrack which provides the transmission
of the races to be simulcast and the racetrack which conducts the races
to be simulcast. A licensee may sell pari-mutuel pools under RSA
284:22-a on the same types of races that it conducts live at its
racetrack with the approval of the commission. A licensee may sell
pari-mutuel pools under RSA 284:22-a on types of races different from
the types of races conducted live at the licensee's racetrack, or if
such licensee holds a license pursuant to RSA 284:15-a and RSA 284:16-a,
or the licensee makes the election pursuant to RSA 284:22-a, II(c) with
respect to live running or harness horse racing, provided such licensee
obtains the approval from the commission and the municipality in which
the licensee operates its facility had approved the issuance of a
license to conduct harness or running horse racing and/or dog racing,
whether live or simulcast, in such municipality either prior to
enactment of RSA 284:22-a or subsequent to enactment of RSA 284:22-a.
                                             
 IV. A licensee which has scheduled less than 50 calendar days of
live racing in a calendar year may simulcast on a day on which live
racing is scheduled at the licensee's race track, without conducting
live racing, provided that the live racing program is cancelled due to
weather or other conditions which produce unsafe conditions at the
racetrack of the licensee. The determination to cancel a live program
based upon weather or the condition of the racetrack shall be made by
the licensee, and notice shall be provided to the commission.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a licensee which has scheduled less than
50 calendar days of live racing shall be limited to no more than 10 such
cancellations in a calendar year.
                                             
 V. (a) A licensee may sell pari-mutuel pools for simulcast races for
races held at racetracks within or outside the state of New Hampshire in
accordance with RSA 284:22-a, II, within the enclosure of said
licensee's racetrack or a licensee, with the written agreement with the
licensee which conducts or transmits the race which is to be simulcast,
may sell a common pari-mutuel pool in conjunction with the licensee
which conducts or transmits the race which is to be simulcast. In the
event of common pools, the licensee which conducts or transmits the race
shall pay the tax required under RSA 284:23 for the portion of the
common pool actually contributed at said licensee's racetrack and the
licensee which simulcasts shall pay the tax due under RSA 284:23 for the
portion of the common pool actually contributed at said licensee's
racetrack.
                                             
 (b) A licensee may sell pari-mutuel pools for simulcast races for
races held at racetracks outside the state of New Hampshire in
accordance with RSA 284:22-a, II, within the enclosure of said
licensee's racetrack or said licensee, with the written agreement with
the entity which conducts the race which is to be simulcast, may sell a
common pari-mutuel pool in conjunction with the entity which conducts
the race which is to be simulcast. In the event of such common pools,
the commission shall be in the amount established by the law of the
state in which the race to be simulcast is actually conducted, provided,
however, the licensee shall pay the tax as provided under RSA 284:23.
                                             
 VI. Racing officials, as defined in the rules adopted by the
commission, any employee or owner of the entity which provides the
totalizator system to the licensee, and any person responsible for the
operation of the electronic reproduction equipment which receives the
simulcast shall be prohibited from participating in wagering, directly
or indirectly, on simulcast races shown at the licensee's racetrack.
                                             
 VII. The provisions of RSA 284:15-c, RSA 284:16-a, RSA 284:16-c, RSA
284:17, RSA 284:17-a, and RSA 284:17-c shall not apply to simulcast and
pari-mutuel pools under RSA 284:22-a, except as specifically provided in
RSA 284:22-a.
                                             
 VIII. RSA 284:22, I, II, III, and IV shall apply according to the
type of race on which the simulcast wagers are made, excepting, however,
interstate common pools as provided in RSA 284:22-a, V(b) and that the
provisions made for purses made in RSA 284:22, I shall not apply to
simulcast races. The commission on simulcast race pools shall be
available to the simulcasting licensee to satisfy obligations to the
racing association originating or transmitting such simulcast races or
to the horsemen's group of such association.

**Source.** 1991, 68:2. 1992, 16:2, 3, 5. 1994, 143:3. 2004, 59:3. 2006,
156:2-4. 2009, 144:104, 105. 2010, 272:11-14. 2012, 256:2, eff. June 18,
2012.

### Section 284:23

 **284:23 Tax. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Each person, association or corporation licensed to conduct a
running horse race or running horse meet under this chapter shall pay to
the state treasurer a sum of money equal to one percent of the total
contributions to all pari-mutuel pools conducted, made, or sold at any
such race or meet licensed under this chapter. The amounts so paid to
the state treasurer shall be for the use of the state.
                                             
 (b) Each person, association, or corporation licensed to
simulcast a running horse race or running horse meet under this chapter
shall pay to the state treasurer a sum of money equal to 1 1/4 percent
of the total contributions to all such pari-mutuel pools conducted,
made, or sold at such simulcast race or simulcast race meet by such
person, association, or corporation licensed to simulcast such races.
The amount so paid to the state treasurer shall be for the use of the
state.
                                             
 (c) Any amounts so paid to the state treasurer by any person,
association, or corporation licensed to simulcast a running horse race
or running horse meet under this chapter collected in Cheshire county
shall be held in escrow for a period of not more than 36 months by the
state treasurer. If any person, association, or corporation licensed
under this chapter has commenced to hold a live race meet within the
36-month period the escrowed amounts shall be paid to the lottery
commission to offset any expenses incurred for the services required to
hold such meet. If there is no live race meet within the 36-month period
all sums so escrowed shall be for the use of the state.
                                             
 II. (a) Each person, association, or corporation licensed to conduct
a harness horse race or harness horse race meet under this chapter shall
pay to the state treasurer a sum of money equal to one percent of all
total contributions to all pari-mutuel pools in a calendar day. The
amount so paid to the state treasurer shall be for the use of the
state.
                                             
 (b) Each person, association, or corporation licensed to
simulcast a harness horse race or simulcast a harness horse race meet
under this chapter shall pay to the state treasurer a sum of money equal
to 1 1/4 percent of the total contributions to all such pari-mutuel
pools conducted, made, or sold at such simulcast race or race meet by
such person, association, or corporation licensed to simulcast such
races. The amount so paid to the state treasurer shall be for the use of
the state.
                                             
 (c) Any amounts so paid to the state treasurer by any person,
association, or corporation licensed to simulcast a harness horse race
or harness horse race meet under this chapter collected in Cheshire
county shall be held in escrow for a period of not more than 36 months
by the state treasurer. If any person, association, or corporation
licensed under this chapter has commenced to hold a live race meet
within the 36-month period the escrowed amounts shall be paid to the
lottery commission to offset any expenses incurred for the services
required to hold such meet. If there is no live race meet within the
36-month period all sums so escrowed shall be for the use of the state.
                                             
 III. (a) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 (b) Each person, association or corporation licensed to simulcast
a dog race or simulcast a dog race meet under this chapter shall pay to
the state treasurer a sum of money equal to 1 1/2 percent of all
pari-mutuel pools conducted, made, or sold at such simulcast race or
simulcast race meet by such person, association, or corporation licensed
under this chapter. The amount so paid to the state treasurer shall be
for the use of the state.
                                             
 (c) Any amounts so paid to the state treasurer by any person,
association, or corporation licensed to simulcast a dog race or meet
under this chapter collected in Cheshire county shall be held in escrow
for a period of not more than 36 months by the state treasurer. If any
person, association, or corporation licensed under this chapter has
commenced to hold a live race meet within the 36-month period the
escrowed amounts shall be paid to the lottery commission to offset any
expenses incurred for the services required to hold such meet. If there
is no live race meet within the 36-month period all sums so escrowed
shall be for the use of the state.
                                             
 IV. Each person, association, or corporation licensed to conduct a
race or race meet under this chapter shall also pay to the city or town
treasurer in which the racing plant is located for each day of racing,
whether such day includes live racing only, simulcast racing only, or a
combination thereof, the fees assessed in subparagraphs (a) and (b)
below, based upon the aggregate pari-mutuel pools conducted, made, or
sold by such person, association, or corporation on each such day. This
rate is provided if said person, association, or corporation has a
license to conduct races or race meets for more than 10 days during the
year for which the license is issued. If said person, association, or
corporation has a license to conduct races or race meets for 10 days or
less, the per diem fee shall be determined by the lottery commission.
                                             
 (a) Each Weekday including Saturday

     Pari-mutuel pool Fee 
     Under $300,000 $ 300 per day
     $300,000 or more $ 350 per day


                                             
 (b) Each Sunday

     Pari-mutuel pool Fee 
     Under $350,000 $ 400 per day
     $350,000 but under $500,000 $ 800 per day
     $500,000 or more $1,200 per day


                                             
 V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VII. For the purposes of this chapter, "racing program'' means live
racing with any number of individual races as determined by the lottery
commission. A live race or racing program may include a combined live
and simulcast race where the combination contains at least one more live
race to simulcast in the same combination. Any such live racing program
or combined racing program upon which a separate tax is paid may
constitute a live racing performance day.

**Source.** 1935, 27:15. 1939, 15:2. RL 171:16. 1945, 117:2. RSA 284:23.
1955, 74:2. 1957, 122:2. 1959, 181:4. 1967, 53:2. 1970, 5:15. 1971,
541:12, 13. 1973, 306:3; 562:1. 1974, 13:2-4. 1976, 52:2. 1977, 93:3-5;
134:1; 176:1, 2. 1979, 35:1; 119:2, 3; 122:1-3. 1981, 462:5; 570:2.
1982, 42:146-148. 1985, 72:8; 170:1; 180:1. 1986, 4:2. 1987, 154:1;
252:3, 4, 6, I-III . 1988, 291:3, 4. 1989, 219:4, 6. 1992, 16:4; 185:3.
1994, 5:3-5; 253:1, 2. 1995, 224:1, 2. 1997, 27:6-9; 351:65. 2008, 25:1;
285:21, IV. 2010, 272:21, IX, X. 2012, 256:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July
1, 2015.

### Section 284:24

 **284:24 Payment. –** Payments made under RSA 284:23 shall be made
no later than 3 calendar days after each racing day. Failure to make
payments in the time prescribed shall subject the licensee to a civil
forfeiture of 
                                             $50 for each day the payments are overdue.

**Source.** 1935, 27:16. RL 171:17. RSA 284:24. 1986, 164:5, eff. May
28, 1986.

### Section 284:25

 **284:25 Distribution to Agricultural Fairs. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987,
252:6, IV, eff. July 1, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 284:25-a

 **284:25-a Distribution for Physical Improvements at Agricultural
Fairs. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 252:6, V, eff. July 1, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 284:26

 **284:26 Reports as to Basis of Distribution. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987,
252:6, VI, eff. July 1, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 284:27

 **284:27 Audit by Commissioner of Revenue Administration of Accounts
of Agricultural Fairs. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 252:6, VII, eff. July 1,
1987.
                                             ]

### Section 284:28

 **284:28 Report of Audit. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 252:6, VIII, eff.
July 1, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 284:29

 **284:29 Records for Purpose of Audit. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 252:6,
IX, eff. July 1, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 284:30

 **284:30 Failure to Keep Records. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1987, 252:6, X,
eff. July 1, 1987.
                                             ]

### Section 284:31

 **284:31 Unclaimed Ticket Money. –** On or before January 31 of each
year every person, association, or corporation conducting a race or race
meet, whether live racing or simulcast racing, hereunder shall pay to
the state treasurer all moneys collected during the previous year of
pari-mutuel pool tickets and vouchers which have not been redeemed. The
books or records of said person, association, or corporation, which
clearly show the tickets entitled to reimbursement in any given race,
live or simulcast, shall be forwarded to the lottery commission. Such
moneys shall become a part of the special fund established in RSA
284:21-j. The state treasurer shall pay the amount due on any ticket or
voucher to the holder thereof from funds not otherwise appropriated upon
an order from the lottery commission. Pari-mutuel tickets and vouchers
which remain unclaimed after 11 months shall not be paid. Vouchers shall
be remitted to the state treasurer on January 31 of the calendar year,
24 months after the year of the unclaimed voucher.

**Source.** 1935, 27:17. RL 171:19. RSA 284:31. 1957, 165:1. 1969, 42:1.
1971, 7:1. 1976, 52:3. 1990, 259:2. 1991, 4:13. 1992, 185:2. 2011,
259:1. 2013, 264:7. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:32

 **284:32 Records of Receipts. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1997, 27:11, III, eff.
June 24, 1997.
                                             ]

### Section 284:32-a

 **284:32-a Annual Financial Statements Required. –** Every person,
association, or corporation conducting a race or race meet, except those
conducted by agricultural fairs, shall annually submit to the lottery
commission on or before June 1 an annual financial report of the entity
licensed to conduct the race or race meet. The report shall include, at
a minimum, a balance sheet, an income statement, a statement of changes
in retained earnings, a statement of changes in financial position and
the applicable notes to those financial statements for the prior year's
operations of the person, association, or corporation, audited by a
public accountant or certified public accountant licensed to practice in
the state of New Hampshire in accordance with RSA 309-A. Said audit and
the auditor's report shall conform to generally accepted auditing
standards as prescribed by the American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants.

**Source.** 1977, 483:1. 1983, 13:2. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:32-b

 **284:32-b Penalty for Failure to Submit. –**
                                             
 I. Every person, association or corporation required to submit an
annual statement pursuant to RSA 284:15-b or an annual financial report
pursuant to RSA 284:32-a who fails to submit such statement or report
within the required time period shall be subject to a civil forfeiture
of up to 
                                             $500 for each day of a continuing violation. Civil forfeitures
shall be levied under this section by the state lottery commission,
shall be collected by the attorney general, and shall be deposited in
the special fund established in RSA 284:21-j. Such civil penalty shall
be in addition to and not a substitute for any other civil or criminal
penalty provided by law, including RSA 284:21.
                                             
 II. The lottery commission shall notify in writing the attorney
general and the fiscal committee of the general court whenever any
person, association or corporation fails to submit such statement or
report within the required time period and shall also include in said
notice the amount of any civil forfeiture levied pursuant to this
section. In the event that the lottery commission grants an extension of
time in which to file such statement or report, the lottery commission
shall notify in writing the attorney general and the fiscal committee of
the general court of such extension, the legal basis for granting the
extension, and the reason the extension was granted.

**Source.** 1983, 13:1. 1997, 27:10. 2008, 25:1. 2013, 264:8. 2015,
276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 284:33

 **284:33 Minors. –** No minor, whether attending a race or employed
in any manner on or about a race track, shall be permitted to
participate in any pari-mutuel pool or be admitted to any pari-mutuel
enclosure.

**Source.** 1935, 27:20. RL 171:22.

### Section 284:34

 **284:34 Effect on Other Laws. –** RSA 338 and RSA 647 shall not
apply to pari-mutuel pools provided for by this chapter.

**Source.** 1935, 27:25. RL 171:28. RSA 284:34. 1971, 541:17. 1973,
40:1, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

False Entries; Names of Horses
------------------------------

### Section 284:35

 **284:35 False Entry. –** No person shall knowingly enter or cause
to be entered for competition, or knowingly compete with, any horse
under any other than its true name, or out of its proper class, for any
purse, prize, premium, stake or sweepstakes offered to the winner of a
contest of speed.

**Source.** 1895, 73:1. PL 189:6. RL 231:5. RSA 284:35. 1971, 541:14.
2010, 272:15, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 284:36

 **284:36 Name. –** The name of any horse for the purpose of entry
for competition or performance in any contest of speed, shall be the
name under which said horse has been registered and has publicly
performed, and shall not be changed, except as provided by the code of
printed rules of the society or association under which the contest is
advertised to be conducted.

**Source.** 1895, 73:2. PL 189:7. RL 231:6. RSA 284:36. 1971, 541:15.
2010, 272:16, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 284:37

 **284:37 Penalty. –** Any person violating any provision of RSA
284:35 or 36 shall be guilty of a class B felony if a natural person, or
guilty of a felony if any other person.

**Source.** 1895, 73:2. PL 189:8. RL 231:7. RSA 284:37. 1973, 528:183,
eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.

Tampering With Horses or Dogs
-----------------------------

### Section 284:38

 **284:38 Malicious Interference With Horses. –** Any person who
willfully or maliciously attempts to or does interfere with, tamper
with, injure, or destroy by the use of narcotics, drugs, stimulants, or
appliances of any kind used by any horse for the purpose of racing,
whether such horse is the property of such person or another, or who
willfully or maliciously causes, instigates, counsels, or in any way
aids or abets any such interference, tampering, injury, or destruction
shall be guilty of a class B felony if a natural person, or guilty of a
felony if any other person. The owner of any race horse engaged in
racing within this state that is found to have been stimulated or doped,
or any entry of which such horse is a part, shall be denied any part of
the purse offered for such race, and the purse shall be distributed as
in the case of a disqualification.

**Source.** 1939, 71:1. RL 171:14. RSA 284:38. 1971, 541:16. 1973,
528:184. 2010, 272:17, eff. Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 284:38-a

 **284:38-a Trainer as Insurer. –**
                                             
 I. The trainer of record shall be responsible for and shall be the
insurer of the condition of any horses used for the purposes of racing,
which such trainer of record enters to race. In this section, "trainer
of record'' means the person registered and identified as trainer of
such horse used for the purpose of racing in the records of the lottery
commission.
                                             
 II. The lottery commission may impose sanctions or penalties upon
the trainer of record resulting from the condition of the horse entered
in a race failing to comply with the rules of the lottery commission.
Any person aggrieved by a decision by the lottery commission, shall have
the right to appeal the decision to the full lottery commission. Any
appeal to the lottery commission shall be in accordance with RSA 284:13.

**Source.** 2004, 59:4. 2008, 25:1. 2010, 272:18. 2015, 276:127, eff.
July 1, 2015.

Trespassing
-----------

### Section 284:39

 **284:39 Rights of Licensee. –**
                                             
 I. Any licensee under this chapter may refuse admission to, or eject
from, the grounds or the enclosure of the racetrack or facility where a
licensed live race or race meet or is being held or where licensed
simulcasting is held, any person or persons whose presence or conduct,
in the sole judgment of the licensee, is inconsistent with the orderly
and proper conduct of the live or simulcast race meet, or is detrimental
to the sport of racing, whether or not such presence or offensive
conduct is associated with gambling.
                                             
 II. The phrase "grounds or the enclosure of the racetrack or
facility'' means all real or personal property used by the licensee in
the operation of the racetrack and the facilities for simulcasting,
including without limitation, the parking lots, grandstands, stables,
barn areas, and buildings at the racetrack or facility.

**Source.** 1959, 210:4. 1987, 176:1. 1992, 185:1. 2010, 272:19, eff.
Jan. 1, 2011.

### Section 284:40

 **284:40 Penalty. –** Any person or persons within said enclosure
without right or to whom admission has been refused or who has
previously been ejected shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

**Source.** 1959, 210:4. 1973, 528:185, eff. Oct. 31, 1973 at 11:59 p.m.
