---
title: CHAPTER 285 BOXING AND WRESTLING COMMISSION
---

TITLE XXIV
                                             
GAMES, AMUSEMENTS, AND ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS
===========================================

CHAPTER 285
                                             
BOXING AND WRESTLING COMMISSION
-------------------------------

### Section 285:1

 **285:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commission'' means the boxing and wrestling commission.
                                             
 II. "Promoter'' means any person, club, association or corporation
sponsoring a fighting sports competition.
                                             
 III. "Fighting sports'' means professional boxing, and amateur and
professional wrestling, mixed martial arts, kickboxing, or any other
form of amateur or professional sport combat in which blows are struck
that reasonably may be expected to inflict injury.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 2008, 261:1, eff. June 26, 2008.

### Section 285:2

 **285:2 Establishment of Commission. –** There is hereby established
a boxing and wrestling commission which shall oversee amateur and
professional fighting sports in the state.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 2008, 261:1, eff. June 26, 2008.

### Section 285:3

 **285:3 Members; Removal; Conflicts of Interest. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall consist of 3 members appointed by the
governor and council. Members appointed by the governor and council
shall have had some experience in the fighting sports and shall be
residents of the state. Members shall have no financial interest, direct
or indirect, in professional fighting sports regulated by the
commission.
                                             
 II. A member may be removed by the governor and council only for
cause in accordance with RSA 4:1.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 2008, 261:1, eff. June 26, 2008.

### Section 285:4

 **285:4 Terms; Vacancies. –**
                                             
 I. Members shall serve 3 year terms and until their successors are
appointed and qualified; provided that, for the initial appointments,
one person shall be appointed to a one year term, one person shall be
appointed to a 2 year term and one person shall be appointed to a 3 year
term.
                                             
 II. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1, eff. July 1, 1981.

### Section 285:5

 **285:5 Chairperson-Treasurer; Quorum. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall elect one of its members to serve as
chairperson-treasurer.
                                             
 II. Two members of the commission shall constitute a quorum.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 1995, 228:2, eff. Aug. 18, 1995.

### Section 285:6

 **285:6 Compensation. –** The members of the commission shall
receive 
                                             $45 a day while performing duties for the commission. Members
shall also receive mileage at the rate of state employees when attending
meetings of the commission or performing duties for the commission.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1, eff. July 1, 1981.

### Section 285:7

 **285:7 Rulemaking. –** The commission shall adopt rules, pursuant
to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The conduct of amateur and professional fighting sports
competitions;
                                             
 II. Requirements and qualifications for licenses, permits and
amateur cards for persons involved in fighting sports competitions;
                                             
 III. The grounds for revocation or suspension of a license or
permit, and the reinstatement of suspended licenses and permits;
                                             
 IV. A fee schedule for permits and amateur cards and for the renewal
of amateur cards;
                                             
 V. Promoters' bonds; and
                                             
 VI. Insurance coverage required by the commission.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 2008, 261:2. 2014, 167:6, eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 285:8

 **285:8 Report of the Commission. –** The commission shall submit a
biennial report to the governor and council on or before October 1 of
each even-numbered year. The report shall include a description of the
commission's activities including a financial report and recommendations
for legislation deemed advisable by the commission.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 2008, 261:3, eff. June 26, 2008.

### Section 285:9

 **285:9 Amateur Events. –** All amateur fighting sports competitions
shall be regulated by the commission, except those conducted by a
school, college or university.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 2008, 261:4, eff. June 26, 2008.

### Section 285:9-a

 **285:9-a Cooperation With Amateur Local Boxing Committee Required.
–**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary,
the commission shall, in the conduct of all amateur boxing or sparring
matches and exhibitions sanctioned by USA Boxing, Inc., acknowledge and
follow the rules and regulations of USA Boxing, Inc.
                                             
 II. The local boxing committee, New England Association of USA
Boxing, Inc., shall certify and register all officials including, but
not limited to, referees, judges, timekeepers, physicians, and clerks,
pursuant to USA Boxing, Inc. rules and Public Law 95-606.
                                             
 III. Certified officials shall be assigned by the commission to work
amateur boxing competitions within the state of New Hampshire, and shall
be overseen and under the direction of the commission.
                                             
 IV. Members of the commission shall become members of USA Boxing,
Inc. and take any certification courses or clinics, or both, offered by
the New England Association of USA Boxing, Inc.
                                             
 V. Neither the New England Association of USA Boxing, Inc. nor the
commission shall have or exercise unilateral power or authority to
waive, circumvent, or ignore any approved and existing rule, procedure,
or policy of USA Boxing, Inc. Any circumstance not addressed by USA
Boxing, Inc. rules, procedures, or policies shall be determined by the
commission.
                                             
 VI. The commission shall collect 5 percent of the gross receipts of
paid admissions to all amateur bouts, as mandated by RSA 285:14.

**Source.** 1995, 228:3. 1997, 313:1, eff. Aug. 20, 1997.

### Section 285:10

 **285:10 Promoter Permit Required; Promoter's Bond; Financial
Interest. –**
                                             
 I. No promoter shall arrange a professional fighting sports
competition in the state without a permit from the commission. The fee
for permits shall be 
                                             $100 for each day of the event. A different permit
shall be required for each day of competitions.
                                             
 II. The commission may require a promoter to produce evidence of
having secured a surety bond in an amount deemed appropriate by the
commission.
                                             
 III. No promoter shall have, directly or indirectly, any financial
interest in a person competing in a fighting sports competition arranged
by the promoter.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 2008, 261:5. 2014, 167:7, eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 285:11

 **285:11 Licenses Required. –** No person shall participate in a
professional fighting sports competition as a contestant, manager,
referee, judge, second or timekeeper without a license from the
commission. The fee for all licenses issued by the commission shall be

                                             $20. Licenses granted by the commission shall be valid for one year
from the date of issue unless revoked or suspended by the commission.
The commission shall, upon application, renew any license unless good
cause is shown that the license should not be renewed. The fee for all
license renewals issued by the commission shall be 
                                             $20.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 2008, 261:5. 2014, 167:8, eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 285:12

 **285:12 Suspension or Revocation; Appeals. –**
                                             
 I. The commission may revoke or suspend any permit or license for
cause.
                                             
 II. Rehearings and appeals from any decision of the commission shall
be in accordance with RSA 541.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1, eff. July 1, 1981.

### Section 285:13

 **285:13 Permit and License Fees; Amateur Cards. –**
                                             
 I. The commission may provide graduated fees for preliminary bouts,
semifinal or main bouts, or all star competitions.
                                             
 II. The commission may issue to an amateur fighter an amateur card
which shall be valid for one year.
                                             
 III. The commission, in its sole discretion, may waive fees for
amateur fighting sports exhibitions to the extent that the proceeds are
to be distributed for charitable purposes to organizations which are
exempt from federal taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 2003, 163:1. 2008, 261:6, eff. June 26, 2008.

### Section 285:14

 **285:14 Tax and Report. –**
                                             
 I. Any promoter who sponsors a professional fighting sports
competition under this chapter shall, within 72 hours after the
competition file with the commission a written report. The report shall
include the number of tickets sold, the amount of gross receipts and
other facts as the commission may require.
                                             
 II. The promoter also shall, at the same time, pay to the commission
by certified check a tax of 5 percent of the gross receipts of paid
admissions after deduction of any federal taxes.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 2008, 261:7, eff. June 26, 2008.

### Section 285:15

 **285:15 Examination of Contestants. –** No person shall compete in
professional fighting sports unless such person has been examined, not
more than 24 hours before, by a physician licensed to practice under the
laws of this state. The physician shall be in attendance throughout the
competition for which the examination was made and shall certify in
writing that the contestant is physically fit to engage in the contest.
The fee shall be paid by the promoter of the fighting sports
competition.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 1995, 228:4. 2008, 261:8, eff. June 26, 2008.

### Section 285:16

 **285:16 Minimum Age; Professional Competitions. –** No person under
the age of 18 years shall engage in any professional fighting sports
competition.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 2009, 35:1, eff. July 14, 2009.

### Section 285:17

 **285:17 Boxing Bout Time Limit. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2008, 261:11, eff.
June 26, 2008.
                                             ]

### Section 285:18

 **285:18 Fighting Sports Officials. –** The sole arbiter in the ring
in all fighting sports, bouts or competitions shall be a licensed
referee, who shall govern the bout or competition in accordance with
rules adopted by the commission. The referee shall have full power to
stop the bout or competition whenever the referee deems it advisable
because of the physical condition of a contestant, when one of the
contestants is clearly outclassed by an opponent, or for other
sufficient reason. The referee shall have discretionary power to declare
forfeited any prize, payment, or purse or any part of a prize, payment,
or purse belonging to the contestants or to one of them if, in the
referee's judgment, the contestant or contestants are not or were not
competing in good faith.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 1995, 228:5. 2008, 261:9, eff. June 26, 2008.

### Section 285:19

 **285:19 Deputy Inspectors. –** A member of the commission is not
required to be present at all fighting sports competitions. If a member
of the commission is not present at a fighting sports competition held
under this chapter, the commission shall appoint a deputy inspector who
shall, for the duration of the contest, have the full duties and powers
of a member of the commission. Deputy inspectors shall be entitled to
compensation as the commission may deem proper.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 2008, 261:9, eff. June 26, 2008.

### Section 285:20

 **285:20 Authorization by Town or City. –** No permit shall be
issued to conduct a professional fighting sports competition in any town
or city until the town has authorized, by vote at an annual town meeting
or a special meeting called for that purpose, or the city has authorized
by ordinance, the holding of such competitions within the town or city.

**Source.** 1981, 457:1. 2008, 261:10, eff. June 26, 2008.
