---
title: 'CHAPTER 287-A RAFFLES'
---

TITLE XXIV
                                             
GAMES, AMUSEMENTS, AND ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS
===========================================

CHAPTER 287-A
                                             
RAFFLES
--------------

General Provisions
------------------

### Section 287-A:1

 **287-A:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Raffle'' means a lottery in which each participant buys a ticket
for an article or articles put up as a prize with the winner being
determined by a random drawing.
                                             
 II. "Charitable organization'' means the following:
                                             
 (a) Any person or entity that is determined by the Internal
Revenue Service to be a tax exempt organization pursuant to section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as that section now exists or
may hereafter be amended; or
                                             
 (b) Any other person or entity that is or holds itself out to be
established, in whole or in part, for any benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic, educational, humane, scientific, public health, environmental
conservation, civic, social, sporting, recreational, or other charitable
purpose which has been in existence for at least 2 years, or political
committee or political party which has been in existence for at least 2
years, or any person who in any manner employs a charitable appeal as
the basis of any solicitation or an appeal that suggests that there is a
charitable purpose to any solicitation. "Charitable organization'' is
not limited to those organizations to which contributions are tax
deductible under section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code.
                                             
 III. "50/50 raffle'' means a raffle conducted by a charitable
organization whereby moneys collected by sale of raffle tickets are
split evenly between the prize winner or winners and the charitable
organization after the raffle drawing.

**Source.** 1971, 43:1. 1973, 270:1. 1999, 306:1. 2000, 115:1, eff. July
7, 2000.

### Section 287-A:2

 **287-A:2 Raffle Authorized. –** A charitable organization may
conduct a raffle to promote the purpose for which it was organized, in
the manner hereinafter provided, and not otherwise.

**Source.** 1971, 43:1, eff. April 5, 1971.

### Section 287-A:3

 **287-A:3 Printed Tickets. –** All raffle tickets shall be printed
with the name of the charitable organization thereon, the date and place
of the drawing, and the prize or prizes to be awarded and the amount of
the donation.

**Source.** 1971, 43:1, eff. April 5, 1971.

### Section 287-A:4

 **287-A:4 Distribution of Tickets. –** Raffle tickets shall be sold
only to persons 16 years of age or over and no raffle tickets shall be
sold by persons other than the members of the charitable organization or
such person or persons, as may be designated by the organization, and
who shall receive no financial remuneration.

**Source.** 1971, 43:1, eff. April 5, 1971.

### Section 287-A:5

 **287-A:5 Agency Not Permitted. –** No charitable organization shall
act as an agent for conducting a raffle, where it is unlawful for the
charitable organization's principal to conduct such a raffle.

**Source.** 1971, 43:1, eff. April 5, 1971.

### Section 287-A:6

 **287-A:6 Effect on Other Laws. –** RSA 647 shall not apply to the
sale of raffle tickets in the manner provided for in this chapter.

**Source.** 1971, 43:1. 1973, 40:4, eff. Nov. 1, 1973.

### Section 287-A:7

 **287-A:7 Permit Required. –** Any charitable organization desiring
to conduct a raffle under the provisions of this chapter shall first
obtain a permit therefor from the selectmen or designee of the town, or
the mayor and aldermen or designee of the city where the drawing for
prizes is to be held. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the
permit shall expire at the time of the drawing and shall not be
transferable. At the request of the charitable organization to conduct
more than one raffle, the governing body may extend the permit to one
year from the date of issuance.

**Source.** 1971, 43:1. 2011, 94:1, eff. July 1, 2011.

Raffles Held in Conjunction With Bingo Games
--------------------------------------------

### Section 287-A:8

 **287-A:8 Tickets; Distribution. –**
                                             
 I. All raffle tickets sold in conjunction with bingo games shall be
numbered sequentially.
                                             
 II. No ticket or multiple tickets shall be sold for more than 
                                             $1.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding RSA 287-A:4, raffle tickets sold in conjunction
with bingo games shall be sold only by members of a charitable
organization licensed by the lottery commission to conduct bingo and
only at bingo games being operated by the charitable organization.

**Source.** 1985, 374:1. 2004, 97:8; 257:9. 2008, 25:1. 2015, 276:127,
eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-A:9

 **287-A:9 Players. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2009, 228:3, III, eff. July 16,
2009.
                                             ]

### Section 287-A:10

 **287-A:10 Prizes. –** Prizes awarded at any raffle held in
conjunction with a bingo game shall not exceed 
                                             $500 wholesale cost.

**Source.** 1985, 374:1. 1991, 276:3, eff. June 10, 1991.

### Section 287-A:11

 **287-A:11 Permit Not Required. –** The provisions of RSA 287-A:7
shall not apply to raffles held in conjunction with bingo games.

**Source.** 1985, 374:1, eff. June 18, 1985.
