---
title: 'CHAPTER 287-C MANUFACTURE OF GAMBLING MACHINES'
---

TITLE XXIV
                                             
GAMES, AMUSEMENTS, AND ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS
===========================================

CHAPTER 287-C
                                             
MANUFACTURE OF GAMBLING MACHINES
--------------------------------

### Section 287-C:1

 **287-C:1 Manufacture Authorized. –** Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, gambling machines as defined in RSA 647:2, II may be
repaired, reconditioned, sold, designed, developed and manufactured in
this state, provided however that such machines shall not under any
circumstances, be sold, leased, used, or made available for use, or be
shipped or delivered to any location in this state or any other state
whose laws prohibit the possession or use of such machines.

**Source.** 1975, 130:1. 1995, 75:1, eff. May 9, 1995.

### Section 287-C:2

 **287-C:2 Literature Printed. –** Literature advertising or
promoting the use and possession of gambling machines may be printed in
and distributed from this state; provided, however, that such literature
shall not be designed for distribution in any state which forbids such
literature.

**Source.** 1975, 130:1, eff. May 13, 1975.

### Section 287-C:3

 **287-C:3 License. –** Any corporation desiring to repair,
recondition, sell, design, develop and manufacture gambling machines as
provided in this chapter shall make application to the office of the
secretary of state upon such form as the secretary shall provide. Upon
the secretary's determination that said corporation has complied with
all provisions of federal law regarding manufacture and transportation
of gambling machines, he shall issue said corporation a license
authorizing the corporation to repair, recondition, sell, design,
develop and manufacture gambling machines and to print and distribute
literature advertising and promoting the use and possession of gambling
machines, as provided in this chapter.

**Source.** 1975, 130:1, eff. May 13, 1975.

### Section 287-C:4

 **287-C:4 State Exempt. –** In order to further carry out the
provisions of this chapter, this state shall henceforth be exempt from
the provisions of 15 U.S.C. 1172, as permitted under the terms of said
federal law.

**Source.** 1975, 130:1, eff. May 13, 1975.
