---
title: 'CHAPTER 287-D GAMES OF CHANCE'
---

TITLE XXIV
                                             
GAMES, AMUSEMENTS, AND ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS
===========================================

CHAPTER 287-D
                                             
GAMES OF CHANCE
---------------

### Section 287-D:1

 **287-D:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Applicant'' means an individual applying for a license under
this chapter.
                                             
 II. "Bona fide member'' means a person who has held full and regular
membership in the charitable organization for a period of not less than
60 days immediately prior to the games of chance in which such person
intends to participate. To qualify as a bona fide member of a charitable
organization, a person shall:
                                             
 (a) Satisfy all criteria for membership in the charitable
organization.
                                             
 (b) Pay all lawful fees or dues required by the charitable
organization.
                                             
 (c) Not have become a member solely for the purpose of operating
games of chance.
                                             
 III. "Games of chance'' means any game involving gambling as defined
by RSA 647:2, II, or any lottery prohibited by RSA 647:1, but shall not
include any game involving the use of a slot machine or any other device
in the nature of a slot machine, 50/50 raffles as defined in RSA
287-A:1, III, or ice-out contests as defined in RSA 287-D:1, VI.
                                             
 IV. (a) "Charitable organization'' means any bona fide religious,
charitable, civic, veterans', or fraternal or church organization,
including police and firemen's organizations which shall have been
registered with the secretary of state for at least 2 years.
                                             
 (b) A charitable organization shall not include auxiliary units,
committees, or other entities organized under the auspices of a
charitable organization eligible for licensure under this chapter, when
such auxiliary unit, committee, or other entity is organized for the
primary purpose of conducting games of chance.
                                             
 V. "Commission'' means the lottery commission established under RSA
284:6-a.
                                             
 VI. "Ice-out contest'' means a contest conducted by a charitable
organization whereby a marker is placed on a frozen lake and the person
most closely estimating the day and time the marker falls through the
ice wins 1/2 the contest proceeds collected by the charitable
organization.
                                             
 VII. "Game operator'' means a primary game operator or a secondary
game operator.
                                             
 VIII. "Game operator employer'' means a primary game operator or a
business entity who employs, supervises, and controls game operators and
who is hired by a charitable organization to operate games of chance on
its behalf. The owner of 10 percent or more of the entity, partner,
managing member, or chief executive of a business entity who serves as a
game operator employer must be licensed as a primary game operator.
                                             
 IX. "Gaming equipment'' means a collective reference to table game
devices and their associated equipment.
                                             
 X. "Primary game operator'' means any person other than a bona fide
member of the charitable organization, involved in conducting, managing,
supervising, directing, or running games of chance.
                                             
 XI. "Secondary game operator'' means any person other than a bona
fide member of the charitable organization, involved in dealing, running
a roulette wheel, handling chips, or providing accounting services or
security functions.
                                             
 XII. "Wager'' means a monetary agreement between 2 or more persons
that a sum of money or other valuable thing shall be paid to one of them
on the happening or not happening of an uncertain event. Wager may be
used synonymously with the term "bet.''

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:2

 **287-D:2 Enforcement. –** The lottery commission, with the
assistance of the attorney general and the chief of police of any city
or town where games of chance are held, shall administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:3

 **287-D:3 Rulemaking. –** The lottery commission shall adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. The application procedure for games of chance licenses for
charitable organizations.
                                             
 II. Information to be required on license applications for games of
chance licenses for charitable organizations.
                                             
 III. The application procedure for games of chance licenses for game
operators.
                                             
 IV. Information to be required on license applications for games of
chance licenses for game operators.
                                             
 V. Procedures for a hearing following revocation or denial of any
license issued pursuant to this chapter.
                                             
 VI. The operation of games of chance.
                                             
 VII. The rental or lease of facilities and the leasing or purchasing
of equipment for use in games of chance.
                                             
 VIII. Accountability controls to ensure game integrity, including,
but not limited to, cash, attendance, prizes, income, expense and
financial reporting, and recordkeeping to be implemented by licensed
charitable organizations and licensed game operators in addition to
requirements set forth in RSA 287-D:22.
                                             
 IX. Enforcement of this chapter pursuant to RSA 287-D:23 and RSA
287-D:24.
                                             
 X. Background and criminal records checks pursuant to RSA 287-D:11
and RSA 287-D:12.
                                             
 XI. The issuance of subpoenas pursuant to RSA 287-D:25.
                                             
 XII. Administrative orders and fines pursuant to RSA 287-D:23.
                                             
 XIII. Badge specifications, requirements, and fees pursuant to RSA
287-D:9, RSA 287-D:10, and RSA 287-D:13.
                                             
 XIV. License applications pursuant to RSA 287-D:5 through RSA
287-D:10.
                                             
 XV. Surveillance requirements pursuant to RSA 287-D:15.
                                             
 XVI. Gambling machine investigation and enforcement under RSA
287-D:28.
                                             
 XVII. Other matters related to the proper administration of this
chapter.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:4

 **287-D:4 Games of Chance Authorized. –**
                                             
 I. A charitable organization may conduct games of chance to promote
the purpose for which it was organized, and shall be licensed as
provided in this chapter.
                                             
 II. The license shall authorize games of chance of a specified type
on specified dates at specified times and at a specified location
including agricultural fairs and other locations where nonprofit
fundraising activities are conducted.
                                             
 III. No license shall be transferable.
                                             
 IV. No person shall be a party to, engage in, or supervise others in
the operation of games of chance in any capacity, unless that person is
licensed under this chapter.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:5

 **287-D:5 License Applications; General Requirements and Process.
–**
                                             
 I. All license applications shall be made on the forms supplied by
the lottery commission and shall be submitted to the lottery commission
by the individual applicant or an officer, director, or duly authorized
official of the entity seeking a license.
                                             
 II. Proof of authority to submit the application on behalf of the
entity may be required by the lottery commission.
                                             
 III. The applicant shall provide written notice of an application
submission to the chief of police of each city or town where games of
chance are held.
                                             
 IV. All applications shall include:
                                             
 (a) The type of license for which applied.
                                             
 (b) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
                                             
 (c) A notarized criminal history record release form, as provided
by the New Hampshire division of state police, department of safety,
which authorizes the release of his or her criminal history record, if
any, to the lottery commission.
                                             
 (d) A complete set of fingerprints taken by a qualified law
enforcement agency or an authorized employee of the department of
safety. In the event that the first set of fingerprints is invalid due
to insufficient pattern, a second set of fingerprints shall be necessary
in order to complete the criminal history records check.
                                             
 (e) The requisite fee for each license.
                                             
 (f) The requisite fee for the criminal records check and the
fingerprint check as established by the department of safety.
                                             
 (g) Certification by the applicant under oath that the
information provided on the application is accurate.
                                             
 (h) Certification under oath that the applicant has not, in any
jurisdiction, been convicted of a felony within the previous 10 years
which has not been annulled by a court, or a misdemeanor involving
falsehood or dishonesty within the previous 5 years which has not been
annulled by a court, nor violated the statutes or rules governing
charitable gambling.
                                             
 V. Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant for
completion.
                                             
 VI. Applicants for facilities and game operator employer licenses
shall comply with the provisions of RSA 287-D:12.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:6

 **287-D:6 Charitable Organization License Application; Specific
Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. In addition to the general requirements under RSA 287-D:5, a
charitable organization license application shall include, at a minimum,
the following information provided that the lottery commission may, by
rule, establish additional items to be submitted on the application form
or attached to it:
                                             
 (a) The name of each bona fide member of the charitable
organization who will participate in the operation of the games of
chance who shall comply with the provisions of RSA 287-D:5.
                                             
 (b) A list of the names and addresses of the current bona fide
members of the charity.
                                             
 (c) The name of the financial institution with at least one
branch in New Hampshire and the corresponding bank account number for
the account in which money from the game of chance will be deposited and
withdrawn.
                                             
 (d) If known, the date or dates and location or locations of each
game of chance to be sponsored by the charity.
                                             
 (e) The identity of the licensed primary game operator who will
operate the games of chance for the charity, if applicable.
                                             
 (f) The identity of the licensed facility at which the proposed
games will be held, if applicable.
                                             
 (g) The identity of the licensed game equipment dealer from whom
the charitable organization is buying or renting any equipment, if
applicable.
                                             
 (h) Documentation of exemption from federal income tax.
                                             
 (i) Proof that the religious, civic, fraternal, veterans', or
charitable purposes for which it was organized, other than charitable
gambling, are furthered through activities conducted in the state.
                                             
 (j) Documentation of registration with the director of charitable
trusts, if required under RSA 7:19 through RSA 7:32.
                                             
 II. Applications shall be received by the lottery commission no
fewer than 60 days before the first game date of the year. This
requirement may be waived by the lottery commission for good cause
shown.
                                             
 III. In addition to the certifications under RSA 287-D:5, the
applicant shall certify under oath that:
                                             
 (a) Only bona fide members of the charitable organization or
persons complying with the requirements of RSA 287-D:14, III, will
operate the games of chance.
                                             
 (b) The applicant or any member of the charitable organization
who will be participating in the operation of the games of chance is
aware of all statutes and rules applicable to the operation of games of
chance.
                                             
 IV. Only one license shall be issued to each applicant per year to
operate games of chance for 10 days, which 10 days need not be
consecutive.
                                             
 V. Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:7

 **287-D:7 Facilities License Application; Specific Requirements.
–**
                                             
 I. Any person or entity other than a charitable organization or
governmental subdivision with a facility at which games of chance are
held for 5 or more game dates per calendar year shall be licensed.
                                             
 II. In addition to the general requirements under RSA 287-D:5, a
facilities license application shall include, at a minimum, the
following information provided that the commission may, by rule,
establish additional items to be submitted on the application form or
attached to it:
                                             
 (a) Certification of compliance with all of the requirements of
RSA 287-D:5.
                                             
 (b) A certificate of good standing from the department of revenue
administration.
                                             
 (c) Two passport quality photographs, if the applicant is an
individual.
                                             
 III. Only one facilities license shall be issued to each applicant
per year.
                                             
 IV. Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:8

 **287-D:8 Game Operator Employer License Application; Specific
Requirements. –** Any person or entity other than a charitable
organization that employs primary game operators shall be licensed under
this section. In addition to the general requirements under RSA 287-D:5,
a game operator employer license application shall include, at a
minimum, the following information provided that the lottery commission
may, by rule, establish additional items to be submitted on the
application form or attached to it:
                                             
 I. Certification of compliance with all of the requirements of RSA
287-D:5.
                                             
 II. A certificate of good standing from the department of revenue
administration.
                                             
 III. Federal tax identification number.
                                             
 IV. Two passport quality photographs, if the applicant is an
individual.
                                             
 V. A description of the licensed premises.
                                             
 VI. A list of the known game dates on which the game operator
employer will participate including the name of the game, the location
of the game, and the charitable organization holding the game.
                                             
 VII. A bond for each location where the game operator employer is
conducting games of chance, conditioned upon the licensees running games
of chance in conformity with this chapter and with the rules and
regulations prescribed by the lottery commission, in the amount of up to

                                             $500,000 but not less than 
                                             $25,000. The amount of the bond in excess
of 
                                             $25,000 established for each licensee shall be based on that
licensee's normal outstanding obligations of charity payments and state
taxes.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:9

 **287-D:9 Primary Game Operator License Application; Specific
Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. Other than members of a charitable organization, any person who
supervises, manages, advises, or provides consulting to secondary game
operators or other primary game operators shall be licensed under this
section. In addition to the general requirements under RSA 287-D:5, a
primary game operator license application shall include, at a minimum,
the following information provided that the lottery commission may, by
rule, establish additional items to be submitted on the application form
or attached to it:
                                             
 (a) The identity of the game operator employer for whom the
applicant works.
                                             
 (b) A list of any other states in which the game operator has
been registered or licensed as a professional fundraiser, professional
game operator, or other similar position.
                                             
 (c) Whether a registration or license listed in subparagraph (b)
has been denied, suspended, revoked, or enjoined by a court or state
agency, or if such proceedings are pending.
                                             
 (d) The names and addresses of any individuals with whom the
applicant is affiliated in the fundraising or game operating business.
                                             
 (e) The name of the financial institution with at least one
branch in New Hampshire and the corresponding bank account number for
the account in which money from the game of chance will be deposited and
withdrawn.
                                             
 (f) Two passport quality photographs.
                                             
 II. The bank account identified in subparagraph I(e) shall be the
only account in which the primary game operator shall deposit and
withdraw moneys from games of chance.
                                             
 III. Concurrent with the charitable organization, primary game
operators who operate games of chance on behalf of a charitable
organization shall be responsible for all requirements for which the
charitable organization is responsible when a charitable organization
operates games of chance itself.
                                             
 IV. Unless a provision to the contrary is part of a written
agreement in place prior to the commencement of a game date between the
charitable organization and the game operator or game operator employer,
all moneys due to the charitable organization shall be paid over to the
organization no later than 5 business days following the date on which a
game was conducted. Notwithstanding the provisions of any agreement with
the charitable organization, the game operator or game operator employer
shall pay over all moneys due to the charitable organization no later
than 15 business days following a game date.
                                             
 V. The provisions of RSA 7:28-c shall not apply to primary game
operator licensees.
                                             
 VI. Nothing in this section shall prevent a licensee from working
for another game operator employer. A licensee who works for more than
one game operator employer during the licensed period shall submit a
supplemental application with a separate licensing fee, have a separate
badge for each game operator employer, and pay a separate fee for each
badge.
                                             
 VII. The primary game operator license shall expire on the last day
of the month of the licensee's birthday.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:10

 **287-D:10 Secondary Game Operator License Application; Specific
Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. Other than members of a charitable organization, any person who
is employed by a game operator employer or a primary game operator shall
be licensed under this section.
                                             
 II. In addition to the general requirements under RSA 287-D:5, a
secondary game operator license application shall include, at a minimum,
the following information provided that the lottery commission may, by
rule, establish additional items to be submitted on the application form
or attached to it:
                                             
 (a) A list of any other states in which the game operator has
been registered or licensed as a professional fundraiser, professional
game operator, or other similar position.
                                             
 (b) A statement of whether a registration or license listed in
subparagraph (a) has been denied, suspended, revoked, or enjoined by a
court or state agency, or if such proceedings are pending.
                                             
 (c) The identity of the primary game operators for whom the
applicant works.
                                             
 (d) Two passport quality photographs.
                                             
 III. A secondary game operator license shall expire on the last day
of the month of the licensee's birthday.
                                             
 IV. The provisions of RSA 7:28-c shall not apply to secondary game
operator licensees.
                                             
 V. Nothing in this section shall prevent a licensee from working for
different licensed entities. A licensee who works for more than one game
operator employer during the licensed period shall submit a supplemental
application with a separate licensing fee, have a separate badge for
each game operator employer, and pay a separate fee for each badge.
                                             
 VI. Upon receipt of a completed application under this section, and
at the request of the applicant, the lottery commission may issue a
provisional license, valid for up to 60 days, under rules adopted by the
lottery commission under RSA 541-A. If the lottery commission denies the
license, the provisional license shall expire upon the applicant's
receipt of such denial. If the applicant requests a provisional license
under this paragraph, he or she shall submit a fee of 
                                             $10 to the
lottery commission, in addition to the application fee for the license,
at the time of such request.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 248:1, eff. July 1, 2015 at 12:01 a.m.;
276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:11

 **287-D:11 Background Investigations. –**
                                             
 I. This section shall apply to applicants for a:
                                             
 (a) Facilities license.
                                             
 (b) Game operator employer license.
                                             
 II. Any person, association, corporation, or other type of entity
applying for or holding a license under paragraph I shall file, with an
initial application and every 5 years thereafter, with the attorney
general a complete and detailed written statement, signed under oath by
the applicant or holder of such license if an individual, or by the
officers of the entity, containing the following information:
                                             
 (a) The name, residence address, and nature of the ownership
interest including, where applicable, the number of shares of stock held
and if known, how obtained, of every person who possesses an ownership
interest in such entity.
                                             
 (b) The name, address, present principal occupation or
employment, and name and principal business of any corporation or other
organization in which such employment is carried on of every director,
officer, and holder of 10 percent or more ownership interest in such
entity.
                                             
 (c) Such information as the attorney general may prescribe by
rule.
                                             
 (d) Each licensee shall notify the attorney general and the
lottery commission of any change of information required by this
paragraph within 10 days of such change.
                                             
 III. (a) The lottery commission shall refer all applications to the
attorney general who shall conduct a background investigation of the
license applicant or holder, any person included in paragraph I, or any
person or entity upon whom the license applicant or holder relies for
financial support. Any appropriate state or federal law enforcement
system may investigate the subject's financial, criminal, or business
background, or any other information which the attorney general, in the
attorney general's sole discretion, may find to bear on the subject's
fitness to be associated with charitable gaming in New Hampshire,
including, but not limited to, the subject's character, personal
associations, and the extent to which the subject is properly doing
business in the manner in which it purports to operate. When the lottery
commission requests such an investigation, the attorney general shall
report the results of such investigation to the lottery commission
within 90 days after the receipt of the request. Notwithstanding RSA
91-A, the results of any such investigation shall be confidential and
shall not be subject to disclosure or to public inspection, except that
the attorney general shall have sole discretion to determine the extent
to which and the manner in which the results may be reported to the
lottery commission or other state agency or official and, if reported,
whether such results are to retain their confidential character;
provided, however, that whenever the attorney general conducts such an
investigation, the attorney general shall notify the lottery commission
whether or not in the attorney general's opinion such person is fit to
be associated with charitable gaming in New Hampshire. No person shall
be issued or hold a license if in the opinion of the attorney general
such person is not fit to be associated with charitable gaming in this
state.
                                             
 (b) The attorney general may conduct a background investigation
described in subparagraph (a) on the attorney general's motion.
                                             
 IV. The expenses of the office of attorney general in conducting any
investigation authorized in this section, including the services of
consultants, experts, accountants, and other assistants, shall be a
direct charge against the applicant or holder. Total expenses for each
investigation under this paragraph shall not exceed 
                                             $5,000, except with
the approval of the fiscal committee of the general court.
                                             
 V. In any investigation conducted pursuant to paragraph III, the
attorney general may require, by subpoena or otherwise, the attendance
of witnesses and the production of such correspondence, documents,
books, and papers as the attorney general deems advisable, and for
purposes of this section, may administer oaths and take the testimony of
witnesses. No person shall be excused from testifying or from producing
any book or paper in any investigation conducted pursuant to paragraph
III upon the ground that such testimony or documentary evidence might
tend to incriminate such person; provided that if, after a claim of
privilege, the attorney general, in writing, orders such person to
testify or produce documentary evidence, that person shall not be
prosecuted, punished, or subjected to any penalty or forfeiture for or
on account of any act, transaction, matter, or thing which such person,
under oath, disclosed or produced. No person so testifying shall be
exempt from prosecution or punishment for any perjury committed by such
person in such testimony.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:12

 **287-D:12 Background and Criminal Records Check. –**
                                             
 I. All applicants for a license pursuant to this chapter shall
submit to the lottery commission a New Hampshire department of safety,
division of state police, notarized criminal record release
authorization form.
                                             
 II. Upon receipt of an applicant's criminal record information, the
lottery commission shall make a determination of eligibility for
licensure and whether the applicant is fit to be associated with games
of chance in New Hampshire.
                                             
 III. The applicant shall submit with the release form a complete set
of fingerprints taken by a qualified law enforcement agency or an
authorized employee of the department of safety. In the event that the
first set of fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern, a
second set of fingerprints shall be necessary in order to complete the
criminal history records check. If, after 2 attempts, a set of
fingerprints is invalid due to insufficient pattern, the lottery
commission may, in lieu of the criminal history records check, accept
police clearances from every city, town, or county where the person has
lived during the past 5 years.
                                             
 IV. The lottery commission shall submit the criminal history records
release form and fingerprint form to the division of state police which
shall conduct a criminal history records check through its records and
through the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Upon completion of the
records check, the division of state police shall release copies of the
criminal history records to the lottery commission. The lottery
commission shall maintain the confidentiality of all criminal history
records information received pursuant to this section.
                                             
 V. The lottery commission shall bill the applicant for any fee
associated with the criminal or background record check to cover any fee
charged by the department of safety for the criminal records check in
paragraph I or by the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the background
check in paragraph IV.
                                             
 VI. For purposes of licensees, under RSA 287-D:7 or RSA 287-D:8 each
owner, partner, or trustee of the underlying property, or in the case of
a corporation, each officer, director, or shareholder, or in the case of
a limited liability company, each manager or member, shall comply with
all of the requirements of this section.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:13

 **287-D:13 License Fees. –** The application fee for:
                                             
 I. A charitable gaming license shall be 
                                             $25 per game date.
                                             
 II. A facility license shall be 
                                             $250 per year.
                                             
 III. A game operator employer license shall be 
                                             $750 per year.
                                             
 IV. A primary game operator license shall be 
                                             $500 per year.
                                             
 V. A secondary game operator license shall be 
                                             $30 per year.
                                             
 VI. Each original or replacement identification badge shall be 
                                             $10.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:14

 **287-D:14 Operation of Games of Chance. –**
                                             
 I. No more than 2 licensed charitable organizations may conduct
games of chance at any one location on any date.
                                             
 II. No agreement between a charitable organization and any other
licensee shall be valid unless such agreement is in writing and has been
approved by the lottery commission. The lottery commission shall create
standardized contracts.
                                             
 III. (a) Only persons licensed under this chapter shall operate
games of chance; except that, if all bona fide members of a charitable
organization are under 18 years of age, adult officers or directors of
the charitable organization or parents or legal guardians of bona fide
minor members, who have been authorized by the officers or directors of
the charitable organization, shall operate the games. Proof of bona fide
membership shall be required for any person not subject to licensure.
                                             
 (b) Notwithstanding subparagraph (a), if, by reason of the
established criteria for membership, all bona fide members of the
charitable organization are physically or mentally disabled, or both,
the officers, directors, or authorized officials of the charitable
organization may designate individuals to conduct the operation of games
of chance on behalf of said charitable organization. Individuals so
designated are subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter, and
the designation of such individuals is subject to the approval of the
lottery commission.
                                             
 (c) Notwithstanding subparagraph (a), all charitable
organizations that conduct games of chance for charitable purposes may
allow spouses, sons, and daughters of bona fide members who are at least
18 years of age to assist with the operation of the games of chance.
These spouses, sons, and daughters are subject to all applicable
provisions of this chapter, and are subject to the approval of the
lottery commission.
                                             
 (d) Notwithstanding subparagraph (a), all charitable
organizations that conduct games of chance for charitable purposes may
employ, by means of a written agreement, a licensed game operator
employer or a licensed primary game operator.
                                             
 IV. No compensation shall be paid to any operator of a game of
chance unless agreed to in advance in writing by the charitable
organization.
                                             
 V. No operator shall require additional fees not specifically
allowed under this chapter as a condition of contracting with the
operator for game dates.
                                             
 VI. No one under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to the
premises on which games of chance are being conducted, except when the
games are being conducted at a carnival. Proof of age shall be produced
upon request of the lottery commission or commission's agents. When
games of chance are conducted at a carnival, persons under the age of 18
years may be admitted to the premises on which the games are being
conducted when accompanied and supervised by a parent or legal guardian;
but persons under the age of 18 shall not be permitted to play games of
chance at a carnival.
                                             
 VII. Games of chance may be conducted between the hours of 11:00
a.m. and 1:00 a.m. the following day.
                                             
 VIII. No person operating a game of chance and no person who has
leased a facility or sold or leased game of chance paraphernalia or
related equipment to a charitable organization for use during games of
chance shall participate or play in any game conducted at that location
on that date.
                                             
 IX. No person who has in any jurisdiction been convicted of a felony
within the previous 10 years which has not been annulled by a court, or
a misdemeanor involving falsehood or dishonesty within the previous 5
years which has not been annulled by a court, or who has violated the
statutes or rules governing charitable gambling in the past year shall
operate a game of chance licensed under this chapter, or rent, lease,
sublease, or otherwise provide any hall or game of chance paraphernalia
for the conduct of games of chance licensed under this chapter.
                                             
 X. Only the treasurer of the charitable organization or a bona fide
member of the charitable organization designated by the treasurer shall
handle any monetary transactions related to the game of chance.
                                             
 XI. A member of the sponsoring charitable organization shall be
present and on site at least once per day during the operation of any
game of chance and shall file with the lottery commission an affidavit
attesting to the member's presence at the site during the operation of
any games of chance. The sponsoring charitable organization member shall
not be employed by the game operator.
                                             
 XII. (a) On game dates where the charitable organization operates
the games, the charitable organization shall deposit cash and proceeds
from a game of chance into the account required under this chapter. All
expenses, including prizes of 
                                             $500 or more and equipment and hall
rental fees shall be paid by check from said account. The treasurer of
the charitable organization shall document all prizes awarded as
prescribed in rules adopted by the lottery commission.
                                             
 (b) On game dates when the licensed game operator operates the
games, the licensed game operator shall deposit cash and proceeds from a
game of chance into the account required under this chapter. All
expenses, including equipment and hall rental fees shall be paid by
check or electronic fund transfers from the account described in RSA
287-D:9, I(e). The licensed game operator shall document all prizes
awarded as prescribed in rules adopted by the lottery commission. Prizes
of 
                                             $500 or more shall be paid by check from the account described in
RSA 287-D:9, I(e).
                                             
 XIII. All game of chance paraphernalia or related equipment used in
conducting games of chance shall be subject to inspection and approval
by the lottery commission.
                                             
 XIV. The charitable organization shall keep a record of all persons
participating in the operation of a game of chance, including but not
limited to, the date and location of the game and the person's name,
address, telephone number, and type of participation in the game.
                                             
 XV. For games of chance where chips have no monetary face value, the
charitable organization may offer any number of games per licensed event
in which each player may spend up to 
                                             $150 per game including buy-ins
and re-buys.
                                             
 XVI. Notwithstanding paragraph XV, the charitable organization may
offer one game per licensed event in which each player may spend up to

                                             $250 for the game including buy-ins and re-buys.
                                             
 XVII. For games of chance where chips have no monetary face value,
the payback in prizes shall not exceed 80 percent of the total amount
collected from players.
                                             
 XVIII. A games of chance licensee shall not play any games of chance
on a licensed game date unless all games of chance to be played have
been approved by the lottery commission and have been identified on an
approved game schedule.
                                             
 XIX. The charitable organization may amend or supplement the list of
members who will participate in the operation of a game of chance up to
10 working days prior to any particular game.
                                             
 XX. At least 45 days prior to each game date, the charitable
organization shall submit the date and location of the game of chance,
if this information has not already been submitted to the lottery
commission under RSA 287-D:6, I(d).
                                             
 XXI. Every game operator employer shall develop house rules and
submit such rules to the lottery commission for approval.
                                             
 XXII. Every game operator employer shall maintain list of
manufacturers and distributers detailing the type of gaming equipment
purchased from each. The information shall be detailed enough to permit
the lottery commission to research the origin and any piece of gaming
equipment.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015. 2016, 313:2,
eff. Aug. 23, 2016.

### Section 287-D:15

 **287-D:15 Surveillance Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. (a) A game operator employer conducting games of chance at a
facility that is required to be licensed pursuant to RSA 287-D:7 shall
conduct and record, at the expense of the game operator employer, video
surveillance that allows clear, unobstructed views of cashier
transactions, table games where cash wagers are accepted, and the
counting of money from storage boxes removed from a gaming table. A game
operator employer shall be exempt from this provision if the games of
chance are conducted in a temporary location for 4 days or fewer,
provided that an alternative method of surveillance is approved by the
commission.
                                             
 (b) Surveillance shall include the customer, the employee, and
the surrounding area and shall monitor and record with sufficient
clarity to identify employees and customers in all areas where currency
is counted, verified, sorted, stacked, or stored, including monitoring
and recording all table game drop boxes, safes, and counting surfaces,
and all cashier personnel. The counting surface area shall be
continuously monitored and recorded by a dedicated camera during the
count.
                                             
 (c) Access to the surveillance equipment shall be limited to
management personnel, designated employees, state regulators, and other
persons authorized in accordance with the surveillance policy.
                                             
 (d) The game operator employer shall ensure at least one person
at the facility while games of chance are being conducted is trained in
the use of the equipment, knowledge of the games, and all applicable
regulations.
                                             
 (e) Each camera required by these regulations shall be installed
in a manner that will prevent it from being readily obstructed, tampered
with, or disabled by customers or employees.
                                             
 (f) Reasonable effort shall be made to repair each malfunction of
surveillance system equipment required by the standards in this section
within 72 hours after the malfunction is discovered, provided any such
malfunction shall be reported to the commission immediately.
                                             
 (g) In the event of a dedicated camera malfunction, the game
operator employer or the surveillance person shall immediately provide
alternative camera coverage or other security measures.
                                             
 II. The surveillance system, at a minimum, shall:
                                             
 (a) Have an auxiliary or backup power source available and
capable of providing immediate restoration of power to all elements of
the surveillance system.
                                             
 (b) Include date and time generators that possess the capability
to display the date and time of recorded events on all digital
recordings. The displayed date and time shall not significantly obstruct
the recorded view.
                                             
 (c) Utilize cameras that possess the capability of having a
picture displayed on a monitor and recorded.
                                             
 (d) Include sufficient numbers of monitors and recorders to
simultaneously display and record multiple table games and count room
activities, and record the views of all dedicated cameras and
motion-activated cameras.
                                             
 (e) Record at 30 frames per second or its equivalent.
                                             
 III. (a) All digital records of coverage provided by cameras
required by this section shall be retained for a minimum of 45 days
except as otherwise provided in this paragraph.
                                             
 (b) Recordings involving suspected or confirmed gaming crimes,
unlawful activity, or actions of investigations by management personnel
shall be retained indefinitely until released by the commission and a
copy of any report and video shall be forwarded to the commission.
                                             
 (c) Duly authenticated copies of digital records shall be
provided to the commission upon request.
                                             
 (d) Multiple recordings shall be made to avoid any loss of images
in the event of a hardware failure.
                                             
 (e) A recording library log, or comparable alternative procedure
approved by the commission, shall be maintained to demonstrate
compliance with the storage, identification, and retention standards
required in this section.
                                             
 (f) All recordings not otherwise required to be retained may be
destroyed after a period of 45 days, unless the commission provides
written notice to retain certain video recordings.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:16

 **287-D:16 Wagers. –** No single wager by a player, on any game of
chance, shall exceed the amount of 
                                             $4. Provided, however, that in games
of poker where the chips have monetary value, play may be conducted
under "table stakes'' rules where the amount of blinds, antes, and any
other type of forced bet shall not exceed 
                                             $4 per player but the amount
wagered by a player during the play of a hand shall not be limited
except by the amount of chips the player has in his or her possession on
the table. In any such "table stakes'' game, the amount of chips a
player may purchase during the course of play in said game shall be no
greater in value than 
                                             $150.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 160:1, eff. July 1, 2015, at 12:01 a.m.

### Section 287-D:17

 **287-D:17 Equipment; Inspection. –**
                                             
 I. All devices and equipment used to conduct games of chance shall
be subject to inspection by duly authorized law enforcement or lottery
commission officials.
                                             
 II. No mechanism or device, which can be used to regulate odds,
shall be permitted to operate games of chance and no progression in any
form shall be permitted in the operation of any such game.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:18

 **287-D:18 Equipment; Ownership and Rental. –**
                                             
 I. If a charitable organization operates games of chance itself,
such games of chance shall be conducted with equipment that is:
                                             
 (a) Owned absolutely;
                                             
 (b) Used without payment or any compensation therefor by the
charitable organization; or
                                             
 (c) Rented at a fixed fee only from a dealer in such equipment
who has his or her principal place of business in this state and who is
licensed by the lottery commission.
                                             
 II. Any contract for the rental of equipment for games of chance
shall be independent of any contract for the rental of a facility. No
contract for the rental of equipment for games of chance shall be
contingent upon the charitable organization's agreement that it will
contract with a particular business for a particular facility or
equipment.
                                             
 III. If a charitable organization's games of chance are operated
through a primary game operator, the charitable organization shall not
be charged for the use of any equipment.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:19

 **287-D:19 Facilities; Rental. –**
                                             
 I. If a charitable organization operates games of chance itself,
such games of chance shall be conducted within a facility that is:
                                             
 (a) The charitable organization's primary meeting place, whether
owned absolutely or rented;
                                             
 (b) Used by the charitable organization without payment or any
compensation; or
                                             
 (c) Rented by the charitable organization for the express purpose
of conducting games of chance; provided that:
                                             
 (1) The charitable organization shall only rent a facility by
means of a fixed rental payment, and such agreement shall be approved by
the lottery commission.
                                             
 (2) The fixed rental payment shall not be based on a
percentage of what the charitable organization receives from the game of
chance and it shall reflect fair rental value of the property for any
use, not only as a place to hold a game of chance.
                                             
 (3) Any contract for the rental of a facility for a game of
chance shall be independent of any contract for the rental of equipment.
No contract for the rental of a facility for a game of chance shall be
contingent upon the charitable organization's agreement that it will
contract with a particular business for a particular facility or
equipment.
                                             
 II. (a) If a charitable organization contracts for services from a
game operator employer licensed under RSA 287-D:8, the game operator
employer shall provide equipment and shall not charge the charitable
organization for such equipment. No charitable organization shall
receive less than 35 percent of the gross revenues from any games of
chance minus any prizes paid and rental charge under subparagraph (b).
                                             
 (b) If a game operator employer charges rent, such charge shall
be by written agreement and shall be a fixed payment, not based on a
percentage of what the charitable organization receives from the game of
chance, and shall reflect fair rental value of the property for any use,
not only as a place to hold a game of chance.
                                             
 (c) Any service or rental agreement entered into by the
charitable organization shall be submitted with the charitable
organization's license application for review by the lottery
commission.
                                             
 (d) Under no circumstances shall a charitable organization
sustain any loss from games of chance, such that its share of the gross
revenues minus any prizes paid, and any rent paid or due, is less than
zero dollars, during a license period with a single game operator.
                                             
 (e) All contracts between a game operator employer and a
charitable organization to conduct games of chance under this chapter
shall contain the following language: "This agreement represents the
entire agreement between the parties. No charge or fee of any kind that
is not contained in this agreement shall be paid by the charity.''
                                             
 (f) No fee for any service which is required by or provided by
the game operator employer or primary game operator shall be allowed.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:20

 **287-D:20 Prizes. –**
                                             
 I. In games where chips have no monetary value, 3 percent of all
funds collected from players, less moneys used by the lottery commission
to fund authorized personnel expenses and related costs, shall be paid
to the state treasurer to be deposited into the special fund established
in RSA 284:21-j. Such payments shall be made once per month not later
than the 5th day of the month for the funds collected in the previous
month.
                                             
 II. In games where chips have monetary value, 10 percent of the rake
or house winnings and other moneys collected by the game operator that
are not paid out as prizes to players, less moneys used by the lottery
commission to fund authorized personnel expenses and related costs,
shall be paid to the state treasurer for deposit into the special fund
established in RSA 284:21-j. Such payments shall be made once per month
not later than the 5th day of the month for the funds collected in the
previous month.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:21

 **287-D:21 Agency Not Permitted. –** No charitable organization
shall act as an agent for conducting a game of chance, where it is
unlawful for the charitable organization's principal to conduct such a
game.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:22

 **287-D:22 Financial Reports, Inspections, and Other Records. –**
                                             
 I. (a) A charitable organization shall submit a complete financial
report for all game dates licensed under RSA 287-D:4 to the lottery
commission on forms approved by the lottery commission within 15 days of
the end of each month during which a game of chance was held. Such
report shall be completed by the treasurer of the charitable
organization or a duly authorized officer, director, or official of the
charitable organization who shall certify such accounting under oath;
or
                                             
 (b) A licensed primary game operator under contract to conduct
games of chance on behalf of a charitable organization shall prepare and
submit the financial reports required under subparagraph (a). In such
case the charitable organization shall not be required to submit such
report. Such report shall be completed by the primary game operator who
shall certify such accounting under oath.
                                             
 II. The financial report shall include:
                                             
 (a) A complete statement of all revenues and expenses.
                                             
 (b) A record of the amount of prizes awarded.
                                             
 (c) The names and addresses of the members who participated in
the games of chance.
                                             
 (d) The name and address of any fundraising counsel or game
operator involved in conducting the games of chance.
                                             
 III. The charitable organization shall retain canceled checks for
the payment of expenses and prizes for a period of 2 years.
                                             
 IV. All financial reports filed by charitable organizations shall be
maintained by the lottery commission for a period of one year from the
date of filing and shall be open to public inspection.
                                             
 V. All records pertaining to the games of chance shall be maintained
by the treasurer of the charitable organization or other duly authorized
director, officer, or official of the charitable organization and shall
be made available to the lottery commission, the attorney general, or
the chief of police of any city or town where games of chance are held
upon request. The lottery commission may audit, review, or inspect any
and all financial records, books, documentation, and bank accounts in
the name of the charitable organization that pertain to games of
chance.
                                             
 VI. A charitable organization shall maintain complete and accurate
documentation of all revenues and expenses contained in the financial
reports for at least 2 years from the date the financial report is
filed.
                                             
 VII. For the purpose of this section "records pertaining to the
games of chance'' means at a minimum, the following information,
provided that the lottery commission may, by rule, establish additional
items:
                                             
 (a) A policies and procedures manual governing gaming activities,
procedures related to the operation of a game, including play,
surveillance, security, revenue collection, and accounting for,
reporting, and auditing the results produced.
                                             
 (b) Documentation of information technology procedures and
controls, including monitoring systems for security incidents, data
back-up, and maintenance of systems to ensure integrity of games.
                                             
 (c) A formal bookkeeping system.
                                             
 (d) Bank statements, check registers, reconciliations, and
cancelled checks for games of chance bank accounts.
                                             
 (e) Bank deposit slips for the games of chance bank account.
                                             
 (f) Invoices for all games of chance related purchases.
                                             
 (g) Pre-numbered 3-part, table credit and fill slips.
                                             
 (h) Pit game table reconciliation sheets.
                                             
 (i) Cash poker table reconciliation sheets.
                                             
 (j) Cage accountability form summarizing daily cage activities.
                                             
 (k) Cage inventory count sheets supported by employee
signatures.
                                             
 (l) Inventory transfer to and from cage documentation sheets.
                                             
 (m) Chip inventory documentation forms, including purchase,
receipt, balances on hand, storage, and destruction.
                                             
 (n) Tournament sign-in or registration sheets, buy-in, re-buy,
and add-on documentation slips.
                                             
 (o) Tournament reconciliation sheets.
                                             
 (p) Documentation for all prize and promotional payouts.
                                             
 (q) Digital surveillance logs.
                                             
 (r) Documentation of the calculation of charity allocation and
state tax.
                                             
 (s) All written contracts, agreements, leases, rental agreements,
or any other statement of understanding regarding the operation of games
of chance.
                                             
 (t) Employee information, work schedules, sign-in sheets, time
cards, and table assignments.
                                             
 (u) Written manuals for surveillance systems, gaming computer
programs, and accounting programs.
                                             
 (v) Organization chart listing titles, roles, and
responsibilities.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:23

 **287-D:23 Penalties. –**
                                             
 I. In addition to any other penalties provided by law, any person
who violates RSA 287-D shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural
person, or guilty of a felony if any other person.
                                             
 II. Each day on which a game of chance is played in violation of RSA
287-D shall constitute a separate offense.
                                             
 III. The lottery commission may suspend or revoke the license of any
licensee who violates any provision of this chapter or for just cause
shown. Any licensee whose license is revoked shall not be eligible for
licensure for a period of up to one year from the date of revocation.
                                             
 IV. (a) Any person who purposely or knowingly makes a false entry in
any report required under this chapter which results in a reduction of
revenues due to a charitable organization shall be guilty of a class A
felony.
                                             
 (b) Any person who recklessly or negligently makes a false entry
on any report required under this chapter which results in a reduction
of revenues due to a charitable organization shall be guilty of a class
A misdemeanor.
                                             
 (c) Any game operator employer or game operator who fails to
remit to a charitable organization all revenues due under this chapter
shall be guilty of a class A felony.
                                             
 V. Any game operator employer or game operator who fails to pay the
charitable organization all moneys required by this chapter shall be
guilty of a class B felony for any amount less than 
                                             $500, and a class A
felony for any amount equal to or greater than 
                                             $500.
                                             
 VI. Any person who violates any provision of RSA 637 in a manner
that deprives the charitable organization of any moneys required by this
chapter, notwithstanding the penalties set forth in RSA 637:11, shall be
guilty of a class B felony for any amount less than 
                                             $500, and a class A
felony for any amount equal to or greater than 
                                             $500.
                                             
 VII. In addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter, a
charitable organization that suffers a loss caused by the violation of
any provision of this chapter may bring a civil action for actual
damages suffered. If the court finds that the violation was committed
purposefully or knowingly, it shall award enhanced compensatory damages
of not less than 2 times the amount of actual damages suffered, and may
award up to 3 times the amount of actual damages suffered. In any civil
action, the prevailing party shall be awarded court costs and reasonable
attorney's fees. No waiver of the provisions of this paragraph shall be
enforceable.
                                             
 VIII. The lottery commission may issue an order requiring any person
or organization to comply with this chapter or any rule adopted pursuant
to this chapter, and may require such remedial measures as may be
necessary.
                                             
 IX. The lottery commission may impose an administrative fine scaled
to reflect a violator's prior history of noncompliance with laws
pertaining to games of chance and the scope and severity of the
violation, after notice and hearing, pursuant to rules adopted under RSA
541-A, for any violation of this chapter, any rule adopted under this
chapter, any license issued pursuant to this chapter, or any order
issued pursuant to this chapter, or upon any person who makes or
certifies to a material false statement relative to any application or
report required by this chapter. In determining the amount of a fine,
the lottery commission may take into consideration all relevant
circumstances, including: the degree of noncompliance, the extent of
harm caused by the violation, the nature and persistence of the
violation, the time and cost associated with the investigation by the
state, and the economic impact of the violation on the state or the
charitable organization conducting or sponsoring the game. No
administrative fine imposed under this paragraph shall preclude the
imposition of other penalties as provided by law. Rehearings and appeals
from a decision of the lottery commission under this paragraph shall
comply with RSA 541. Fines imposed by the lottery commission shall be as
follows:
                                             
 (a) The fine for a minor violation shall be not less than 
                                             $25
and not more than 
                                             $500 per violation. A minor violation shall be one
where the lottery commission determines that the potential for harm to
the interests of the state and the charitable organization, as well as
the integrity of charitable gaming is minor and may include, but is not
limited to, the failure of a game operator, a game operator employer,
charitable organization, or charitable organization member to:
                                             
 (1) Wear a properly issued badge;
                                             
 (2) Post 2 copies of the laws and rules;
                                             
 (3) Have a diagram available for each table where games of
chance are being played indicating the type of game being played, the
bet amount, the buy-in amount, and the re-buy amounts as applicable; or
                                             
 (4) Publicly display the name of the charitable organization.
                                             
 (b) The fine for a moderate violation shall be not less than

                                             $250 and not more than 
                                             $1,500 per violation. A moderate violation
shall be one where the lottery commission determines that the potential
for harm to the interests of the state and the charitable organization,
as well as the integrity of charitable gaming is moderate and may
include, but is not limited to, a game operator, game operator employer,
charitable organization, or charitable organization member:
                                             
 (1) Filing a late financial report;
                                             
 (2) Operating a game not specifically listed on the game
schedule;
                                             
 (3) Operating a game on a different date than licensed without
approval of the lottery commission;
                                             
 (4) Committing 3 or more minor violations within 2 years; or
                                             
 (5) Knowingly operating a game of chance without a
representative of the charitable organization present as specified in
RSA 287-D:14, XI.
                                             
 (c) The fine for a major violation shall be not less than 
                                             $1,000
and not more than 
                                             $5,000 per violation. A major violation shall be one
where the lottery commission determines that the potential for harm to
the interests of the state and the charitable organization, as well as
the integrity of charitable gaming is major and shall include, but is
not limited to, a game operator, game operator employer, charitable
organization, or charitable organization member:
                                             
 (1) Operating a game of chance without a license;
                                             
 (2) Operating a game of chance without having the personnel or
officials required;
                                             
 (3) Purposely operating a game of chance without a
representative of the charitable organization present as specified in
RSA 287-D:14, XI;
                                             
 (4) Operating a game of chance with game operators who are not
licensed;
                                             
 (5) Failing to establish or maintain a New Hampshire bank
account; or
                                             
 (6) Committing 5 or more minor violations or 3 or more
moderate violations within 2 years.
                                             
 (d) The lottery commission may suspend any part of a fine for
just cause.
                                             
 X. All fines imposed by the lottery commission shall be deposited in
the special fund established pursuant to RSA 284:21-j.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015

### Section 287-D:24

 **287-D:24 Rehearing and Appeal. –** Any person aggrieved by a
decision of the commission issued pursuant to this chapter may apply to
the commission for a rehearing within 15 business days of the decision.
Rehearings and appeals shall be governed by RSA 541.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:25

 **287-D:25 Subpoenas. –** The lottery commission may issue subpoenas
for witnesses and for documents relative to investigations or
adjudicatory hearings held by the lottery commission. The attorney
general shall assist the lottery commission in matters pertaining to the
enforcement of subpoenas.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1. 2015, 276:127, eff. July 1, 2015.

Unlawful Gambling Machines
--------------------------

### Section 287-D:26

 **287-D:26 Purpose. –** The general court finds use of gambling
machines is pervasive statewide with little or no oversight by the
state. The general court also finds that redemption slot machines are
frequently a front for unlawful gambling, and the use of such machines
siphons money away from legal, charitable gambling to the detriment of
the state's charities. Therefore the general court is establishing an
administrative investigation and enforcement ability in addition to
existing criminal prosecution.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:27

 **287-D:27 Definitions. –** For purposes of this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Antique gambling machine'' means any device or equipment at
least 25 years old which is in the possession of a collector and which
is not maintained or operated for gambling purposes.
                                             
 II. "Collector'' means a person who for nostalgic reasons, monetary
investment, or personal interest acquires antique gambling machines as
defined in paragraph I for personal display or retention.
                                             
 III. "Family entertainment center'' means a place of business having
at least 50 games or devices designed and manufactured only for bona
fide amusement purposes on premises which are operated for the
entertainment of the general public and tourists as a bona fide
entertainment facility and not having more than 15 percent of the total
games or machines being redemption slot machines or redemption poker
machines.
                                             
 IV. "Gambling'' means to risk something of value upon a future
contingent event not under one's control or influence, upon an agreement
or understanding that something of value will be received in the event
of a certain outcome. For the purposes of this paragraph, the phrase
"something of value'' shall include a sweepstakes ticket or other item
obtained in conjunction with the purchase of goods or services that
entitles the holder to a share or chance in a sweepstakes where, but for
the opportunity to enter the sweepstakes, the value of purchased goods
or services is insufficient to justify the purchase or the inducement to
purchase the goods or services.
                                             
 V. "Gambling machine'' means any device or equipment that is capable
of being used to play sweepstakes or games of chance and which
discharges money, or anything that may be exchanged for money, cash
equivalent, debit card, merchandise credit card, or opportunities to
enter sweepstakes or play games of chance, or displays any symbol
entitling a person to receive such a prize.
                                             
 VI. "Redemption slot machine'' or "redemption poker machine'' means
any device or equipment that operates by means of the insertion of a
coin or token and that may entitle the person playing or operating the
game or machine to additional chances or free plays, or to receive
points or coupons which may be exchanged for merchandise only, excluding
alcoholic beverages, money, cash equivalent, debit card, merchandise
credit card, or opportunities to enter sweepstakes or play games of
chance, and provided the value for such points or coupons does not
exceed 2 1/2 cents for each credit on the game or machine.
                                             
 VII. "Sweepstakes'' means any game, advertising scheme or plan, or
other promotion which, with or without payment of any consideration, a
person may enter to win or become eligible to receive any prize, the
determination of which is based upon chance. For purposes of this
chapter, the term includes only those sweepstakes that an entrant can
enter, play, or otherwise interact with using a gambling machine
furnished by the sweepstakes operator or an affiliate or person under
contract with the operator, in an establishment controlled by,
affiliated with, or contracting with the operator.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:28

 **287-D:28 Investigation and Enforcement. –** The commission shall
investigate and enforce this subdivision relating to gambling machines
and shall have statewide jurisdiction whether or not persons or entities
are licensed by the commission. The commission may seek administrative
search warrants as required, and may issue subpoenas as provided in RSA
287-D:25.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:29

 **287-D:29 Gambling Machines Not Authorized. –** A person shall be
in violation of this subdivision if such person conducts, finances,
manages, supervises, directs, or owns all or part of a business, and
such person or business possesses or promotes gambling on a gambling
machine.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:30

 **287-D:30 Fines and Forfeiture. –** Any person who violates this
subdivision shall be fined not less than 
                                             $5,000 per day for each
gambling machine used or intended for use, and all implements,
equipment, and apparatus used in violation of this subdivision shall be
forfeited.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 287-D:31

 **287-D:31 Exceptions. –** This subdivision shall not apply to:
                                             
 I. Dispenser devices approved by the commission which are located at
the regular meeting place of, or at a facility owned, leased, or
utilized by, a charitable organization licensed under RSA 287-E:20.
                                             
 II. Bona-fide redemption slot machines or redemption poker machines
at a family entertainment center.
                                             
 III. Cruise ships which are equipped with gambling machines whose
primary purpose is touring. Any such cruise ship shall be allowed to
temporarily enter New Hampshire coastal waters and ports for up to 48
hours, provided that all gambling machines on board are not in use or
capable of being used while in New Hampshire coastal waters and ports.
For the purposes of this paragraph "cruise ship'' means any vessel which
is capable of providing overnight accommodations for 500 or more
people.
                                             
 IV. An antique gambling machine in the possession of a collector
which is not maintained or operated for gambling purposes.

**Source.** 2014, 329:1, eff. July 1, 2015.
