---
title: CHAPTER 176 THE LIQUOR COMMISSION
---

TITLE XIII
                                             
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
===================

CHAPTER 176
                                             
THE LIQUOR COMMISSION
---------------------

### Section 176:1

 **176:1 Commission. –** There shall be a state liquor commission
under the executive direction of a liquor commissioner, who shall also
be known as the chairman of the liquor commission, appointed by the
governor with the consent of the council. The commissioner shall have
significant business management experience and shall complete a criminal
history records check prior to confirmation by the council. The liquor
commissioner shall hold office for a term of 4 years. If a vacancy shall
occur, it shall be filled for the remainder of the term. The
commissioner may be removed by the governor and council for cause.

**Source.** 1990, 255:1. 2007, 156:5. 2013, 258:1, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 176:2

 **176:2 Liquor Commissioner; Compensation. –** The annual salary of
the commissioner shall be as specified in RSA 94:1-a, and the
commissioner shall receive his or her reasonable expenses while
traveling in the performance of his or her duties, provided that the
commissioner shall not be allowed as expenses, travel between his or her
place of residence and the commissioner's office in Concord, nor shall
the commissioner be allowed board or lodging while in Concord. The
commissioner shall serve as the representative to the National Alcoholic
Beverage Control Association.

**Source.** 1990, 255:1. 1998, 167:10. 2013, 258:2, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 176:2-a

 **176:2-a Deputy Commissioner. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall nominate a deputy commissioner for
appointment by the governor with the consent of the council who shall be
qualified to hold that position by reason of education and experience.
The deputy commissioner shall hold office for a term of 4 years and may
be reappointed. The deputy commissioner shall be subject to a background
check by the state police prior to appointment.
                                             
 II. If a vacancy shall occur in said office, it shall be filled for
the remainder of the term. The deputy commissioner may be removed by the
governor and council for cause.
                                             
 III. The annual salary of the deputy commissioner shall be as
specified in RSA 94:1-a.
                                             
 IV. The deputy commissioner shall perform such duties as are
assigned by the commissioner. The deputy commissioner shall assume the
duties of the commissioner in the event that the commissioner is unable
for any reason to perform such duties.
                                             
 V. The deputy commissioner shall, subject to the supervision of the
commissioner, exercise authority as required to ensure that the
divisions and their directors are implementing the organizational goals
and managing the work of the commission in an effective and efficient
manner.

**Source.** 2013, 258:3, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 176:3

 **176:3 Duties. –** The primary duties of the liquor commission
shall be to:
                                             
 I. Optimize the profitability of the commission.
                                             
 II. Maintain proper controls.
                                             
 III. Assume responsibility for the effective and efficient operation
of the commission.
                                             
 IV. Provide service to the customers of the commission, pursuant to
this title.

**Source.** 1990, 255:1. 1991, 349:1, eff. June 29, 1991.

### Section 176:4

 **176:4 Requirements. –** The commissioner and deputy commissioner
shall devote their entire time to the service of the commission. The
commissioner and deputy commissioner shall not have any financial
interest, direct or indirect, in the liquor or beverage business. The
compensation and expenses of the commissioner and deputy commissioner
and the expenses of the administration of this chapter shall be paid by
the state on the warrant of the governor with the approval of the
council.

**Source.** 1990, 255:1. 2013, 258:4, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 176:5

 **176:5 Bond. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1995, 34:15, eff. June 23, 1995.
                                             ]

### Section 176:6

 **176:6 Offices; Seal. –** The commission shall be provided with
suitable offices in the city of Concord. It shall adopt a proper seal.

**Source.** 1990, 255:1, eff. July 1, 1990.

### Section 176:7

 **176:7 Assistants and Employees. –** The state liquor commission
may employ such assistants as are, in its opinion, necessary for the
proper transaction of its business, and fix their compensation, subject
to the rules of the director of personnel. It may secure any necessary
technical or professional assistance.

**Source.** 1990, 255:1. 1992, 146:2. 1996, 106:1.

### Section 176:8

 **176:8 Divisions and Directors. –** The commission shall have 3
divisions under the direction of unclassified division directors. The
directors shall be nominated by the commissioner for appointment by the
governor with the consent of the council and shall serve for terms of 4
years dependent upon maintaining good behavior and competence. There
shall be a division of marketing, merchandising, and warehousing, a
division of administration, and a division of enforcement and licensing.
The director of the division of enforcement and licensing shall be
subject to a background check by the state police prior to appointment.

**Source.** 1990, 235:2; 255:1. 1992, 146:3. 1996, 106:2. 2009, 144:121.
2013, 258:5, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 176:9

 **176:9 Liquor Investigator; Training. –**
                                             
 I. The commission may, subject to rules adopted by the director of
personnel, employ and dismiss liquor investigators. Liquor investigators
shall, under the direction of the commission, investigate any or all
matters arising under this title.
                                             
 II. Any new liquor investigator employed by the commission under
this section after August 13, 1985, shall, within 6 months of
employment, satisfactorily complete a preparatory police training
program as provided by RSA 188-F:27, unless he has already completed
such a program.
                                             
 III. The commissioner, deputy commissioner, assistant, or liquor
investigator may enter any place where liquor, beverages, or tobacco
products are sold or manufactured, at any time, and may examine any
license or permit issued or purported to have been issued under the
terms of this title. They shall make complaints for violations of this
title.

**Source.** 1990, 255:1. 1992, 146:4. 2008, 341:11. 2013, 258:6, eff.
Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 176:10

 **176:10 Preference Given. –** Any person who served for not less
than 90 days in the armed forces of the United States during "any war in
which the United States was engaged, and received an honorable discharge
from such service,'' shall be given preference in appointment under the
provisions of RSA 176:7, RSA 176:9, RSA 177:4, and RSA 179:59, if
qualified for such positions.

**Source.** 1990, 255:1. 1992, 146:5, eff. July 5, 1992.

### Section 176:11

 **176:11 Commission to Sell. –**
                                             
 I. It shall be the duty of the commission to buy and have in its
possession liquor for sale in the manner provided in this title. Such
liquors shall be free from adulteration and misbranding within the
meaning of the provisions of RSA 146. All liquors sold for medicinal use
shall conform to the standards and tests for such liquors as laid down
in the United States Pharmacopoeia, official at the time of sale. All
purchases of liquor shall be made by the commission directly and not
through the department of administrative services. The commission shall
be subject to all the provisions so far as applicable of RSA 9.
                                             
 II. In the event that the commission determines New Hampshire liquor
revenues are being diverted by actions taken by persons holding either
liquor and wine representative or liquor and wine vendor licenses who
compete directly or indirectly with the commission for market share in
this or other states, the commission may take such marketing or
merchandising action, or both, as it deems necessary, including
sanctions against products supplied by the competing entities.

**Source.** 1990, 255:1. 1992, 146:6. 1993, 285:5. 2003, 231:11, eff.
July 1, 2003.

### Section 176:12

 **176:12 New Hampshire Products. –** The commission, wherever
feasible, shall purchase and list for sale in all state stores the
domestic liquor and wines manufactured or bottled in this state by a
manufacturer.

**Source.** 1990, 255:1, eff. July 1, 1990.

### Section 176:13

 **176:13 Listing and Delisting of Products. –**
                                             
 I. All decisions regarding listing and delisting of products for
sale shall be made by the commission.
                                             
 II. The commission shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A establishing
procedures and criteria for listing and delisting of products for sale.
These rules shall include procedures for appeal of commission
decisions.
                                             
 III. All requests for action regarding listing or delisting from
vendors or their representatives shall be submitted to the commission,
to the attention of the chairman.

**Source.** 1990, 255:1, eff. July 1, 1990.

### Section 176:14

 **176:14 Rulemaking. –** The commission shall adopt rules, under RSA
541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Procedures for regular and special meetings of the commission.
                                             
 II. Procedures for responses to petitions on rulemaking.
                                             
 III. Methods of complying with requests for information under RSA
91-A, including copying fees sufficient to cover the cost of copies.
                                             
 IV. Declaratory ruling procedures.
                                             
 V. Procedures for handling petitions from municipalities to revoke a
liquor license.
                                             
 VI. Listing and delisting products for sale.
                                             
 VII. Liquor licenses, including:
                                             
 (a) Requirements and restrictions for each type of license.
                                             
 (b) Procedures and forms to apply for or renew a license.
                                             
 (c) Safekeeping of licenses.
                                             
 (d) Authorized expansion of a licensed facility and procedures
for authorization.
                                             
 (e) Procedures to approve exceptions of license requirements,
restrictions, and limitations.
                                             
 (f) Training and continuing education required or recommended for
licensees.
                                             
 VIII. Licensee operations, including:
                                             
 (a) Procedures for on-premises and off-premises licensees to
purchase wines and liquor.
                                             
 (b) Credit and billing procedures, including fees for late
payment.
                                             
 (c) Bailment requirements, including fees.
                                             
 (d) Restrictions on packaging, promotions, signage, and operating
hours.
                                             
 (e) Relations between types of licensees.
                                             
 (f) Procedures for public sampling of liquor, wine, or beverages
pursuant to RSA 179:44.
                                             
 (g) Collection of additional fees required under RSA 178:6, VI,
RSA 178:8, IV, and RSA 178:26.
                                             
 IX. Requirements and procedures for direct shipments.
                                             
 X. Any other matters necessary to implement their duties under this
title. As a condition of the commission invoking its rulemaking
authority under this paragraph, the liquor commission shall provide a
written report detailing the necessity for the proposed rule as set
forth in the rulemaking notice, to include any fiscal impact or policy
implications related to the adoption of the proposed rule, to the
chairpersons of the house and senate executive departments and
administration committees, the chairpersons of the house and senate
standing committees with jurisdiction over revenue collection, the joint
legislative committee on administrative rules, and the chairperson of
the fiscal committee of the general court.

**Source.** 1990, 255:1. 1991, 204:1. 2013, 174:1, eff. July 2, 2013.

### Section 176:15

 **176:15 Insurance. –** The commission shall have power to insure
the state liquor warehouse or warehouses and contents against fire and
sprinkler damage and such insurance shall be purchased through the
department of administrative services.

**Source.** 1990, 255:1. 1992, 146:7. 1994, 158:11, eff. May 23, 1994.

### Section 176:16

 **176:16 Funds. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph II, the state treasurer shall
credit all gross revenue derived by the commission from the sale of
liquor, or from license fees, and interest received on such moneys, to a
special fund, to be known as the liquor commission fund, from which the
treasurer shall pay all expenses of the commission incident to the
administration of this title. Any balance left in such fund after such
expenses are paid shall be deposited in the general fund on a daily
basis.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding any provision of law, or the designation of the
funds allocated by the state to the liquor commission as the liquor
commission fund, the general court shall retain budgeting authority and
control over the liquor commission.
                                             
 III. 1.7 percent of the previous fiscal year gross profits derived
by the commission from the sale of liquor shall be deposited into the
alcohol abuse prevention and treatment fund established by RSA 176-A:1.
For the purpose of this section, gross profit shall be defined as total
operating revenue minus the cost of sales and services as presented in
the state of New Hampshire comprehensive annual financial report,
statement of revenues, expenses, and changes in net position for
proprietary funds.
                                             
 IV. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the expenditure
of additional funds over budget estimates is necessary for the proper
funding of retirement and health benefits for commission employees, the
commissioner may request, with prior approval of the fiscal committee of
the general court, that the governor and council authorize the transfer
of funds from the liquor commission fund.
                                             
 V. The commissioner is authorized to transfer funds within and among
all accounting units within the commission's operating budget and to
create accounting units and expenditure classes as required and as the
commissioner deems necessary and appropriate to address present or
projected budget deficits, or to respond to changes in federal law,
regulations, or programs, and otherwise as necessary for the efficient
management of the liquor commission. Any individual transfer of 
                                             $75,000
or more shall require prior approval of the fiscal committee of the
general court and governor and council, and any determination of this
prior approval requirement shall not be determined on a cumulative
basis. The provisions of this section shall not be subject to RSA
9:16-a, RSA 9:17-a, and RSA 9:17-c.

**Source.** 1990, 255:1. 1996, 275:11. 2000, 328:2. 2009, 144:122. 2012,
247:21, eff. Aug. 17, 2012. 2015, 276:138, 251, 263, eff. July 1, 2015.
2016, 263:3, eff. June 15, 2016.

### Section 176:16-a

 **176:16-a Revenue Shortfalls; Reports. –** Beginning July 1, 2015
and for each fiscal year thereafter, if the transfer of revenue from the
liquor commission to the general fund under RSA 176:16 falls short of
the revenue plan for a completed fiscal year, the commission shall
reduce the commission's budgeted appropriations for the subsequent
fiscal year by an amount equal to the shortfall up to 5 percent of the
budgeted appropriations and shall provide a report by September 30 each
year of any such reductions to the comptroller, the commissioner of the
department of administrative services, and the fiscal committee of the
general court.

**Source.** 2015, 276:253, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 176:17

 **176:17 Purchases by the Liquor Commission. –** The liquor
commission shall purchase all liquor, wine, and beverages from primary
sources. For the purposes of this title, primary source means the
manufacturer or producer, whether or not it is within the state. If a
primary source is not available, the commissioner may, if he or she
feels it is in the best interests of the state, allow an exemption and
shall explain why such exemption has been allowed.

**Source.** 1990, 255:1. 1994, 236:3. 2013, 258:7, eff. Sept. 22, 2013.

### Section 176:18

 **176:18 Contracts Entered into by the Liquor Commission. –**
Contracts in excess of 
                                             $10,000 made or entered into by the liquor
commission, including but not limited to contracts for warehousing,
transportation, and advertising, shall be competitively bid, reviewed by
the attorney general, and approved by the governor and council before
becoming effective. This section shall not apply to leases of retail
stores. If the commission uses competitive bidding, this section shall
not apply to design, construction, renovation, relocation, and property
management of retail stores, purchase of products for sale in retail
stores, purchase of products for sale on a wholesale basis, or purchase
of supplies pursuant to RSA 21-I:18, I(b).

**Source.** 2013, 157:2, eff. June 28, 2013.

### Section 176:19

 **176:19 Commission to Study the Sale of Beer in Refillable
Containers. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2014, 73:2, eff. Dec. 1, 2014.
                                             ]
