---
title: 'CHAPTER 362-E TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM'
---

TITLE XXXIV
                                             
PUBLIC UTILITIES
================

CHAPTER 362-E
                                             
TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
-----------------------------------------------

### Section 362-E:1

 **362-E:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Commission'' means the governor's commission on disability
established in RSA 275-C.
                                             
 II. "Telecommunications equipment assistance'' means a
teletypewriter or other telecommunications equipment used by a qualified
person to conduct telephone communications.
                                             
 III. "Telecommunications relay service'' means a service
transmitting messages and information between a person using standard
telephone equipment for spoken communications and a qualified person
using telecommunications equipment assistance.
                                             
 IV. "Qualified person'' means a person who is unable to reasonably
use standard telephone equipment due to a disability, such as being
deaf, hard of hearing, speech impaired, paraplegic, or unable to use his
or her arms.

**Source.** 1996, 240:1. 1999, 337:4. 2002, 219:9, eff. July 1, 2002.

### Section 362-E:2

 **362-E:2 Administration. –** The commission shall administer the
telecommunications equipment assistance program and shall implement the
program by contract with one or more entities.

**Source.** 1996, 240:1. 1999, 337:5, eff. Jan. 2, 2000.

### Section 362-E:3

 **362-E:3 Duties. –** The commission shall:
                                             
 I. Establish:
                                             
 (a) A program that will enable qualified persons in New Hampshire
to access telephone service through the use of telecommunications
equipment assistance.
                                             
 (b) Eligibility criteria, which shall include ability to pay. The
telecommunications equipment assistance program shall pay the full costs
for persons whose income levels do not exceed 200 percent of the federal
poverty level guidelines published in the Federal Register, exclusive of
disability-related expenses.
                                             
 (c) Guidelines for verifying the applicant's impairment and
eligibility.
                                             
 (d) Limits on equipment availability.
                                             
 II. Contract services for:
                                             
 (a) Distributing equipment.
                                             
 (b) Teaching applicants how to use or access any adaptive
equipment.
                                             
 (c) Evaluating the needs of an applicant in the applicant's
customary environment.
                                             
 (d) Providing assistance to applicants with selection, design,
fit, application, and other issues related to the use of assistive
devices.
                                             
 III. Consult with the New Hampshire Telecommunications Relay
Services Advisory Board on methods to enhance the current
telecommunications relay service and increase accessibility.
                                             
 IV. Perform any other functions necessary to implement the
provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1996, 240:1. 1999, 337:6, eff. Jan. 2, 2000; 337:7, eff.
Jan. 2, 2000.

### Section 362-E:4

 **362-E:4 Cooperation. –** The commission may cooperate with any
local, state, or federal agency or any private organization necessary to
implement the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1996, 240:1, eff. July 1, 1996.

### Section 362-E:5

 **362-E:5 Rulemaking. –** The commission shall adopt rules, pursuant
to RSA 541-A, relative to:
                                             
 I. Eligibility criteria.
                                             
 II. Procedures for the verification of an applicant's impairment and
eligibility.
                                             
 III. Limits on equipment availability.
                                             
 IV. The proper administration of this chapter.

**Source.** 1996, 240:1. 1999, 337:8, eff. Jan. 2, 2000.

### Section 362-E:6

 **362-E:6 Funding. –** The telecommunications equipment assistance
program shall be funded in an amount not to exceed 
                                             $96,000 annually
from the telecommunications relay service trust fund established by the
public utilities commission.

**Source.** 1996, 240:1. 1999, 337:9, eff. Jan. 2, 2000.

### Section 362-E:7

 **362-E:7 Annual Report. –** The governor's commission on disability
shall file a report which shall include the number of persons assisted,
all sources of funding, and the total amount disbursed under this
chapter. Such report shall be submitted annually to the governor and
council, the senate president, the speaker of the house and the public
utilities commission, on or before October 1.

**Source.** 1996, 240:1, eff. July 1, 1996. 2015, 259:8, eff. July 1,
2015.
