---
title: 'CHAPTER 363-B PROCEDURES FOR TERMINATION OF CERTAIN UTILITY SERVICES'
---

TITLE XXXIV
                                             
PUBLIC UTILITIES
================

CHAPTER 363-B
                                             
PROCEDURES FOR TERMINATION OF CERTAIN UTILITY SERVICES
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 363-B:1

 **363-B:1 Termination of Service. –**
                                             
 I. No public gas or electric utility, as defined in RSA 362:2, shall
terminate any residential service without good cause and without
providing the customer at least 10 days' written notice of the utility
company's intent to terminate service. The notification shall be sent by
regular mail or shall be delivered by hand, and shall inform the
customer of the proposed date of termination, the reason for
termination, and the provision in RSA 363-B:2 for questioning or
contesting the reason for termination.
                                             
 II. For purposes of this section, good cause shall mean violation of
any tariff provision then in force as approved by the public utilities
commission, or nonpayment of charges that are past due and remain unpaid
after proper demand for them.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a gas or electric public utility
may terminate service to a residential customer without prior notice to
the customer or the commission when:
                                             
 (a) There exists unauthorized or fraudulent use or procurement of
utility service;
                                             
 (b) A condition dangerous to the health, safety, or utility
service of others exists;
                                             
 (c) There is a clear and present danger to life, health, or
physical property; or
                                             
 (d) The customer has clearly abandoned the premises.
                                             
The utility shall notify the commission after it has terminated service
for any of these reasons.
                                             
 IV. This section shall not apply when the customer requests the
termination of service.

**Source.** 1974, 11:1. 1981, 129:1, eff. July 10, 1981.

### Section 363-B:2

 **363-B:2 Conference Provided. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who receives a notice of intent to terminate service
pursuant to RSA 363-B:1 and believes such proposed termination to be
unjustified may request, prior to the date specified in the termination
notice, a conference with the utility company involved to review the
basis for the proposed termination. The conference with the utility
company shall be conducted in person, by writing or by telephone as the
customer may elect. If the customer is dissatisfied with the outcome of
the conference he may, within 3 days after the conference if the
conference is conducted in person, or within 5 days after the conference
if the conference is conducted by writing or by telephone, request a
conference with a staff member of the commission to review the basis for
the proposed termination. The conference with the commission may be
conducted by writing or by telephone if the customer so elects.
                                             
 II. In the event of a request for a conference with the public
utility, the public utility shall continue service to the customer for 3
days after the conference if the conference was conducted in person, or
for 5 days after the conference if the conference was conducted by
writing or by telephone, or to the date specified in the notice of
termination, whichever comes later.
                                             
 III. During the conference with the utility company, the utility
company shall inform the customer of his right to request a conference
with a staff member of the commission. If the conference with the
utility company is conducted in person, the customer shall be furnished
a form for requesting a conference with a staff member of the commission
during the conference. If the conference with the utility company is
conducted by writing or by telephone, the utility company shall mail the
form to the customer by regular mail on the same day as the conference.
In the event of a request for a conference with a staff member of the
commission, the public utility shall continue service to the customer
until such time as the staff member or the commission determines that
termination is justified.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1974, 11:1. 1975, 119:1-3. 1981, 220:3. 1994, 193:8, I, eff.
July 23, 1994.

### Section 363-B:3

 **363-B:3 Notification of Property Owner or Condominium Association.
–** Notwithstanding any other provisions of state law, any electric or
gas public utility may, prior to terminating residential service to a
tenant or to a condominium owner, provide notice of the termination to
the property owner, in the case of a tenant, or any associated
condominium association when:
                                             
 I. The termination of service is to occur between November 1 and
April 30, inclusive of beginning and end dates; and
                                             
 II. The property owner or the condominium association has requested
that it, or its agents, be notified in such instances.

**Source.** 2000, 276:1, eff. June 16, 2000.
