---
title: |
    CHAPTER 363-A EXPENSES OF PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION AGAINST CERTAIN
    UTILITIES
---

TITLE XXXIV
                                             
PUBLIC UTILITIES
================

CHAPTER 363-A
                                             
EXPENSES OF PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION AGAINST CERTAIN UTILITIES
-----------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 363-A:1

 **363-A:1 Ascertainment of Expenses. –** The public utilities
commission shall annually, after the close of the fiscal year, ascertain
the total of its expenses during such year incurred in the performance
of its duties relating to public utilities as defined in RSA 362 and
other entities subject to its regulatory and enforcement authority and
relating to the office of the consumer advocate. In the determination of
such expenses there shall be excluded the expenses which have been or
may be charged and recovered under the provisions of RSA 365:37, RSA
365:38, and RSA 374-F:7, I.

**Source.** 1955, 203:1 par. 1. 1959, 242:1. 1971, 557:62. 1981,
568:118. 1987, 136:4, eff. May 7, 1987. 2014, 136:1, eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 363-A:2

 **363-A:2 Assessment. –**
                                             
 I. The expenses thus ascertained shall be assessed against the
public utilities and other entities described in this section in the
manner provided in this chapter. The assessment shall be calculated by
using the following revenue percentages:
                                             
 (a) 100 percent of the gross utility revenue of all public
utilities, except as otherwise provided in this section;
                                             
 (b) 33 percent of the gross utility revenue of rural electric
cooperatives for which a certificate of deregulation is on file with the
commission;
                                             
 (c) 33 percent of the gross utility revenue of all excepted local
exchange carriers as defined in RSA 362:7, I(c), and 33 percent of the
gross revenue of any affiliate of such a carrier received from New
Hampshire retail customers for a VoIP service as defined in RSA 362:7,
I(d) or an IP-enabled service as defined in RSA 362:7, I(e) that
provides the voice capabilities described in RSA 362:7, I(d)(1) and (3),
other than a cellular mobile radio communications service provider;
                                             
 (d) 33 percent of all providers' gross revenue received from New
Hampshire retail customers for a VoIP service as defined in RSA 362:7,
I(d) or an IP-enabled service as defined in RSA 362:7, I(e) that
provides the voice capabilities described in RSA 362:7, I(d)(1) and (3),
other than a cellular mobile radio communications service provider or
any entity to which subparagraph (c) applies; and
                                             
 (e) 100 percent of the gross revenue of all competitive electric
power suppliers and all competitive natural gas suppliers received from
New Hampshire retail customers, except for any such revenue received
from the members of an electric cooperative for which a certificate of
deregulation is on file with the commission, with respect to which the
applicable revenue percentage shall be 33 percent.
                                             
 II. To facilitate the revenue calculations required under this
chapter, entities described in subparagraph I(d) or their registered
telecommunications carrier affiliates shall file with the commission
confidential annual reports of the retail telephone service revenue of
such entities, and entities described in subparagraph I(e) shall file
with the commission confidential annual reports of sales volume and
revenues, by customer class, and separately identifying the total
revenues received from the distribution customers of each electric or
natural gas distribution utility or the members of each rural electric
cooperative for which a certificate of deregulation is on file with the
commission. All other utilities and other assessed entities shall file
information in accordance with applicable commission rules.
                                             
 III. Each entity described in subparagraph I(e) shall be assessed
the sum of 
                                             $10,000 on an annual basis and shall pay such assessed sum
to the commission. Each electric load aggregator, and each aggregator of
natural gas customers shall be assessed the sum of 
                                             $2,000 on an annual
basis and shall pay such assessed sum to the commission. Each
telecommunications carrier voluntarily registered with the commission
shall be assessed the sum of 
                                             $1,000 on an annual basis and shall pay
such sum to the commission.
                                             
 IV. The expenses of the commission, less the total of the assessed
sums paid to the commission pursuant to paragraph III, shall be
allocated to each utility and other assessed entity in direct proportion
as the revenue calculation for such utility or other assessed entity
relates to the total of all such revenue calculations as a whole, except
as otherwise provided in paragraph V. Each such expense allocation shall
be assessed against each public utility and other assessed entity in an
amount equal to its proportionate share as determined under this
section, except that the expense allocation attributed to each entity
described in subparagraph I(e) shall be imputed to and included in the
expense allocation to each electric or natural gas distribution utility
or rural electric cooperative for which a certificate of deregulation is
on file with the commission, in correspondence to the revenue portion
reported pursuant to paragraph II as having been received from the
distribution customers of such distribution utility or the members of
such rural electric cooperative for which a certificate of deregulation
is on file with the commission.
                                             
 V. The expenses relating to the office of the consumer advocate
shall be allocated to each utility or other assessed entity in direct
proportion as its revenue calculation described in paragraph I bears to
the total of all such revenue calculations as a whole. Each such expense
allocation shall be assessed against each public utility and other
assessed entity in an amount equal to its proportionate share as
determined under this section, except that the expense allocation
attributed to each entity described in subparagraph I(e) shall be
imputed to and included in the expense allocation to each electric or
natural gas distribution utility or rural electric cooperative for which
a certificate of deregulation is on file with the commission, in
correspondence to the revenue portion reported pursuant to paragraph II
as having been received from the distribution customers of such
distribution utility or the members of such rural electric cooperative
for which a certificate of deregulation is on file with the commission.
This paragraph shall not apply to any entity to which subparagraph I(c)
or (d) applies or to any revenue of that entity.
                                             
 VI. A minimum amount shall be assessed to utilities and other
assessed entities described in paragraph I having minimal revenues in
such proportion as the public utilities commission shall determine to be
fair and equitable, provided that the minimum amount assessed to any
entity to which subparagraphs I(c) or (d) applies shall not be less than

                                             $1,000.
                                             
 VII. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to any
cellular mobile radio communications service or to any "information
service'' as defined in 47 U.S.C. section 153.

**Source.** 1955, 203:1, par. 2. 1959, 242:2. 1963, 322:1. 1971, 557:62.
1987, 136:5. 1997, 229:7, eff. Aug. 17, 1998. 2014, 136:2, eff. July 1,
2014.

### Section 363-A:3

 **363-A:3 Certification of Assessment. –** It shall be the duty of
the public utilities commission to calculate the amount to be assessed
against each such public utility and each other entity subject to
assessment in accordance with RSA 363-A:1 and RSA 363-A:2. At the
beginning of each fiscal year, the public utilities commission shall
estimate its total expenses for the fiscal year, and then, based on such
estimate, shall calculate the amount to be assessed quarterly on August
10, October 15, January 15, and April 15 of that fiscal year, against
each such public utility and other assessed entity in accordance with
RSA 363-A:1 and RSA 363-A:2. The public utilities commission shall then
make a list showing the amount due on August 10, October 15, January 15,
and April 15 of that fiscal year from each of the several public
utilities and other entities assessed under the provisions hereof, and,
together with a statement of the full name and mailing address of each
such public utility and other assessed entity, shall certify the same.
After the close of each fiscal year, the public utilities commission
shall ascertain its actual total expenses in accordance with RSA 363-A:1
and RSA 363-A:2, and then shall adjust the assessment for the first
quarterly payment of the new fiscal year for each such public utility or
other assessed entity for any underpayment or overpayment by each such
public utility or other assessed entity for the prior fiscal year.

**Source.** 1955, 203:1, par. 3. 1971, 557:62. 1995, 29:1. 1997, 208:14,
eff. July 1, 1997. 2014, 136:3, eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 363-A:4

 **363-A:4 Collection. –** Upon the completion of each such list, on
or before August 10, October 10, January 10, and April 10 of each fiscal
year, the public utilities commission shall bill each public utility and
each other entity subject to assessment for the quarterly amount
assessed against it within 10 working days. Such bill shall be sent
registered mail, and shall constitute notice of assessment and demand
for payment. Payment shall be made to the public utilities commission
within 30 days after the receipt of the bill. After the expiration of 30
days from the receipt of an original bill, the public utilities
commission may add to the assessment a late penalty fee and may commence
an action at law for the recovery of the assessment. Within 30 days of
the assessment for the first quarterly payment, each public utility or
other assessed entity which has any objection to the amount assessed
against it for the prior fiscal year shall file with the commission its
objection in writing, setting out in detail the grounds upon which it is
claimed that said assessment is excessive, erroneous, unlawful, or
invalid. If such objections are filed, the commission, after reasonable
notice to the objecting public utility or other assessed entity, shall
hold a hearing on such objections, and if the commission finds that said
assessment or any part thereof is excessive, erroneous, unlawful, or
invalid, the commission shall reassess the amount to be paid by such
public utility or other assessed entity, and shall order that an amended
bill be sent to such public utility or other assessed entity in
accordance with such reassessment. The public utilities commission shall
not commence an action at law for recovery of any assessment for the
first quarterly payment until any such objection has been resolved.

**Source.** 1955, 203:1, par. 4. 1971, 557:62. 1995, 29:2. 1997, 208:14.
2004, 148:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2005. 2014, 136:4, eff. July 1, 2014.

### Section 363-A:5

 **363-A:5 Exemption From Assessment. –** Any public utility or other
assessed entity that is not an entity to which RSA 363-A:2, I(c) or (d)
applies, and that earned less than 
                                             $10,000 in gross revenue during the
preceding fiscal year shall not be liable for any assessment pursuant to
this chapter.

**Source.** 1995, 29:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1996. 2014, 136:5, eff. July 1,
2014.

### Section 363-A:6

 **363-A:6 Public Utility Recovery of Assessment Costs. –**
                                             
 I. Assessment amounts determined with reference to the revenues of
competitive electric power suppliers and all assessments against
regulated electric distribution utilities and electric cooperatives for
which a certificate of deregulation is on file with the commission shall
be collected from electric customers through the distribution rates of
the respective electric distribution utility or rural electric
cooperative for which a certificate of deregulation is on file with the
commission; provided that an amount equal to the amount assessed
directly to a competitive electric power supplier under RSA 363-A:2, III
shall be collected from the energy service or default service customers
of each electric distribution utility or rural electric cooperative for
which a certificate of deregulation is on file with the commission.
                                             
 II. Assessment amounts determined with reference to the revenues of
competitive natural gas suppliers and all assessments against regulated
natural gas distribution utilities shall be collected from natural gas
customers through the distribution rates of the respective natural gas
distribution utility.
                                             
 III. The commission shall by order establish rate recovery
mechanisms for any public utility that is not either an excepted local
exchange carrier, as defined in RSA 362:7, I(c), or a rural electric
cooperative for which a certificate of deregulation is on file with the
commission. Such rate recovery mechanisms shall adjust annually to
recover any change in a utility's annual assessment.

**Source.** 2014, 136:6, eff. July 1, 2014.
