---
title: CHAPTER 364 MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
---

TITLE XXXIV
                                             
PUBLIC UTILITIES
================

CHAPTER 364
                                             
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES
-------------------

### Section 364:1

 **364:1 Submission of Plan to Public Utilities Commission. –**
Before any town, village district or precinct shall vote to appropriate
money or issue bonds or notes for the acquisition of any existing public
utility, or for the construction of a public utility, or for the
reconstruction or enlarging of a municipally owned utility, the
selectmen of the town or the commissioners of the village district or
the commissioners of any precinct may submit, and upon written
application of 50 or more qualified voters or 1/4 of the qualified
voters of said town, district or precinct, shall submit to the public
utilities commission the general details of the plan and the amount
proposed to be expended together with engineering plans and
specifications.

**Source.** 1949, 271:1, eff. June 29, 1949.

### Section 364:2

 **364:2 Hearing. –** Said commission shall after notice hold a
public hearing at which time it shall receive evidence from any
interested parties, and shall on its own motion investigate the public
need for such acquisition, construction, reconstruction or enlarging and
the feasibility of said proposed plan.

**Source.** 1949, 271:2, eff. June 29, 1949.

### Section 364:3

 **364:3 Findings. –** Said commission shall, within 30 days after
said hearing, issue a report which shall contain its findings on said
plan as proposed, with the reasons therefor, and shall cause it to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in said town, and shall
also submit a copy of said report to the selectmen or precinct
commissioners of said town, village district or precinct. Before any
vote is taken by said town, village district or precinct to appropriate
money or issue bonds or notes for any of the purposes mentioned in RSA
364:1, said findings of the public utilities commission shall be read to
the meeting by the moderator or the chairman.

**Source.** 1949, 271:3, eff. June 29, 1949.
