---
title: CHAPTER 366 AFFILIATES OF PUBLIC UTILITIES
---

TITLE XXXIV
                                             
PUBLIC UTILITIES
================

CHAPTER 366
                                             
AFFILIATES OF PUBLIC UTILITIES
------------------------------

Generally
---------

### Section 366:1

 **366:1 Definition of Terms. –** Terms used in this chapter shall be
construed as follows unless a different meaning is clearly apparent from
the language or context:
                                             
 I. "Person'' shall mean and include individuals, corporations,
trustees, lessees, holders of beneficial equitable title, voluntary
associations, receivers, and partnerships.
                                             
 II. "Affiliate'' shall mean and include the following:
                                             
 (a) Any person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, or
holds with power to vote a majority of the outstanding voting securities
or such minority thereof as to give him substantial control of such a
public utility.
                                             
 (b) Every person who the commission may determine as a matter of
fact, after investigation and hearing, is either directly or indirectly
through intermediate persons, or otherwise, actually exercising any
substantial influence over the policies and actions of a public utility,
whether or not in conjunction with one or more persons.
                                             
 (c) Any person with whom a public utility has a management or
service contract or arrangement of the character set forth in RSA 366:3,
but not including contracts for personal services with persons not
otherwise affiliated.
                                             
 (d) Any person that is directly or indirectly owned, controlled
or held by any person described in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph
through either power to vote a majority of the outstanding voting
securities, or such a minority so as to maintain substantial control.

**Source.** 1933, 182:1. RL 305:1. 1951, 203:64. RSA 366:1. 1991, 86:2,
eff. Jan. 1, 1992.

### Section 366:1-a

 **366:1-a Exceptions. –** The provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to any excepted local exchange carrier.

**Source.** 2012, 177:6, eff. Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 366:2

 **366:2 Sale of Securities to or by Employees. –** No public utility
shall, without the approval of the commission, permit any employee to
sell, offer for sale, or solicit the purchase of any security issued by
an affiliate during such hours as such employee is engaged to perform
any duty of such public utility; nor shall any public utility by any
means or device whatsoever require any employee to purchase or contract
to purchase any of its securities or those of any other person or
corporation; nor shall any public utility require any employee to permit
the deduction from his wages or salary of any sum as a payment or to be
applied as a payment on any purchase or contract to purchase any
security of such public utility or of any other person.

**Source.** 1933, 182:1. RL 305:1.

Contracts Between Utilities and Affiliates
------------------------------------------

### Section 366:3

 **366:3 Filing of Contracts. –** The original or a verified copy of
any contract or arrangement and of any modification thereof or a
verified summary of any unwritten contract or arrangement, the
consideration of which exceeds 
                                             $500, hereafter entered into between a
public utility and an affiliate providing for the furnishing of
managerial, supervisory, construction, engineering, accounting,
purchasing, financial, or any other services either to or by a public
utility or an affiliate shall be filed by the public utility with the
commission within 10 days after the date on which the contract is
executed or the arrangement entered into. The commission may also
require a public utility to file in such form as the commission may
require full information with respect to any purchase from or sale to an
affiliate, whether or not made in pursuance of a continuing contract or
arrangement.

**Source.** 1933, 182:1. RL 305:2.

### Section 366:4

 **366:4 Failure to File. –** Any contract or arrangement not filed
with the commission pursuant to RSA 366:3 shall be unenforceable in any
court in this state and payments thereunder may be disallowed by the
commission unless the later filing thereof is approved in writing by the
commission.

**Source.** 1933, 182:1. RL 305:3.

### Section 366:5

 **366:5 Investigation and Proof. –** The commission shall have full
power and authority to investigate any such contract, arrangement,
purchase, or sale and, if the commission after notice and hearing shall
find any such contract, arrangement, purchase, or sale to be unjust or
unreasonable, the commission may make such reasonable order relating
thereto as the public good requires. In any such investigation, the
burden shall be on the public utility and affiliate to prove the
reasonableness of any such contract, arrangement, purchase, or sale
with, from, or to an affiliate. If the public utility shall fail to
satisfy the commission of the reasonableness of any such contract,
arrangement, purchase, or sale, the commission may disapprove the same
and disallow payments thereunder or such part of any such payment as the
commission shall find to be unjust or unreasonable. No payment
disallowed by the commission shall be capitalized or included as an
operating cost of the public utility in the fixing of rates or as an
asset in fixing a rate base. If in any such investigation the public
utility or affiliate shall unreasonably refuse to comply with any
request of the commission for information with respect to relevant
accounts and records, whether of such public utility or any affiliate,
any portion of which may be applicable to any transaction under
investigation, so that such parts thereof as the commission may deem
material may be made part of the record, such refusal shall justify the
commission in disapproving the transaction under investigation and
disallowing payments in pursuance thereof.

**Source.** 1933, 182:1. RL 305:4.

### Section 366:6

 **366:6 Summary Order in Certain Cases. –** If as a result of an
investigation in accordance with RSA 366:5 the commission shall find
that any public utility is making any payment or about to make any
payment or doing or about to do any other thing which substantially
threatens or impairs the ability of the public utility to render
adequate service at reasonable rates or otherwise to discharge its duty
to the public, the commission may apply to the superior court for an
order directing the public utility to cease making any such payment or
doing such other thing; and, thereupon, the court shall make such order
as the public good may require.

**Source.** 1933, 182:1. RL 305:5.

### Section 366:7

 **366:7 Disallowance of Charges Under Existing Contracts. –** In any
proceeding whether upon the commission's own motion or upon complaint
involving the rates or practices of any public utility, the commission
may disallow the inclusion in the accounts of a public utility of any
payments or compensation to an affiliate for any services rendered, or
property furnished, under existing contracts or arrangements with an
affiliate unless such public utility shall establish the reasonableness
of such payment or compensation.

**Source.** 1933, 182:1. RL 305:6.

Reports Disclosing Interests in Utilities and Affiliates
--------------------------------------------------------

### Section 366:8

 **366:8 Annual Reports. –** Every public utility annually reporting
to the commission under RSA 374 shall also annually report the name and
address of, and the number of shares held by, its officers and directors
and each holder of one percent or more of the voting capital stock of
the reporting public utility according to its records.

**Source.** 1933, 182:1. RL 305:7.

### Section 366:9

 **366:9 Information Concerning Control. –** The commission may also
require such other information as to the direct or indirect control of a
public utility or affiliate from a public utility, affiliate, or other
person as may be reasonably required for the effective enforcement of
this chapter.

**Source.** 1933, 182:1. RL 305:8.

Procedure
---------

### Section 366:10

 **366:10 Rulemaking Authority. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1994, 193:8, II, eff.
July 23, 1994.
                                             ]

### Section 366:11

 **366:11 Appeal. –** From any order or decision of the commission in
the exercise of the jurisdiction and power conferred upon it by this
chapter, an appeal shall lie to the supreme court. The procedure for
rehearings and appeals shall be that prescribed by RSA 541.

**Source.** 1933, 182:1. RL 305:10.
