---
title: CHAPTER 368 RAILROAD TRUSTEES AND HOLDING COMPANIES
---

TITLE XXXIV
                                             
PUBLIC UTILITIES
================

CHAPTER 368
                                             
RAILROAD TRUSTEES AND HOLDING COMPANIES
---------------------------------------

### Section 368:1

 **368:1 Creditors' Meeting. –** The trustees to whom a railroad has
been assigned, or conveyed in mortgage for the benefit of creditors,
shall call a meeting of the creditors whose claims are secured by the
mortgage once a year, to be held at some place on or near the railroad,
by publication in 2 daily newspapers published in Boston, Massachusetts,
and one newspaper in each county in which the railroad is located.

**Source.** 1858, 2100:1. GS 151:1. GL 165:1. PS 161:1. PL 252:1. RL
302:1.

### Section 368:2

 **368:2 Failure to Call Meeting. –** If the trustees, on application
of such creditors to the amount of 1/3 of the whole sum secured, do not,
within 14 days, call such meeting, 5 or more creditors holding the like
amount of claims may call it in the same manner.

**Source.** 1858, 2100:1. GS 151:2. GL 165:2. PS 161:2. PL 252:2. RL
302:2.

### Section 368:3

 **368:3 Report. –** At such meeting, the trustees shall make a
report of the state of the trust property, and of their proceedings and
management in relation thereto, according to the usual custom of
directors of railroads to the stockholders.

**Source.** 1858, 2100:1. GS 151:3. GL 165:3. PS 161:3. PL 252:3. RL
302:3.

### Section 368:4

 **368:4 Election of Trustees. –** The creditors at such meeting may
elect, by ballot, 3 or 5 trustees, being creditors, and a majority, at
least, residents of the state, each creditor being entitled to one vote
for each 
                                             $100 of his debt and having the same right to vote by proxy as
stockholders of railroads at their meetings.

**Source.** 1858, 2100:2. GS 151:4. GL 165:4. PS 161:4. PL 252:4. RL
302:4.

### Section 368:5

 **368:5 Transfer of Interest. –** Upon the election of new trustees,
the interest of the former trustees shall be transferred to and vest in
such new trustees; and the former trustees shall render and settle an
account of their trust with such successors, and pay and transfer to
them such mortgage estate and any balances in their hands; and, if a
balance is due the retiring trustees, the assets of the trust shall be
charged therewith.

**Source.** 1858, 2100:3. GS 151:5. GL 165:5. PS 161:5. PL 252:5. RL
302:5.

### Section 368:6

 **368:6 Liability of Trustees. –** No trustees or assignees of a
railroad mortgage, who have the railroad in their charge, shall, as such
and without their own default, be personally responsible for any damage,
by collision or force, occurring to any passenger or freight upon the
railroad.

**Source.** 1858, 2100:5. GS 151:6. GL 165:6. PS 161:6. PL 252:6. RL
302:6.

### Section 368:7

 **368:7 Liability of Company. –** In case of such damage, the
company assigning or mortgaging the railroad shall be liable; and the
assets in the hands of the trustees shall be held for such damage as
part of the expenses of the trust, in preference to the claims of the
general creditors of the company.

**Source.** 1858, 2100:5. GS 151:7. GL 165:7. PS 161:7. PL 252:7. RL
302:7.

### Section 368:8

 **368:8 Power of Court. –** The superior court shall have summary
power to make all orders and decrees necessary to carry such trusts into
effect.

**Source.** 1858, 2100:6. GS 151:8. GL 165:8. PS 161:8. PL 252:8. RL
302:8.

### Section 368:9

 **368:9 Duties of Holding Companies. –** Any corporation, whether
foreign or domestic, which owns a majority of the capital stock of any
railroad in the state, or operates the same under lease or otherwise,
shall make returns and furnish information to the department of
transportation as to such railroad properties and railroad business; and
all provisions of law respecting reports and information concerning
railroads and respecting the issue of securities shall apply to such
railroad properties and railroad business.

**Source.** 1913, 190:1. PL 252:9. RL 302:9. 1951, 203:61. RSA 368:9.
1985, 402:6, I(e)(4).

### Section 368:10

 **368:10 Neglect of Holding Company. –** If any such holding company
shall, after reasonable notice, fail to comply with the provisions of
RSA 368:9, the supreme court shall, upon petition of any party
interested, dissolve the railroad corporation, a majority of whose
stocks is owned by such holding company.

**Source.** 1913, 190:2. PL 252:10. RL 302:10.
