---
title: 'CHAPTER 369 ISSUANCE OF STOCK AND OTHER SECURITIES; GENERAL PROVISIONS'
---

TITLE XXXIV
                                             
PUBLIC UTILITIES
================

CHAPTER 369
                                             
ISSUANCE OF STOCK AND OTHER SECURITIES; GENERAL PROVISIONS
----------------------------------------------------------

### Section 369:1

 **369:1 Authority to Issue Securities. –** A public utility lawfully
engaged in business in this state may, with the approval of the
commission but not otherwise, issue and sell its stock, bonds, notes and
other evidences of indebtedness payable more than 12 months after the
date thereof for lawful corporate purposes. The proposed issue and sale
of securities will be approved by the commission where it finds that the
same is consistent with the public good. Such approval shall extend to
the amount of the issue authorized and the purpose or purposes to which
the securities or the proceeds thereof are to be applied, and shall be
subject to such reasonable terms and conditions as the commission may
find to be necessary in the public interest; provided, however, that the
provisions of RSA 293-A shall be observed by corporations organized
under the laws of this state in respect of the corporate authorization
required and of other formalities to be observed.

**Source.** 1911, 164:14. 1913, 145:14. 1915, 115:1. PL 241:1. RL 291:1.
1951, 203:45 par. 1, eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 369:1-a

 **369:1-a Exceptions. –** The provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to any excepted local exchange carrier.

**Source.** 2012, 177:7, eff. Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 369:2

 **369:2 Mortgages. –** A public utility may, with the approval of
the commission but not otherwise, mortgage its present and future
property, tangible and intangible including franchises, to secure the
payment of its bonds or notes, including any bonds or notes to be
thereafter issued under the provisions of such mortgage; provided,
however, that no such approval shall be required for any mortgage of
property pursuant to after-acquired clauses of mortgages securing the
payment of bonds or notes issued prior to September 1, 1951.

**Source.** 1913, 145:15. PL 241:31. RL 291:32. 1951, 203:45 par. 2,
eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 369:3

 **369:3 Application for Leave to Issue. –** Any such public utility
which may apply to the commission for authority to issue such securities
shall file with its application a statement in reasonable detail,
showing the actual cost already incurred and the estimated cost to be
incurred for any of the purposes for which such securities are to be
issued and the actual cost already incurred and the estimated cost to be
incurred for such purposes.

**Source.** 1911, 164:14. 1913, 145:14. 1915, 115:2. PL 241:2. RL 291:3.
1951, 203:45 par. 3, eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 369:4

 **369:4 Authorization. –** The commission, after such hearing or
investigation as it may deem proper, shall determine the actual or
probable cost incurred or to be incurred; and, if in its judgment the
issue of such securities upon the terms proposed is consistent with the
public good, it shall authorize the same to an amount sufficient, at the
price fixed in accordance with the laws applicable thereto, to provide
funds for defraying the cost as so determined.

**Source.** 1911, 164:14. 1915, 115:2. PL 241:3. RL 291:4. 1951, 203:45
par. 4, eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 369:5

 **369:5 Certificate. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1999, 289:17, eff. July 1,
1999.
                                             ]

### Section 369:6

 **369:6 Depreciation. –** Upon any application for authority to
issue securities for the purpose of providing funds for discharging any
indebtedness incurred by a public utility in good faith prior to July 1,
1914, in acquiring property, or for other lawful corporate purpose, no
deduction shall be made from the cost thereof, as determined by the
commission, on account of any estimated depreciation of plant and
properties beyond the portion, if any, of such cost which it may appear
has been paid out of the depreciation reserve of said public utility, if
any, or out of earnings, to make good depreciation.

**Source.** 1915, 115:2. PL 241:6. RL 291:7. 1951, 203:45 par. 6, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 369:7

 **369:7 Short Term Notes. –**
                                             
 I. No public utility engaged in business within this state shall
issue or renew any notes, bonds, or other evidences of indebtedness
payable less than 12 months after the date thereof, except as provided
in this section, by rules adopted by the commission, or by specific
order of the commission in an individual case.
                                             
 II. In establishing the amounts of the notes, bonds, and other
evidences of indebtedness which the utility is permitted to issue or
renew without prior commission approval, the commission shall consider
the size, circumstances, and other characteristics of each utility, the
aggregate term of the renewals of such notes, bonds, and other evidences
of indebtedness, and the time period and manner for reporting such
renewals to the commission.

**Source.** 1929, 136:1. RL 291:2. 1951, 203:45 par. 7. RSA 369:7. 1981,
370:1. 1994, 193:7, eff. July 23, 1994.

### Section 369:8

 **369:8 Foreign Business. –**
                                             
 I. Public utilities carrying on business both within and without
this state shall not be subject to the provisions of RSA 369:1-7 when
the stock or obligations are to be issued for the acquisition of
property, the construction, completion, extension or improvement of
their facilities, or the improvement or maintenance of their service
entirely without this state, or the discharge or refunding of their
obligations or reimbursement of money actually expended for such
purposes; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall
not be applicable to the financing by domestic electric utilities of
their interests in electric power facilities, as defined in RSA 374-A:1,
located without the state.
                                             
 II. (a) To the extent that the approval of the commission is
required by any other statute for any corporate restructuring,
financing, change in long-term or short-term indebtedness, or issuance
of stock involving parent companies of a public utility regulated by the
commission, the approval of the commission shall not be required if the
public utility files with the commission a detailed representation in
writing no less than 60 days prior to the anticipated completion of the
transaction that the transaction will not adversely affect rates, terms,
service, or operation of the public utility within the state.
                                             
 (b) (1) To the extent that the approval of the commission is
required by any other statute for any corporate merger or acquisition
involving parent companies of a public utility whose rates, terms, and
conditions of service are regulated by the commission, the approval of
the commission shall not be required if the public utility files with
the commission a detailed written representation no less than 60 days
prior to the anticipated completion of the transaction that the
transaction will not have an adverse effect on rates, terms, service, or
operation of the public utility within the state.
                                             
 (2) If the commission does not issue an order within 60 days
of the completed filing, the transaction shall be considered approved as
filed.
                                             
 (3) If the commission within 30 days, and after an opportunity
for a public hearing, issues a preliminary written determination that
such a merger or acquisition will have an adverse effect on rates,
terms, service, or operation of the public utility in the state, the
commission shall allow the utility at least 30 days to amend its filing
in order to address the commission's preliminary determination.
                                             
 (4) The commission may extend making its preliminary
determination of adverse effect on rates, terms, service, or operation
of the public utility in the state for 30 days.
                                             
 (5) Should the commission find within 30 days after receiving
the amended filing, the proposed merger or acquisition has an adverse
effect, the commission shall review the transaction under the statute
which would have otherwise applied but for this section, and, after an
opportunity for a public hearing, issue a ruling based upon the other
applicable statute or statutes within 60 days of its determination of
adverse effect.

**Source.** 1911, 164:14. 1917, 76:6. PL 241:9. RL 291:10. 1951, 203:45
par. 8. RSA 369:8. 1975, 501:3. 1997, 298:2. 1999, 289:12, eff. July 1,
1999.

### Section 369:9

 **369:9 Capitalization of Franchises. –** The commission shall have
no power to authorize the capitalization, directly or indirectly, of any
franchise to be a corporation, or of any franchise or any right to own,
operate or enjoy any franchise whatever in excess of the amount
(exclusive of any tax or annual charge) actually paid to the state or to
a political subdivision thereof as a consideration for the grant of such
franchise or right, all such franchises, rights and privileges being
granted in the public interest only, and not justly subject to
capitalization against the public.

**Source.** 1917, 168:1. PL 241:10. RL 291:11. 1951, 203:45 par. 9, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 369:10

 **369:10 Unincorporated Utilities. –** No unincorporated person or
partnership, being a public utility through the ownership, operation or
management of property devoted to public use, shall be required to apply
to the commission for authority to issue notes or bonds unless the same
are to be secured by mortgage of the property so devoted to public use.

**Source.** 1913, 145:14. 1917, 76:6. PL 241:11. RL 291:12. 1951, 203:45
par. 10, eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 369:11

 **369:11 Application of Proceeds. –** No public utility shall apply
the proceeds of any stock, bonds or notes to any other purpose than
those specified in the order of the commission authorizing the issue of
the same.

**Source.** 1911, 164:14. 1913, 145:14. 1917, 76:6. PL 241:12. RL
291:13. 1951, 203:45 par. 11, eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 369:12

 **369:12 Account. –** Every public utility issuing stocks, bonds or
other evidence of indebtedness subject to the provisions hereof shall
file with the commission an account showing, in such detail as the
commission shall require, the disposition of the proceeds of such issue.

**Source.** 1911, 164:14. 1913, 145:14. 1917, 76:6. PL 241:13. RL
291:14. 1951, 203:45 par. 12, eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 369:13

 **369:13 Foreign Corporations. –** Any foreign corporation which
shall engage in intrastate business as a public utility within this
state after May 1, 1919, shall be subject to the provisions hereof, and,
by applying for authority to begin or by continuing to engage in such
intrastate business after said date, shall be deemed to have consented
to said provisions as a condition precedent to its right to engage in
such intrastate business.

**Source.** 1919, 94:1. PL 241:14. RL 291:15. 1951, 203:45 par. 13, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 369:14

 **369:14 Public Utilities. –** A public utility for any corporate
purpose approved by the commission, upon petition of the corporation,
may, from time to time, with the authority of the commission as provided
in this chapter, increase its capital stock or bonds beyond the amounts
fixed and limited by its articles of association or its charter or by
any act of the general court.

**Source.** 1921, 81:1. PL 241:16. RL 291:17. 1951, 203:45 par. 14, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 369:15

 **369:15 Stockholders. –** Whenever a public utility organized under
the laws of this state shall issue (1) additional shares of its capital
stock having unconditionally the general right to vote or (2) securities
convertible into shares of such capital stock, it shall, except as
hereinafter provided, first offer such shares or convertible securities
proportionately to holders of its stock having such voting right in such
manner as shall have been determined by its directors; provided,
however, that if the charter, articles of agreement or stockholder votes
authorizing the outstanding stock have limited or eliminated the rights
of holders of such outstanding stock to subscribe to such shares or
convertible securities, such offer need not be made, except to the
extent, if any, required by said charter, articles of agreement or
votes.

**Source.** 1911, 164:14. PL 241:19. RL 291:20. 1951, 203:45 par. 15,
eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 369:16

 **369:16 Stockholders' Liability. –** Whenever a public utility
incorporated under the laws of this state shall apply to the commission
for authority to issue any stock requiring the approval of the
commission, the stockholders shall not become individually liable for
debts and contracts of the corporation under RSA 296:30, if the amount
of stock which the commission authorized the corporation to issue upon
any such application is paid in and a certificate of the treasurer and a
majority of the directors to that effect is executed, filed and recorded
in the manner provided by RSA 296:30 within 90 days after the filing in
the office of the secretary of state of the order of the commission
authorizing the issue of such stock; provided, that, in cases where such
stock is an increase of prior capital, the whole amount of the prior
capital as theretofore fixed and limited by the corporation, or so much
thereof as the stockholders have voted to issue, or as the commission
has authorized to be issued, has also been paid in and that the
certificate so filed by the treasurer and directors shows that fact.

**Source.** 1913, 145:15. PL 241:30. RL 291:31. 1951, 203:45 par. 16,
eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 369:17

 **369:17 Public Utilities Excluded. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 402:39,
II.
                                             ]
