---
title: 'CHAPTER 370-A USE OF CUSTOMER-OWNED EQUIPMENT'
---

TITLE XXXIV
                                             
PUBLIC UTILITIES
================

CHAPTER 370-A
                                             
USE OF CUSTOMER-OWNED EQUIPMENT
-------------------------------

### Section 370-A:1

 **370-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Governmental agency'' means any state, county, city, town,
village, district, organized fire mutual aid system dispatch or
municipal agency, authority, department or other public instrumentality
thereof.
                                             
 II. "Self-dialing telephone alarm'' means a device attached to a
person's telephone system, designed to dial a designated telephone
number when fire or unauthorized entry is detected at the location in
which it is installed.

**Source.** 1979, 205:1, eff. Aug. 10, 1979.

### Section 370-A:2

 **370-A:2 Prohibited Use; Notification Required. –** No person shall
have a self-dialing telephone alarm system connected to his telephone
which automatically calls a governmental agency unless that agency
receives notification from the person prior to connection of such alarm
system in compliance with regulations and guidelines promulgated by the
department of safety pursuant to RSA 541-A. The governmental agency to
be notified may provide a form suitable for information and action
required of said agency upon receipt of call.

**Source.** 1979, 205:1, eff. Aug. 10, 1979.

### Section 370-A:3

 **370-A:3 Violation. –** Any person who has a self-dialing telephone
alarm system connected to his telephone and who has not obtained written
permission pursuant to RSA 370-A:2 shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 1979, 205:1, eff. Aug. 10, 1979.
