---
title: CHAPTER 370 SERVICE EQUIPMENT OF PUBLIC UTILITIES
---

TITLE XXXIV
                                             
PUBLIC UTILITIES
================

CHAPTER 370
                                             
SERVICE EQUIPMENT OF PUBLIC UTILITIES
-------------------------------------

### Section 370:1

 **370:1 Units of Service. –** The public utilities commission may
ascertain, determine and fix, for each kind of public utility, suitable
and convenient standard commercial units of service, product or
commodity, which units shall be lawful units for the purposes of this
chapter.

**Source.** 1913, 124:1. PL 245:1. RL 295:1. 1951, 203:1, eff. Sept. 1,
1951.

### Section 370:1-a

 **370:1-a Exceptions. –** The provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to any excepted local exchange carrier.

**Source.** 2012, 177:8, eff. Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 370:2

 **370:2 Standards. –** The commission may ascertain, determine and
fix adequate and serviceable standards for the measurement of quality,
pressure, initial voltage or other condition pertaining to the
performing of its service, or to the furnishing of its product or
commodity, by any public utility, and prescribe reasonable regulations
for examination and testing of such service, product or commodity, and
for the measurement thereof.

**Source.** 1913, 124:1. PL 245:2. RL 295:2.

### Section 370:3

 **370:3 Meters. –** The commission may ascertain, determine and fix
reasonable rules, regulations, specifications and standards to secure
the accuracy of all meters and appliances for measurement, and every
public utility is required to carry into effect all orders issued by the
commission relative thereto.

**Source.** 1913, 124:1. PL 245:3. RL 295:3.

### Section 370:4

 **370:4 Service Inspections. –** The commission may provide for the
inspection of the manner in which every public utility conforms to the
reasonable regulations prescribed by the commission for examination and
testing of its service, product or commodity, and for the measurement
thereof, and may supplement such inspections by examinations and
testing.

**Source.** 1913, 124:1. PL 245:4. RL 295:4.

### Section 370:5

 **370:5 Inspection of Meters. –** The commission may provide for the
inspection of the manner in which every public utility has carried into
effect the reasonable rules, regulations, specifications and standards
fixed by orders of the commission relative thereto, and may examine and
test any meters and appliances for measurements under such reasonable
rules and regulations as it may prescribe.

**Source.** 1913, 124:1. PL 245:5. RL 295:5.

### Section 370:6

 **370:6 Testing Appliances. –** The commission may provide for the
examination and testing of any appliances used for the measuring of any
service, product or commodity of a public utility.

**Source.** 1913, 124:1. PL 245:6. RL 295:6.

### Section 370:7

 **370:7 At Consumer's Request. –** Any consumer or user may have any
such appliance tested by the commission. The commission may declare and
establish reasonable fees to be paid for examining and testing such
appliances on the request of consumers or users, the fee to be paid by
the consumer or user at the time of his request; but, if the measuring
appliance be found unreasonably defective or incorrect to the
disadvantage of the consumer or user, the commission shall repay such
fee to the consumer or user and collect the same from the public
utility.

**Source.** 1913, 124:1. PL 245:7. RL 295:7.

### Section 370:8

 **370:8 Apparatus for Tests. –** The commission may purchase such
materials, apparatus and standard measuring instruments for such
examinations and tests, and for the calibration and standardization of
the measuring instruments used by any public utility, as it may deem
necessary.

**Source.** 1913, 124:1. PL 245:8. RL 295:8.

### Section 370:9

 **370:9 Fees. –** The commission shall fix and collect reasonable
fees for examining and testing meters and other measuring apparatus and
appliances and the product of any public utility offered to the public
for use or consumption, and such fees shall be paid by the public
utility owning the same, or offering the same to the public, except as
provided in RSA 370:7. All fees so collected shall be paid each month to
the state treasurer, with an itemized statement of the same.

**Source.** 1913, 124:2. PL 245:9. RL 295:9.

### Section 370:10

 **370:10 Lights on Railroad Track Motor Cars. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985,
402:39, III.
                                             ]

### Section 370:11

 **370:11 Penalty. –** Any person, firm or corporation operating or
controlling any railroad running through or within this state using or
permitting to be used on its line in this state a track motor car in
violation of the provisions of RSA 370:10 shall be liable to a penalty
of 
                                             $100 for each violation, to be recovered in a suit or suits to be
brought by the county attorney in the superior court of the county
having jurisdiction in the locality where such violation occurred. Upon
duly verified information being given him of such violation, such
prosecuting attorney shall bring such suits.

**Source.** 1953, 163:1 par. 1-b, eff. May 14, 1953.

### Section 370:12

 **370:12 Installation of Power Line Extensions. –** Any New
Hampshire utility customer that requires a power line extension located
on private property may hire a contractor who is licensed in the state
of New Hampshire and is approved by the utility. Such contractor shall
supply and install materials specified by the local utility for
underground and overhead line extensions, the cost of which shall be
borne by the utility customer.

**Source.** 2012, 258:1, eff. Aug. 17, 2012.
