---
title: |
    CHAPTER 374-G ELECTRIC UTILITY INVESTMENT IN DISTRIBUTED ENERGY
    RESOURCES
---

TITLE XXXIV
                                             
PUBLIC UTILITIES
================

CHAPTER 374-G
                                             
ELECTRIC UTILITY INVESTMENT IN DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCES
-----------------------------------------------------------

### Section 374-G:1

 **374-G:1 Purpose. –** Distributed energy resources can increase
overall energy efficiency and provide energy security and diversity by
eliminating, displacing, or better managing traditional fossil fuel
energy deliveries from the centralized bulk power grid, in keeping with
the objectives of RSA 362-F:1. It is therefore in the public interest to
stimulate investment in distributed energy resources in New Hampshire in
diverse ways, including by encouraging New Hampshire electric public
utilities to invest in renewable and clean distributed energy resources
at the lowest reasonable cost to taxpayers benefiting the transmission
and distribution system under state regulatory oversight.

**Source.** 2008, 373:1, eff. Sept. 9, 2008. 2013, 40:1, eff. Aug. 3,
2013.

### Section 374-G:2

 **374-G:2 Definitions; Exclusions. –**
                                             
 I. The following definitions shall apply in this chapter except as
otherwise provided:
                                             
 (a) "Commission'' means the public utilities commission.
                                             
 (b) "Distributed energy resources'' means electric generation
equipment, including clean and renewable generation, energy storage,
energy efficiency, demand response, load reduction or control programs,
and technologies or devices located on or interconnected to the local
electric distribution system for purposes including but not limited to
reducing line losses, supporting voltage regulation, or peak load
shaving, as part of a strategy for minimizing transmission and
distribution costs as provided in RSA 374-F:3, III.
                                             
 II. "Distributed energy resources'' in this chapter shall exclude
electric generation equipment interconnected with the local electric
distribution system at a single point or through a customer's own
electrical wiring that is in excess of 5 megawatts.

**Source.** 2008, 373:1, eff. Sept. 9, 2008.

### Section 374-G:3

 **374-G:3 Electric Generation Equipment Funded by Public Utility;
Requirements. –** Any electric generation equipment funded in part by a
public utility under this chapter is subject to the following
requirements:
                                             
 I. The energy produced by electric generation equipment owned by the
public utility shall be used as an offset to distribution system losses
or the public utility company's own use;
                                             
 II. The energy produced by electric generation equipment utilizing a
non-renewable fuel source that is owned by a customer, or sited on a
customer's property shall be used to displace the customer's own use;
                                             
 III. The energy produced by electric generation equipment utilizing
a renewable fuel source that is owned by a customer, or sited on the
consumer's premises shall be used to displace the customers own use;
however, if energy is occasionally generated in excess of the customer's
energy requirements, it may be credited to the customer's account in a
subsequent period.
                                             
 IV. Any biomass-fueled generation shall meet the emission
requirements to qualify as eligible biomass technology under RSA
362-F:2, VIII.
                                             
 V. Any fossil-fuel fueled generation shall produce combined heat and
power with a minimum energy efficiency of 60 percent, measured as usable
thermal and electrical output in BTUs divided by fuel input in BTUs,
shall be installed as an integrated combined heat and power application,
and shall meet the following emission standards (in lbs/MW-H):
NOx--0.07; CO--0.10; VOCs--0.02. A credit to meet the emission standard
may be applied at the rate of one MW-H for each 3.4 million BTUs of heat
recovered.
                                             
 VI. These requirements apply in addition to and do not preempt or
replace any emission standards or permitting requirements applicable to
a given generation facility under any other applicable state or federal
law.

**Source.** 2008, 373:1, eff. Sept. 9, 2008.

### Section 374-G:4

 **374-G:4 Investments in Distributed Energy Resources. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, as
provided in RSA 374-G:5, a New Hampshire electric public utility may
invest in or own distributed energy resources, located on or
inter-connected to the local electric distribution system.
                                             
 II. Distributed electric generation owned by or receiving
investments from an electric utility under this section shall be limited
to a cumulative maximum in megawatts of 6 percent of the utility's total
distribution peak load in megawatts.
                                             
 III. In addition, once the cumulative generation authorized under
this chapter for a given public utility reaches 3 percent of the
utility's total distribution peak load in megawatts, then that utility
shall not be allowed to add any additional non-renewable generation
under this chapter, until the cumulative renewable generation installed
pursuant to this chapter, as a percentage of total generation installed
pursuant to this chapter, shall equal or exceed twice the sum of the
then-applicable percentage requirements for class I and class II under
RSA 362-F:3.

**Source.** 2008, 373:1, eff. Sept. 9, 2008.

### Section 374-G:5

 **374-G:5 Rate Filing; Authorization. –**
                                             
 I. A New Hampshire electric public utility may seek rate recovery
for its portion of investments in distributed energy resources from the
commission by making an appropriate rate filing. At a minimum, such
filing shall include the following:
                                             
 (a) A detailed description and economic and environmental
evaluation of the proposed investment.
                                             
 (b) A discussion of the costs, benefits, and risks of the
proposal with specific reference to the factors listed in paragraph II,
including an analysis of the costs, benefits, and rate implications to
the participating customers, to the company's default service customers,
and to the utility's distribution customers.
                                             
 (c) A description of any equipment or installation
specifications, solicitations, and procurements it has or intends to
implement.
                                             
 (d) A showing that the utility has used a competitive bidding
process to reasonably minimize the costs of the project to its
customers.
                                             
 (e) A showing that it has made reasonable efforts to involve
local businesses in its program.
                                             
 (f) Evidence of compliance with any applicable emission
limitations.
                                             
 (g) A copy of any customer contracts or agreements to be executed
as part of the program.
                                             
 II. Prior to authorizing a utility's recovery of investments made in
distributed energy resources, the commission shall determine that the
utility's investment and its recovery in rates, as proposed, are in the
public interest. Determination of the public interest under this section
shall include giving a balanced consideration and proportional weight to
each of the following factors:
                                             
 (a) The effect on the reliability, safety, and efficiency of
electric service.
                                             
 (b) The efficient and cost-effective realization of the purposes
of the renewable portfolio standards of RSA 362-F and the restructuring
policy principles of RSA 374-F:3.
                                             
 (c) The energy security benefits of the investment to the state
of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (d) The environmental benefits of the investment to the state of
New Hampshire.
                                             
 (e) The economic development benefits and liabilities of the
investment to the state of New Hampshire.
                                             
 (f) The effect on competition within the region's electricity
markets and the state's energy services market.
                                             
 (g) The costs and benefits to the utility's customers, including
but not limited to a demonstration that the company has exercised
competitive processes to reasonably minimize costs of the project to
ratepayers and to maximize private investment in the project.
                                             
 (h) Whether the expected value of the economic benefits of the
investment to the utility's ratepayers over the life of the investment
outweigh the economic costs to the utility's ratepayers.
                                             
 (i) The costs and benefits to any participating customer or
customers.
                                             
 III. Authorized and prudently incurred investments shall be
recovered under this section in a utility's base distribution rates as a
component of rate base, and cost recovery shall include the recovery of
depreciation, a return on investment, taxes, and other operating and
maintenance expenses directly associated with the investment, net of any
offsetting revenues received by the utility directly attributable to the
investment. The utility may recover all reasonable costs associated with
the filing, whether or not the application is approved by the
commission.
                                             
 IV. The commission may add an incentive to the return on equity
component as it deems appropriate to encourage investments in
distributed energy resources.
                                             
 V. The commission shall approve, disapprove, or approve with
conditions a utility rate filing under this section within 90 days of
its filing. The commission may extend this deadline to 6 months at its
discretion for any filing involving an investment in excess of

                                             $1,000,000. The commission may also extend the deadline at its
discretion for failure of the applicant to respond to data requests on
an expedited timeline.

**Source.** 2008, 373:1, eff. Sept. 9, 2008. 2013, 40:2, eff. Aug. 3,
2013.

### Section 374-G:6

 **374-G:6 Exemption; Rural Electric Cooperatives. –** The
requirements for commission authorization for recovery of investments
under RSA 374-G:5 shall not apply to rural electric cooperatives for
which a certificate of deregulation is on file with the commission.

**Source.** 2008, 373:1, eff. Sept. 9, 2008.

### Section 374-G:7

 **374-G:7 Exclusion. –** Any renewable generating equipment funded
in part by a distribution utility under this chapter shall not be
included in the calculation of the total rated generating capacity under
RSA 362-A:9, I for purposes of limiting net energy metering.

**Source.** 2008, 373:1, eff. Sept. 9, 2008.
