---
title: 'CHAPTER 375-A CARRIAGE OF HOUSEHOLD GOODS FOR HIRE BY MOTOR VEHICLE'
---

TITLE XXXIV
                                             
PUBLIC UTILITIES
================

CHAPTER 375-A
                                             
CARRIAGE OF HOUSEHOLD GOODS FOR HIRE BY MOTOR VEHICLE
-----------------------------------------------------

### Section 375-A:1

 **375-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter, the following words
shall have the following meanings:
                                             
 I. "Department'' shall mean the department of safety.
                                             
 II. "Household goods carrier'' shall mean a common or contract
carrier which transports for hire by motor vehicle between points in
this state:
                                             
 (a) Personal effects and property used or to be used in a
dwelling as a part of the equipment or supply of the dwelling;
                                             
 (b) Furniture, fixtures, equipment and property of any
establishment, which are a part of the stock, equipment or supply of the
establishment;
                                             
 (c) Articles, including objects of art, displays and exhibits
with an unusual nature or value, which require specialized handling and
equipment usually used in moving household goods.
                                             
 III. "Household goods carrier'' does not include any person who
transports his own goods for the purpose of sale or delivery, or in the
furtherance of a trade or business other than transportation.
                                             
 IV. "Commissioner'' shall mean the commissioner of the department of
safety.
                                             
 V. "Common carrier'' means a person holding itself out to the
general public to provide motor vehicle transportation for compensation
over regular or irregular routes, or both.
                                             
 VI. "Contract carrier'' means a person providing motor vehicle
transportation for compensation under continuing agreements with one or
more persons:
                                             
 (a) By assigning motor vehicles for a continuing period of time
for the exclusive use of each such person; or
                                             
 (b) Designed to meet the distinct needs of each such person.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1981, 435:8. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7). 1988,
288:16, 17. 1989, 325:22, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 375-A:2

 **375-A:2 Certificate Required. –** No household goods carrier, as
defined herein, shall engage in the business of transporting household
goods, as defined by the department, between points in this state,
unless he holds a certificate issued by the department authorizing such
operations; provided, however, that, if he or his predecessor in
interest was engaged in bona fide operations as a common or contract
carrier pursuant to RSA 375, engaged in the business of transporting
household goods over regular or irregular routes on January 1, 1963, or
within the territory for which application is made, and has so operated
since that time, the department shall issue such certificate without
requiring further proof that the public convenience and necessity will
be served by such operation, and without further proceedings, if
application for such certificate is made to the department in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter on or before August 1, 1963.
Otherwise, the application for such certificate shall be in accordance
with the procedure provided for in RSA 375-A:3 and such certificate
shall be issued or denied accordingly. Pending action on any such
application, the continuance of such operation shall be lawful.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 375-A:3

 **375-A:3 Issuance. –** A certificate shall be issued to any
qualified applicant therefor, authorizing the whole or any part of the
operations covered by the application, if it is found that the applicant
is fit, willing and able properly to perform the service proposed and to
conform to the provisions of this chapter and the requirements, rules
and regulations issued by the commissioner thereunder, and that the
proposed service, to the extent to be authorized by the certificate, is
or will be required by the present or future public convenience and
necessity; otherwise, such application shall be denied.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 375-A:4

 **375-A:4 Terms and Conditions. –** Each certificate issued under
RSA 375-A:2 or 375-A:3 shall specify the service to be rendered and the
territory within which the carrier is authorized to operate. The
department may impose upon the exercise of the privileges granted by the
certificate, at the time of its issuance or from time to time
thereafter, such reasonable terms, conditions and limitations as the
public convenience and necessity may require; provided, however, that no
terms, conditions, or limitations shall restrict the right of the
carrier to add to his or its equipment and facilities over the routes,
between the termini or within the territory specified in the
certificate, as the development of the business and the demands of the
public shall require.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 375-A:4-a

 **375-A:4-a Issuance of Contract Carrier Permits. –** A contract
carrier permit shall be issued to any qualified applicant, authorizing
in whole or in part the operations covered by the application, if it
appears from the application, or from any hearing held on the
application, that the applicant is fit, willing and able to properly
perform the service of a contract carrier by motor vehicle, and to
conform to the provisions of this chapter and any rules adopted by the
commissioner, and that the proposed operation, to the extent authorized
by the permit, will be consistent with the public interest; otherwise,
such application shall be denied. The department shall specify in the
permit the business of the contract carrier covered by the permit and
the scope of the permit. The department shall attach to the permit, at
the time of issuance and from time to time thereafter, such reasonable
terms, conditions, and limitations consistent with the character of the
holder as a contract carrier as are necessary to carry out, with respect
to the operations of such carrier, the requirements established by the
department under the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that
no terms, conditions, or limitations shall restrict the right of the
carrier to substitute or add contracts within the scope of the permit,
or to add to his or its equipment and facilities as the development of
the business and the demands of the public may require.

**Source.** 1989, 325:2, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 375-A:5

 **375-A:5 Applications for Certificates. –** Application for
certificates required in RSA 375-A:2 shall be:
                                             
 I. Made in writing to the department;
                                             
 II. Verified under oath;
                                             
 III. Accompanied by the fee specified in RSA 375-A:18;
                                             
 IV. In the form specified in rules adopted by the commissioner; and
                                             
 V. With the information specified in rules adopted by the
commissioner.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1981, 435:9. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 375-A:6

 **375-A:6 Suspension, Change and Revocation of Certificates and
Permits. –** Certificates and permits issued under the provisions of
this chapter authorizing operations as a household goods carrier shall
be effective from the date specified therein and shall remain in effect
until suspended, revoked or terminated as herein provided. The
department may, after notice and hearing, upon application or upon its
own initiative, amend, suspend, or revoke any such certificate or permit
in whole or in part, for willful failure to comply with any provision of
this chapter or with any lawful order or rule issued or adopted by the
department or with any term, condition or limitation of such certificate
or permit.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7). 1989, 325:3, eff. July 1,
1989.

### Section 375-A:7

 **375-A:7 Transfer of Certificates and Permits. –** No certificate
or permit, nor any rights thereunder, shall be transferred without the
approval of the department.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7). 1989, 325:3, eff. July 1,
1989.

### Section 375-A:8

 **375-A:8 Security for the Protection of Property. –** No
certificate or permit issued to a carrier under the provisions of this
chapter shall remain in effect unless such carrier shall file with the
department and keep in force a certificate of insurance in such form and
in such reasonable amount as the department may require to adequately
provide for the reasonable protection of the owner or owners of the
property transported.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7). 1989, 325:3, eff. July 1,
1989.

### Section 375-A:9

 **375-A:9 Rates and Charges. –** Every household goods carrier by
motor vehicle shall file with the department, and shall print and keep
open to public inspection, schedules showing the rates and charges for
the transportation to be rendered, within such time and in such form and
with such detail as the department may prescribe. Unless the department
otherwise orders, no change shall be made in any such rate or charge
which shall have been filed or published in compliance with this section
except after 30 days' notice to the department and such notice to the
public as the department shall direct.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 375-A:10

 **375-A:10 Discrimination Prohibited. –** It shall be unlawful for
any household goods carrier by motor vehicle engaged in transportation
between points in this state to make, give, or cause any undue or
unreasonable preference or advantage to any particular person or
locality in any respect whatsoever or to subject any particular person
or locality to any unjust discrimination or any undue or unreasonable
prejudice or disadvantage in any respect whatsoever.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1, eff. Sept. 1, 1963.

### Section 375-A:11

 **375-A:11 Adherence to Tariffs. –** No household goods common
carrier by motor vehicle shall charge or demand or collect or receive a
greater or lesser or different compensation for transportation or for
any service in connection therewith between the points enumerated in
such tariff than the rates and charges specified in the tariffs in
effect at the time; and no such carrier shall refund or remit in any
manner or by any device, directly or indirectly, or through any agent or
otherwise, any portion of the rates or charges so specified, or extend
to any person any privileges or facilities for transportation between
points in this state except such as are specified in its tariffs.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1989, 325:4, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 375-A:12

 **375-A:12 Schedules of Minimum Rates and Charges. –**
                                             
 I. Every household goods contract carrier shall:
                                             
 (a) Print schedules of minimum charges and, if required by the
department, copies of contracts of the carrier involving transportation
between points in this state;
                                             
 (b) File contracts, if required, with the department;
                                             
 (c) File a tariff with the department, which shall include
schedules of charges and carrier regulations or practices affecting a
charge; and
                                             
 (d) Keep filed schedules and contracts posted and available for
public inspection.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 (a) Form and content of the filing and printing;
                                             
 (b) Posting of schedules and contracts; and
                                             
 (c) Manner in which schedules and contracts are to be available
for public inspection.
                                             
 III. No contract carrier shall charge or receive, in any way, for
any service rendered less than the charge filed with the department.
                                             
 IV. Any carrier may request an exemption from the department from
the requirements of RSA 375-A:12. The department may, in its discretion,
grant relief consistent with the public interest.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1981, 435:10. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7). 1989,
325:5, 6, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 375-A:13

 **375-A:13 Accounts, Records and Reports. –**
                                             
 I. The department may require:
                                             
 (a) Annual reports from all household goods carriers. The
department may require the reports to be made under oath; and
                                             
 (b) Specific answers to any questions deemed necessary by the
department.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to the form of annual reports.
                                             
 III. The department or its authorized representative shall have
access, at reasonable times, to all accounts, records and other
documents of a carrier which relate to RSA 375-A.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1981, 435:11. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 375-A:14

 **375-A:14 Rulemaking; General Duties and Powers of the
Commissioner. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall regulate household goods carriers by motor
vehicle.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may adopt rules relative to:
                                             
 (a) Reasonable and adequate service, and safety of operation and
equipment.
                                             
 (b) 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1981, 435:12. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7). 1993,
338:1. 2007, 263:175, I, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 375-A:15

 **375-A:15 Complaints; Hearings. –**
                                             
 I. The department may investigate, upon written complaint or on its
own initiative, or hold a hearing, after notice, to determine whether
any household goods carrier has failed to comply with RSA 375-A or rules
adopted by the commissioner relative to RSA 375-A.
                                             
 II. If the department finds, after a hearing, that a carrier has
failed to comply with RSA 375-A, the department may issue an appropriate
order to compel compliance.
                                             
 III. The department may dismiss any complaint which does not state
reasonable grounds for investigation and action by the department.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1981, 435:13. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 375-A:16

 **375-A:16 Examination of Vehicles; Inspectors; Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who operates a motor vehicle for a household goods
carrier doing business in this state shall stop his motor vehicle and
permit any inspector authorized by the department to examine the
vehicle. The inspector may examine the vehicle as necessary to determine
its compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules
adopted under this chapter.
                                             
 II. Inspectors authorized by the department shall have authority as
peace officers as provided by RSA 594 to enforce this chapter and rules
adopted by the commissioner relative to this chapter. An inspector shall
display the proper insignia of his office when stopping and examining a
motor vehicle.
                                             
 III. Any person who violates RSA 375-A:16 shall be guilty of a
violation.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1973, 531:113. 1981, 435:14. 1985, 402:6,
I(e)(7). 1989, 325:7, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 375-A:17

 **375-A:17 Vehicles to be Registered. –** Each household goods
carrier holding a certificate or permit under the provisions of this
chapter shall annually apply to the department of safety, division of
motor vehicles, on blanks to be furnished by it, for the registration of
each vehicle operated under the provisions of such certificate or permit
and pay to said department fees as provided for in RSA 375-A:18. Upon
receipt of such application and fee, a distinguishing number plate or
plates and registration certificate shall be furnished by the division
for such vehicle applied for, and said plates shall be prominently
displayed on the vehicle in such manner as the director of the division
shall prescribe. Registration certificates and number plates issued
under the provisions of this section shall be used coincidental with,
and shall expire with, the corresponding registration certificate and
number plates issued by the division of motor vehicles, department of
safety, of this state.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1989, 325:8, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 375-A:18

 **375-A:18 Fees. –** The following fees shall be paid:
                                             
 I. To the department:
                                             
 (a) For each application for a common or contract carrier of
household goods certificate under RSA 375-A:3 or permit under RSA
375-A:4-a, 
                                             $50.
                                             
 (b) For the annual registration of each vehicle used in the
carriage of household goods, 
                                             $10.
                                             
 (c) For each transfer of a registration certificate, 
                                             $1.
                                             
 II. The department of safety, division of motor vehicles, shall
deduct from the fees received under subparagraphs (b) and (c) of
paragraph I the actual cost of issuing such registration certificates
and number plates and shall forward the balance to the department to be
used by it in the administration of this chapter.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1977, 563:48. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7). 1988,
288:18. 1989, 325:9, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 375-A:19

 **375-A:19 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph II, any person violating any
provision of this chapter, or any rule or order adopted or issued under
this chapter, or any term or condition of any certificate, permit or
license shall:
                                             
 (a) For a first offense, be guilty of a violation and shall be
fined not less than 
                                             $100.
                                             
 (b) For a second offense, within a 12-month period preceding the
date of the second offense, be guilty of a violation and shall be fined
not less than 
                                             $250.
                                             
 II. Any person found guilty of operating after suspension or
revocation of rights, for a first offense, shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be fined not less than 
                                             $250. For a second such
offense, within a 12-month period, such person shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be fined not less than 
                                             $500.
                                             
 III. Any person found guilty of a third and subsequent offense as
described under paragraph I, paragraph II, or paragraphs I and II
combined, in a 12-month period preceding a third or subsequent offense,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than 
                                             $500.

**Source.** 1963, 264:1. 1973, 530:61. 1989, 325:23, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 375-A:20

 **375-A:20 Registration of Interstate Certificates and Permits. –**

                                             [Repealed 1993, 338:6, I, eff. Sept. 30, 1993.
                                             ]

### Section 375-A:21

 **375-A:21 Registration of Vehicles Operating in Interstate
Commerce. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1993, 338:6, II, eff. Sept. 30, 1993.
                                             ]
