---
title: 'CHAPTER 376-A TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY'
---

TITLE XXXIV
                                             
PUBLIC UTILITIES
================

CHAPTER 376-A
                                             
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY
------------------------------

### Section 376-A:1

 **376-A:1 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Department'' means the department of safety.
                                             
 II. "Digital network'' means any online enabled technology
application service, website, or system offered or utilized by a
transportation network company that enables the prearrangement of rides
with transportation network company drivers.
                                             
 III. "Personal vehicle'' means a vehicle that is used by a
transportation network company driver to provide a prearranged ride and
is:
                                             
 (a) Owned, leased, or otherwise authorized for use by the
transportation network company driver; and
                                             
 (b) Not a motor carrier or taxicab under RSA 376:2.
                                             
 IV. "Prearranged ride'' means the provision of transportation by a
driver to a rider, beginning when a driver accepts a ride requested by a
rider through a digital network controlled by a transportation network
company, continuing while the driver transports a requesting rider, and
ending when the last requesting rider departs from the personal vehicle.
A prearranged ride does not include transportation provided through any
of the following:
                                             
 (a) A motor carrier or taxicab as defined in RSA 376:2.
                                             
 (b) Shared expense carpool or vanpool arrangements.
                                             
 (c) A regional transportation provider.
                                             
 V. "Transportation network company'' (TNC) means a corporation,
partnership, sole proprietorship, or other entity, that has a permit
issued by the department and is operating in New Hampshire, that uses a
digital network to connect transportation network company riders to
transportation network company drivers who provide prearranged rides. A
transportation network company shall not be deemed to control, direct,
or manage the personal vehicles or transportation network company
drivers that connect to its digital network, except where agreed to by
written contract.
                                             
 VI. "Transportation network company driver'' (TNC driver) means an
individual who:
                                             
 (a) Receives connections to potential passengers and related
services from a transportation network company in exchange for payment
of a fee to the transportation network company; and
                                             
 (b) Uses a personal vehicle to offer or provide a prearranged
ride to riders upon connection through a digital network controlled by a
transportation network company in return for compensation or payment of
a fee.
                                             
 VII. "Transportation network company rider'' (rider) means a person
who uses a transportation network company's digital network to connect
with a transportation network driver who provides prearranged rides to
the rider in the driver's personal vehicle between points chosen by the
rider.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:2

 **376-A:2 Not Other Carriers. –** No TNC or TNC driver is a motor
carrier, nor do they provide taxicab services pursuant to RSA 376:2. No
TNC or TNC driver shall be required to:
                                             
 I. Apply for a common carrier certificate under RSA 376:4 or a
contract carrier permit under RSA 376:7; or
                                             
 II. Register personal vehicles under RSA 376:24.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:3

 **376-A:3 TNC Permit Required. –** No person shall operate a TNC in
New Hampshire without first having obtained a permit from the
department, provided that any transportation network company operating
in the state before the effective date of this chapter may continue to
operate in the state until the department establishes a permit process
and provides a reasonable period in which to apply for and obtain a
permit. The department shall issue a permit to each applicant that meets
the requirements for a TNC under this chapter, and pays an annual permit
fee of 
                                             $500 to the department. The permit shall be issued annually and
shall be effective on the date of issue.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:4

 **376-A:4 Agent. –** Every TNC shall appoint an agent for service of
process in the state of New Hampshire.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:5

 **376-A:5 Fare. –** On behalf of a TNC driver, a TNC may charge a
fare for the services provided to riders provided that if a fare is
collected from a rider, the TNC shall disclose to the rider the fare or
the fare calculation method on its website, within the vehicle, or on
the online application service. The TNC shall also provide riders with
the applicable rates being charged and the option to receive an
estimated fare before the rider enters the TNC driver's vehicle.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:6

 **376-A:6 Identification of TNC Vehicles and Drivers. –** The TNC's
digital network or website shall display a picture of the TNC driver,
and the license plate number of the motor vehicle utilized for providing
the prearranged ride before the rider enters the TNC driver's vehicle.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:7

 **376-A:7 Receipt. –** Within a reasonable period of time following
the completion of a trip, a TNC shall transmit an itemized receipt to
the rider on behalf of the TNC driver.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:8

 **376-A:8 Financial Responsibility of TNCs. –** On the effective
date of this chapter and thereafter:
                                             
 I. Every TNC driver, or TNC on behalf of the driver, shall maintain
primary motor vehicle insurance that recognizes that the driver is a TNC
driver or otherwise uses a vehicle to transport passengers for
compensation and covers the driver:
                                             
 (a) While the driver is logged on to the TNC's digital network;
or
                                             
 (b) While the driver is engaged in a prearranged ride.
                                             
 II. The following motor vehicle insurance requirements shall apply
while a participating TNC driver is logged on to the TNC's digital
network but is not engaged in a prearranged ride:
                                             
 (a) Primary motor vehicle liability insurance, consistent with
RSA 259:61, in the amount of at least 
                                             $50,000 for death and bodily
injury per person; 
                                             $100,000 for death and bodily injury per incident;
and 
                                             $25,000 for property damage, including the duty to defend.
                                             
 (b) Coverage consistent with New Hampshire financial
responsibility laws.
                                             
 III. The coverage requirements of paragraph II may be satisfied by
any of the following:
                                             
 (a) Motor vehicle insurance maintained by the TNC driver;
                                             
 (b) Motor vehicle insurance maintained by the TNC; or
                                             
 (c) Any combination of subparagraphs (a) and (b).
                                             
 IV. The following motor vehicle insurance requirements shall apply
while a TNC driver is engaged in a prearranged ride:
                                             
 (a) Primary automobile liability insurance that provides at least

                                             $300,000 for death, bodily injury, and property damage.
                                             
 (b) Coverage consistent with New Hampshire financial
responsibility laws.
                                             
 V. The coverage requirements of paragraph IV may be satisfied by any
of the following:
                                             
 (a) Motor vehicle insurance maintained by the TNC driver;
                                             
 (b) Motor vehicle insurance maintained by the TNC; or
                                             
 (c) Any combination of subparagraphs (a) and (b).
                                             
 VI. If insurance maintained by the TNC driver in paragraphs II and
IV has lapsed or does not provide the required coverage, insurance
maintained by the TNC shall provide the coverage required by this
section beginning with the first dollar of a claim and shall have the
duty to defend and indemnify such claim.
                                             
 VII. Coverage under a motor vehicle insurance policy maintained by
the TNC shall not be dependent on a personal motor vehicle insurer first
denying a claim nor shall a personal motor vehicle insurance policy be
required to first deny a claim.
                                             
 VIII. Insurance required by this section shall be placed with an
admitted insurer that has the requisite certificate of authority to
write motor vehicle insurance pursuant to RSA 401:1. Insurance required
under this section may be placed with an unadmitted surplus lines
insurer consistent with the provisions of RSA 405:24 through RSA 405:31,
that has a credit rating of no less than "A-'' from A.M. Best or "A''
from Demotech or a similar rating from another rating agency recognized
by the insurance department.
                                             
 IX. Every TNC driver shall carry physical or electronic proof of
coverage satisfying paragraphs II and IV with him or her at all times
during his or her use of a vehicle in connection with a TNC's digital
network. In the event of an accident, a TNC driver shall provide this
insurance coverage information to the directly interested parties,
automobile insurers, and investigating police officers. Upon request, a
TNC driver shall also disclose to directly interested parties,
automobile insurers, and investigating police officers, whether he or
she was logged on to the TNC's digital network or on a prearranged ride
at the time of an accident.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:9

 **376-A:9 Disclosures. –** Every TNC shall disclose in writing to
the TNC driver the following:
                                             
 I. The insurance coverage, including the types of coverage and the
limits for each coverage, that the TNC provides while the TNC driver
uses a personal vehicle in connection with a TNC's digital network.
                                             
 II. That the TNC driver's own motor vehicle insurance policy might
not provide any coverage while the TNC driver is logged on to the TNC's
digital network or is engaged in a prearranged ride, depending on its
terms.
                                             
 III. That the TNC driver shall contact the driver's personal vehicle
insurer or insurance producer and lienholder to advise the insurer or
producer and lienholder that the driver will be providing TNC services.
                                             
 IV. That if the personal vehicle that the TNC driver uses to provide
TNC services has a lien against it, using the personal vehicle for TNC
services without physical damage coverage may violate the terms of the
contract with the lienholder.
                                             
 V. That if a TNC's insurer makes a payment for a claim covered under
comprehensive coverage or collision coverage, the TNC shall cause its
insurer to issue the payment directly to the business repairing the
personal vehicle or jointly to the owner of the personal vehicle and the
primary lienholder on the covered personal vehicle.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:10

 **376-A:10 Motor Vehicle Insurance Provisions. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Insurers that write motor vehicle insurance in New Hampshire
may exclude any and all coverage afforded under the policy issued to an
owner or operator of a personal vehicle for any loss or injury that
occurs while a TNC driver is logged on to a TNC's digital network or
while a driver provides a prearranged ride. The right to exclude all
coverage may apply to any coverage included in a motor vehicle insurance
policy including, but not limited to:
                                             
 (1) Liability coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
                                             
 (2) Uninsured and under insured motorist coverage.
                                             
 (3) Medical payments coverage.
                                             
 (4) Comprehensive physical damage coverage.
                                             
 (5) Collision physical damage coverage.
                                             
 (b) If the coverage has been excluded under this paragraph, and
the insurance required to be maintained by the TNC driver under RSA
376-A:8, II and IV has lapsed or does not provide the required coverage,
the state financial responsibility requirements in RSA 259:61, I,
including costs of defense, shall be satisfied by the TNC's motor
vehicle insurance policy, beginning with the first dollar of a claim.
Nothing in this section implies or requires that a personal motor
vehicle insurance policy provide coverage while the TNC driver is logged
on to the TNC's digital network, while the TNC driver is engaged in a
prearranged ride, or while the TNC driver otherwise uses a vehicle to
transport passengers for compensation. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to require an insurer to use any particular policy language or
reference to this section in order to exclude any and all coverage for
any loss or injury that occurs while a driver is logged on to a TNC's
digital network or while a TNC driver provides a prearranged ride.
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude an insurer from
providing primary or excess coverage for the TNC driver's vehicle, if it
chooses to do so by contract or endorsement.
                                             
 II. No automobile insurer that excludes the coverage described in
RSA 376-A:8 shall have a duty to defend or indemnify any claim expressly
excluded thereunder. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
invalidate or limit an exclusion contained in a policy, including any
policy in use or approved for use in New Hampshire prior to the
enactment of this chapter, that excludes coverage for vehicles used to
carry persons or property for a charge or available for hire by the
public. An automobile insurer that defends or indemnifies a claim
against a driver that is excluded under the terms of its policy, shall
have a right of contribution against other insurers that provide
automobile insurance to the same driver in satisfaction of the coverage
requirements of RSA 376-A:8 at the time of loss.
                                             
 III. In a claims coverage investigation, TNCs shall immediately
provide, upon request by 3 directly involved parties or any insurer of
the TNC driver if applicable, the precise times that a TNC driver logged
on and off of the TNC's digital network in the 12-hour period
immediately preceding and in the 12-hour period immediately following
the accident. Insurers under RSA 376-A:8 shall disclose, upon request by
any other insurer involved in the particular claim, the applicable
coverage, exclusions, and limits provided under any automobile insurance
maintained under RSA 376-A:8.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:11

 **376-A:11 Zero Tolerance for Drug or Alcohol Use. –**
                                             
 I. The TNC shall implement a zero tolerance policy regarding a TNC
driver's activities while accessing the TNC's digital platform. The zero
tolerance policy shall address the use of drugs or alcohol while a TNC
driver is providing prearranged rides or is logged into the TNC's
digital network but is not providing prearranged rides, and the TNC
shall provide notice of this policy on its website, as well as
procedures to report a complaint about a TNC driver with whom a rider
was matched and whom the rider reasonably suspects was under the
influence of drugs or alcohol during the course of the trip.
                                             
 II. Upon receipt of such rider complaint alleging a violation of the
zero tolerance policy, the TNC shall suspend such TNC driver's access to
the TNC's digital platform as soon as possible, and shall conduct an
investigation into the reported incident. The suspension shall last the
duration of the investigation.
                                             
 III. The TNC shall maintain records relevant to the enforcement of
this requirement for a period of at least 2 years from the date that a
rider complaint is received by the TNC. The suspension shall last the
duration of the investigation.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:12

 **376-A:12 TNC Driver Requirements. –**
                                             
 I. Before allowing an individual to accept trip requests through a
TNC's digital platform:
                                             
 (a) The individual shall submit an application to the TNC, which
includes information regarding his or her address, age, driver's
license, motor vehicle registration, automobile liability insurance, and
other information required by the TNC.
                                             
 (b) The TNC shall conduct, or have a third party conduct, a local
and national criminal background check for each applicant that shall
include:
                                             
 (1) Multi-state/multi-jurisdiction criminal records locator or
other similar commercial nationwide database with validation (primary
source search); and
                                             
 (2) U.S. Department of Justice National Sex Offender Public
Website.
                                             
 (c) The TNC shall obtain and review, or have a third party obtain
and review, a driving history research report from such individual.
                                             
 II. No individual shall act as a TNC driver on the TNC's digital
platform who:
                                             
 (a) Has had more than 3 moving violations in the prior 3-year
period, or one major violation in the prior 3-year period, including,
but not limited to, attempting to evade the police, reckless driving, or
driving with a suspended or revoked license.
                                             
 (b) Has been convicted, within the past 7 years, of driving under
the influence of drugs or alcohol, fraud, sexual offenses, use of a
motor vehicle to commit a felony, a crime involving property damage,
and/or theft, acts of violence, or acts of terror.
                                             
 (c) Is a match on the United States Department of Justice
National Sex Offender Public Website.
                                             
 (d) Does not possess a valid driver's license.
                                             
 (e) Does not possess proof of registration for the motor vehicle
used to provide prearranged rides.
                                             
 (f) Does not possess proof of automobile liability insurance for
the motor vehicle used to provide prearranged rides.
                                             
 (g) Is not at least 19 years of age.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:13

 **376-A:13 Vehicle Safety. –** Prior to permitting a TNC driver to
accept trip requests through the TNC's digital platform, the TNC shall
ensure that the TNC driver's personal vehicle meets New Hampshire's
vehicle safety requirements for private motor vehicles.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:14

 **376-A:14 Street Hails Prohibited. –** No TNC driver shall solicit
or accept street hails.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:15

 **376-A:15 Discrimination Prohibited; Accessibility. –**
                                             
 I. The TNC shall adopt a policy of nondiscrimination on the basis of
destination, race, color, national origin, religious belief or
affiliation, sex, disability, age, sexual orientation, or gender
identity with respect to riders and potential riders and notify TNC
drivers of such policy.
                                             
 II. TNC drivers shall comply with all applicable laws regarding
nondiscrimination against riders or potential riders on the basis of
destination, race, color, national origin, religious belief or
affiliation, sex, disability, age, sexual orientation, or gender
identity.
                                             
 III. TNC drivers shall comply with all applicable laws relating to
accommodation of service animals.
                                             
 IV. No TNC shall impose additional charges for providing services to
persons with physical disabilities because of such disabilities.
                                             
 V. Every TNC shall provide riders an opportunity to indicate whether
they require a wheelchair accessible vehicle. If a TNC cannot arrange a
wheelchair accessible prearranged ride in any instance, it shall direct
the rider to an alternate provider of wheelchair accessible service, if
available.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:16

 **376-A:16 Records. –** Every TNC shall maintain the following
customer records:
                                             
 I. Individual trip records for at least one year from the date each
trip was provided.
                                             
 II. TNC driver records at least until the one year anniversary of
the date on which a TNC driver's customer relationship with the TNC has
ended.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:17

 **376-A:17 Controlling Authority. –** Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, TNCs and TNC drivers are governed exclusively by this
chapter and any rules by the department of safety consistent with this
chapter. No municipality or other local entity may impose a tax on, or
require a license for, a TNC, a TNC driver, or a vehicle used by a TNC
driver where such tax or licenses relates to providing prearranged
rides, or subject a TNC to the municipality's or other local entity's
rate, entry, operational, or other requirements.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:18

 **376-A:18 Penalties. –** The department shall adopt rules pursuant
to RSA 541-A for penalties, including:
                                             
 I. The department may assess an administrative penalty for
violations of this chapter in an amount not to exceed 
                                             $500 for a first
offense and 
                                             $1,000 for a subsequent offense. Failure to pay such a
penalty shall result in revocation of the TNC permit.
                                             
 II. The department may suspend or revoke the TNC permit for repeated
violations of this chapter.
                                             
 III. Any person who subverts the intent and purposes of this chapter
by filing false, misleading, or substantially inaccurate statements with
the department shall be guilty of a violation.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.

### Section 376-A:19

 **376-A:19 General Duties and Powers of the Commissioner;
Rulemaking; Confidentiality of TNC Records. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall regulate transportation network
companies.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall administer and enforce RSA 376-A and
shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the administration
of RSA 376-A.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 (a) Audits for compliance with this chapter and rules relative to
the administration of RSA 376-A;
                                             
 (b) Procedures for permit application and renewal;
                                             
 (c) Account and record systems;
                                             
 (d) Preservation of records and accounts; and
                                             
 (e) Procedures for investigating and disposing of complaints,
including a hearing process.
                                             
 IV. Any rider, driver, trip, or financial records inspected by the
department or any duly authorized representative of the department under
this chapter are designated confidential, are not subject to disclosure
to a third party by the department or duly authorized representative of
the department without the prior written consent of the transportation
network company, and are exempt from disclosure under the RSA 91-A.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the applicability
of any other exemptions under RSA 91-A.

**Source.** 2016, 290:1, eff. June 21, 2016.
