---
title: CHAPTER 376 MOTOR CARRIERS OF PASSENGERS
---

TITLE XXXIV
                                             
PUBLIC UTILITIES
================

CHAPTER 376
                                             
MOTOR CARRIERS OF PASSENGERS
----------------------------

### Section 376:1

 **376:1 Declaration of Policy. –** It is hereby declared to be the
policy of the legislature to provide for proper regulation of the
transportation of passengers by motor vehicle upon the highways of this
state, subject to the provisions of this chapter so administered as to
recognize and preserve the inherent advantages of such transportation,
to promote safe, adequate, economical and efficient service by passenger
motor carriers, and reasonable charges therefor, without unjust
discrimination, undue preferences or advantages or unfair or destructive
competitive practices; to improve the relations between and coordinate
transportation by and the regulation of passenger motor carriers and
other carriers; to develop and preserve a highway passenger
transportation system properly adapted to the needs of the state; and to
promote safety upon its highways in the interest of its citizens. The
provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced with a
view to carrying out the above declaration of policy.

**Source.** 1941, 224:1. RL 304:1.

### Section 376:2

 **376:2 Definition of Terms. –** The following words and phrases as
used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless the
context clearly requires otherwise:
                                             
 I. The term "department'' means the department of safety.
                                             
 II. The term "person'' means any individual, firm, copartnership,
corporation, company, association or joint-stock association, railroad
corporation, including any trustee, administrator, executor, receiver,
assignee or other personal representative thereof.
                                             
 III. The term "motor carrier'' includes both a common carrier and a
contract carrier of passengers by motor vehicle.
                                             
 IV. The term "common carrier of passengers'' means a person holding
itself out to the general public to provide motor vehicle transportation
for compensation over regular or irregular routes, or both.
                                             
 V. The term "regular route common carrier'' means any common carrier
of passengers by motor vehicle who operates over regular routes between
points within this state.
                                             
 VI. The term "irregular route common carrier'' means any common
carrier of passengers by motor vehicle who operates over irregular
routes between points within this state.
                                             
 VII. The term "contract carrier of passengers'' means a person
providing motor vehicle transportation for compensation under continuing
agreements with one or more persons:
                                             
 (a) By assigning motor vehicles for a continuing period of time
for the exclusive use of each such person; or
                                             
 (b) Designed to meet the distinct needs of each person.
                                             
 VIII. The term "certificate'' means a certificate of public
convenience and necessity issued under the provisions of this chapter to
a common carrier of passengers by motor vehicle.
                                             
 IX. The term "permit'' means a permit issued under the provisions of
this chapter to a contract carrier of passengers by motor vehicle.
                                             
 X. The term "highway'' means the roads, highways, streets and ways
laid out for and used generally by the public.
                                             
 XI. The term "taxicab'' means any rubber-tired motor vehicle having
a manufacturer's rated seating capacity of not more than 7 persons used
in the call and demand transportation of passengers for compensation to
or from points chosen or designated by the passengers and not operated
on a fixed schedule between fixed termini; or any such vehicle leased or
rented, or held for leasing or renting, with or without drivers or
operators.
                                             
 XII. The term "vanpooling'' means an arrangement for the
transportation of persons to and from work on a nonprofit basis
utilizing a motor vehicle manufactured primarily for use in transporting
not less than 8 people and not more than 15 people, whose operator must
be 18 years of age or older and must hold a vanpool operator's permit.
The director of motor vehicles shall issue such permits at no charge,
and shall require such examination as to the operator's qualifications
as he may deem necessary.

**Source.** 1941, 224:2. RL 304:2. 1949, 166:1, 2. 1951, 203:1. RSA
376:2. 1977, 382:1. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7). 1988, 288:24. 1989, 325:15,
16, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 376:3

 **376:3 Exemptions. –** There shall be exempt from the provisions of
this chapter (1) motor vehicles while employed solely in transporting
school children and teachers to or from the school for which such
arrangements are within the supervision or control of the local or
appropriate state school board authorities; or (2) taxicabs, and other
motor vehicles having a manufacturer's rated seating capacity of not
more than 7 persons, unless, after investigation, the department shall
be of the opinion that the service provided is in competition with the
schedules of a common carrier by highway or railroad; or (3) motor
vehicles owned or operated by hotels which are used exclusively for the
transportation of hotel patrons between hotels and local railroad or
other common carrier stations; or (4) motor vehicles while engaged
exclusively in work for any branch of the government of the United
States or for any department of this state, or for any county, city,
town or village; or (5) motor vehicles while engaged exclusively in the
delivery of the United States mail; or (6) vans engaged in vanpooling
not less than 8 people and not more than 15 people to and from work on a
nonprofit basis and in which the operating costs and a reasonable
vehicle depreciation cost for such vehicle are paid principally by those
people utilizing such arrangement.

**Source.** 1941, 224:3. RL 304:3. 1949, 166:3. RSA 376:3. 1977, 382:2.
1985, 402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 376:3-a

 **376:3-a Certification as Vanpool Operator. –** Each person, upon
being certified by the director of the division of motor vehicles of the
department of safety as a vanpool operator, shall provide said director
with a certificate indicating that the vehicle used in vanpooling
service is covered by a liability insurance policy in such amount as may
be prescribed by the director.

**Source.** 1977, 382:3, eff. Sept. 3, 1977.

### Section 376:3-b

 **376:3-b Safety Requirements. –** Each vehicle operated in
vanpooling service shall comply with the safety requirements as issued
by the department applicable to common and contract carriers of
passengers for hire.

**Source.** 1977, 382:3. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 376:4

 **376:4 Common Carrier Certificate Required. –** No person shall
engage in the business of operating a motor vehicle as a common carrier
of passengers between points in this state unless he holds a certificate
issued by the department authorizing such operations; provided, however,
that, if he or his predecessor in interest, including street railways
operating motor vehicles in substitution for or in connection with
street car operations, was engaged in bona fide operation as a common
carrier over regular or irregular routes, by motor vehicle, as provided
by the definitions in RSA 376:2, V and VI, on June 13, 1941, over the
route or routes or within the territory for which application is made
and has so operated since that time, or, if engaged in furnishing
seasonal service only, was in bona fide operation on said date during
the season ordinarily covered by its operation, except in either
instance as to interruptions of service over which the applicant or his
predecessor in interest had no control, the department shall issue such
certificate without requiring further proof that the public convenience
and necessity will be served by such operation, and without further
proceedings, if application for such certificate is made to the
department as provided by RSA 376:9, on or before April 1, 1942.
Otherwise, the application for such certificate shall be decided in
accordance with the procedure provided for in RSA 376:5 or 376:8 and
such certificate shall be issued or denied accordingly. Pending action
on any application, the continuance of such operation shall be lawful.

**Source.** 1941, 224:4. RL 304:4. RSA 376:4. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 376:5

 **376:5 Issuance of Common Carrier Certificate. –**
                                             
 I. A certificate authorizing, in whole or in part, an operation for
which application is made shall be issued to any qualified applicant.
                                             
 II. Conditions for qualifications:
                                             
 (a) The applicant must be fit, willing, and able to properly
perform the proposed service;
                                             
 (b) The applicant must agree to conform to the provisions of RSA
376 and any rules adopted by the commissioner relative to RSA 376; and
                                             
 (c) The proposed service must be required by the present or
future public convenience.

**Source.** 1941, 224:5. RL 304:5. RSA 376:5. 1981, 435:25. 1985, 402:6,
I(e)(7).

### Section 376:6

 **376:6 Provisions of Common Carrier Certificate. –**
                                             
 I. Each common carrier certificate shall specify:
                                             
 (a) The type of proposed service; and
                                             
 (b) The scope of proposed service, including:
                                             
 (1) Routes over which the motor carrier may operate and fixed
termini, if any; or
                                             
 (2) Territory within which the motor carrier may operate.
                                             
 II. The department may impose reasonable conditions, as required by
the public convenience and necessity, on the operations authorized by
the certificate when the certificate is issued or at any later time.
However, a carrier may add to its equipment within the scope of the
routes or territory specified in the certificate if the increase in
equipment is required by the development of the carrier's business and
public demands.
                                             
 III. A common carrier by motor vehicle may deviate from its
authorized route as permitted in rules adopted by the commissioner or if
highway conditions make operation over regular routes impracticable.
                                             
 IV. A certificate authorizing the transportation of passengers may
also permit transportation of:
                                             
 (a) Newspapers, baggage of passengers, express, or mail in the
same vehicle with the passengers; or
                                             
 (b) Baggage of passengers in a separate vehicle.

**Source.** 1941, 224:6. RL 304:6. RSA 376:6. 1981, 435:26. 1985, 402:6,
I(e)(7).

### Section 376:7

 **376:7 Contract Carrier Permit Required. –** No person shall
operate a motor vehicle as a contract carrier of passengers between
points in this state without a permit issued by the department.

**Source.** 1941, 224:7. RL 304:7. RSA 376:7. 1981, 435:27. 1985, 402:6,
I(e)(7).

### Section 376:8

 **376:8 Issuance of Contract Carrier Permit. –**
                                             
 I. A permit authorizing, in whole or in part, an operation for which
application is made shall be issued to any qualified applicant.
                                             
 II. Conditions for qualification:
                                             
 (a) The applicant must be fit, willing, and able to properly
perform the proposed service;
                                             
 (b) The applicant must agree to conform to the provisions of RSA
376 and any rules adopted by the commissioner relative to RSA 376; and
                                             
 (c) The proposed service must be consistent with the public
interest and the policy declared in RSA 376:1.
                                             
 III. Each contract carrier certificate shall specify:
                                             
 (a) The business of the contract carrier; and
                                             
 (b) The scope of the carrier's business.
                                             
 IV. The department shall impose reasonable conditions on the
contract carrier's operations when the permit is issued or at any later
time in accordance with rules adopted by the commissioner. However, a
carrier may substitute or add contracts or add to its equipment and
facilities if the change is within the scope of its permit and is
required by the development of the carrier's business and public
demands.

**Source.** 1941, 224:8. RL 304:8. RSA 376:8. 1981, 435:28. 1985, 402:6,
I(e)(7).

### Section 376:9

 **376:9 Applications for Certificates and Permits. –** Applications
for certificates and permits required by RSA 376:4 and RSA 376:7 shall
be:
                                             
 I. Made in writing to the department;
                                             
 II. Verified under oath;
                                             
 III. Accompanied by the proper fee;
                                             
 IV. In the form specified in rules adopted by the commissioner
pursuant to RSA 541-A; and
                                             
 V. With the information specified in rules adopted by the
commissioner pursuant to RSA 541-A.

**Source.** 1941, 224:9. RL 304:9. RSA 376:9. 1981, 435:29. 1985, 402:6,
I(e)(7).

### Section 376:10

 **376:10 Amendment, Suspension and Revocation of Certificates and
Permits. –**
                                             
 I. Certificates and permits issued by the department under RSA 376
become effective on the date specified in the certificate or permit.
                                             
 II. Certificates and permits remain in effect until suspended or
revoked by the department.
                                             
 III. Conditions for amendment, suspension or revocation of a
certificate or permit:
                                             
 (a) The department must provide notice and hearing.
                                             
 (b) The department may act on its own initiative or upon
application.
                                             
 (c) The amendment, suspension or revocation may be in whole or in
part.
                                             
 (d) A certificate or permit may be amended, suspended or revoked
if the holder of the permit or certificate willfully violates:
                                             
 (1) Any provision of RSA 376;
                                             
 (2) Rules adopted by the commissioner, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to RSA 376; or
                                             
 (3) Any provision in a certificate or permit.
                                             
 IV. If the department suspends or revokes a certificate or permit,
the department shall notify the division of motor vehicles. The division
of motor vehicles shall revoke or suspend the registration of each
vehicle registered with the division of motor vehicles under RSA 376:24
for the period specified by the department.

**Source.** 1941, 224:10. RL 304:10. RSA 376:10. 1961, 166:15. 1981,
435:30. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 376:11

 **376:11 Discontinuance of Operations. –** Except as provided in RSA
376:10, the holder of a certificate authorizing regular route operations
shall not discontinue operations carried on thereunder without the
consent of the department.

**Source.** 1941, 224:11. RL 304:11. RSA 376:11. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 376:12

 **376:12 Transfer of Certificates and Permits. –** No certificate or
permit, nor any rights thereunder, shall be transferred without the
approval of the department.

**Source.** 1941, 224:12. RL 304:12. RSA 376:12. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 376:13

 **376:13 Security for the Protection of Passengers. –** No
certificate or permit issued to a motor carrier under the provisions of
this chapter shall remain in effect unless such carrier shall file with
the department, and keep in force, a certificate of insurance, an
insurance policy or indemnity bond in such form and in such reasonable
amount as the department may require providing for the payment of any
final judgment recovered against such motor carrier for bodily injuries
to, or the death of, any person using the facilities of motor carriers
of passengers resulting from the negligent operation, maintenance, or
use of motor vehicles under such certificate or permit.

**Source.** 1941, 224:13. RL 304:13. RSA 376:13. 1963, 130:2. 1985,
402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 376:14

 **376:14 Rates, Fares and Charges. –**
                                             
 I. Every common carrier of passengers by motor vehicle shall print
schedules of rates, fares and charges of the carrier for the
transportation of passengers and baggage or for any other service and
file these schedules with the department. Such schedules shall be open
to public inspection.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to the form and content of the filing and printing and the time
within which the filing and printing are required.
                                             
 III. Unless the department so orders, no carrier shall change a
rate, fare or charge which has been filed with the department, except
after 30 days' notice to the department and notice to the public as the
department directs.

**Source.** 1941, 224:14. RL 304:14. RSA 376:14. 1981, 435:31. 1985,
402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 376:15

 **376:15 Discrimination Prohibited. –** It shall be unlawful for any
common carrier by motor vehicle engaged in transportation between points
in this state to make, give, or cause any undue or unreasonable
preference or advantage to any particular person or locality in any
respect whatsoever, or to subject any particular person or locality to
any unjust discrimination or any undue or unreasonable prejudice or
disadvantage in any respect whatsoever.

**Source.** 1941, 224:15. RL 304:15.

### Section 376:16

 **376:16 Complaints; Hearings. –**
                                             
 I. The department may investigate, upon complaint or on its own
initiative, or hold a hearing, after notice, to determine the
appropriateness for any common carrier or carrier by motor vehicle
transporting persons between points in this state of:
                                             
 (a) Any filed or proposed rate, fare or charge; or
                                             
 (b) Any carrier regulation or practice affecting a rate, fare or
charge.
                                             
 II. If the department finds that any rate, fare or charge is unjust,
unreasonable, unlawful or unjustly discriminatory or unduly preferential
or prejudicial, the department may order:
                                             
 (a) A new rate, fare or charge, including maximum or minimum
amounts; or
                                             
 (b) A new regulation or practice to be followed by the carrier.
                                             
 III. The department shall, after hearing, upon complaint or on its
own initiative when it is in the public interest, establish:
                                             
 (a) Through routes, including the conditions of their operation;
                                             
 (b) Joint rates, fares and charges, including maximum and minimum
amounts; and
                                             
 (c) Carrier regulations or practices affecting the transportation
of passengers by motor vehicle.

**Source.** 1941, 224:16. RL 304:16. RSA 376:16. 1981, 435:32. 1985,
402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 376:17

 **376:17 Adherence to Tariffs. –** No common carrier by motor
vehicle shall charge or demand or collect or receive a greater or lesser
or different compensation for transportation or for any service in
connection therewith between the points enumerated in such tariff than
the rates, fares, and charges specified in the tariffs in effect at the
time; and no such carrier shall refund or remit in any manner or by any
device, directly or indirectly, or through any agent or otherwise, any
portion of the rates, fares, or charges so specified, or extend to any
person any privileges or facilities for transportation between points in
this state except such as are specified in its tariffs.

**Source.** 1941, 224:17. RL 304:17.

### Section 376:18

 **376:18 Schedules of Minimum Charges; Contracts. –**
                                             
 I. Every contract carrier of passengers by motor vehicle shall:
                                             
 (a) Print schedules of minimum charges and, if required by the
department, copies of contracts of the carrier for the transportation of
passengers between points in this state;
                                             
 (b) File contracts, if required, with the department;
                                             
 (c) File a tariff with the department which shall include
schedules of minimum charges and carrier regulations or practices
affecting a charge; and
                                             
 (d) Keep filed schedules and contracts posted and available for
public inspection.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 (a) Form and content of the filing and printing;
                                             
 (b) Posting of schedules and contracts; and
                                             
 (c) Manner in which printed schedules and contracts are to be
available for public inspection.
                                             
 III. No contract carrier shall charge or receive, in any way, for
any service rendered less than the charge filed with the department.
                                             
 IV. Any carrier may request an exemption from the department from
the requirements of RSA 376:18. The department may, in its discretion,
grant relief consistent with the public interest and the policy declared
in RSA 376:1.

**Source.** 1941, 224:18. RL 304:18. RSA 376:18. 1981, 435:33. 1985,
402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 376:19

 **376:19 Hearings; Orders. –** If the department, after a hearing
upon complaint or on its own initiative, determines that a charge by any
contract carrier by motor vehicle or any carrier regulation or practice
affecting a charge contravenes the policy in RSA 376:1 or gives an
unreasonable advantage to any carrier in competition with another
carrier, the department may, after giving consideration to the cost of
the carrier's service and the public interest, order:
                                             
 (I) A new charge; or
                                             
 (II) A new rule or practice.

**Source.** 1941, 224:19. RL 304:19. RSA 376:19. 1981, 435:34. 1985,
402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 376:20

 **376:20 Accounts, Records and Reports. –**
                                             
 I. The department may require:
                                             
 (a) Annual reports from all carriers by motor vehicle. The
department may require that the reports be made under oath;
                                             
 (b) Specific answers to any questions deemed necessary by the
department; and
                                             
 (c) Copies of any agreements between a carrier by motor vehicle
and any other person if the agreement affects the carrier's business as
regulated by RSA 376.
                                             
 II. The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 (a) The form of annual reports;
                                             
 (b) The form of accounts and all other records to be kept by
motor carriers; and
                                             
 (c) The length of time a motor carrier shall keep accounts and
records.
                                             
 III. The department or its representative shall have access, at
reasonable times, to all accounts, records and other documents of a
motor carrier which relate to RSA 376.
                                             
 IV. RSA 376:20 shall apply to receivers of carriers and operating
trustees. RSA 376:20 shall apply, as deemed necessary by the department,
to persons with direct or indirect control over a motor carrier.

**Source.** 1941, 224:20. RL 304:20. RSA 376:20. 1981, 435:35. 1985,
402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 376:21

 **376:21 General Duties and Powers of the Commissioner; Rulemaking.
–**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall regulate common and contract carriers by
motor vehicle.
                                             
 II. The commissioner shall administer and enforce RSA 376 and shall
adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the administration of
RSA 376.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A,
relative to:
                                             
 (a) Levels of service;
                                             
 (b) Transportation of baggage and express;
                                             
 (c) Account and record systems;
                                             
 (d) Preservation of records and accounts; and
                                             
 (e) Safety of operation and equipment.

**Source.** 1941, 224:21. RL 304:21. RSA 376:21. 1981, 435:36. 1985,
402:6, I(e)(7). 1993, 338:3. 2007, 263:169, eff. July 1, 2007.

### Section 376:22

 **376:22 Investigations and Orders. –** Upon complaint in writing by
any person, organization, or body politic, or upon its own initiative,
the department may investigate whether any motor carrier has failed to
comply with any provision of this chapter, or with any requirement
established pursuant thereto. If the department, after notice and
hearing, finds upon any such investigation that the motor carrier has
failed to comply with any such provision or requirement, the department
may issue an appropriate order to compel the carrier to comply
therewith. Whenever the department is of the opinion that any complaint
does not state reasonable grounds for investigation and action on its
part, it may dismiss such complaint.

**Source.** 1941, 224:22. RL 304:22. RSA 376:22. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 376:23

 **376:23 Examination of Vehicles; Inspectors; Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Any person who operates a motor vehicle for a motor carrier
shall, when requested, stop his motor vehicle and permit any authorized
inspector of the department to examine the vehicle. The inspector may
examine the vehicle as necessary to determine its compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and with rules adopted under this chapter.
                                             
 II. Inspectors authorized by the department shall have authority as
peace officers as provided by RSA 594 relating to enforcement of this
chapter and rules adopted by the commissioner relating to this chapter.
An inspector shall display the proper insignia of his office when
stopping and examining a motor vehicle.
                                             
 III. Any person who violates RSA 376:23 shall be guilty of a
violation.

**Source.** 1941, 224:23. RL 304:23. RSA 376:23. 1973, 531:115. 1981,
435:37. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7). 1989, 325:17, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 376:24

 **376:24 Vehicles to be Registered. –** Each motor carrier holding a
certificate or a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall
annually apply to the department of safety, division of motor vehicles,
on blanks to be furnished by it, for the registration of each vehicle,
operated under the provisions of such certificate or permit and pay to
said department fees as provided for in RSA 376:25. Upon receipt of such
application and fee, a distinguishing number plate or plates and
registration certificate shall be furnished by the division for each
vehicle applied for and said plates shall be prominently displayed on
the vehicle in such manner as the director of the division shall
prescribe. No such plates shall be transferred from one vehicle to
another, except upon authority and with the consent of the department of
safety, and the payment of the fees prescribed in RSA 376:25.
Registration certificates and number plates issued under the provisions
of this section shall be used coincidental with, and shall expire with,
the corresponding registration certificate and number plates issued by
the division of motor vehicles, department of safety, of this state
under the provisions of RSA title XXI; provided, however, that if the
vehicle so registered as a motor carrier is not registered with the
division of motor vehicles, department of safety of this state under
title XXI, said carrier registration certificate and number plates shall
expire on March 31 next following the date of issue.

**Source.** 1941, 224:24. RL 304:24. RSA 376:24. 1961, 166:16. 1985,
402:6, I(e)(7). 1988, 288:25, eff. Jan. 1, 1989.

### Section 376:25

 **376:25 Fees. –** There shall be paid to the division of motor
vehicles, the following fees:
                                             
 I. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 II. For each application for common or contract carriers of
passengers for which a certificate or permit is issued pursuant to RSA
376:5 or 8, 
                                             $50;
                                             
 III. For the annual registration of each vehicle used in the common
or contract transportation of passengers, 
                                             $10;
                                             
 IV, V. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 VI. For each transfer of a motor vehicle registration certificate of
a common or contract carrier of passengers, 
                                             $1.

**Source.** 1941, 224:25. RL 304:25. RSA 376:25. 1977, 563:50. 1989,
325:18, 20, I, II, III, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 376:26

 **376:26 Temporary Certificates and Permits. –**
                                             
 I. When there is an immediate and urgent need for service in an area
and no carrier service is able to meet the need, the department may,
without hearing, grant temporary authority for the needed service to a
common carrier or contract carrier by motor vehicle.
                                             
 II. Temporary authority is valid for the length of time specified by
the department in the certificate or permit, but may not exceed an
aggregate of 60 days. A grant of temporary authority may be suspended or
revoked for good cause. A grant of temporary authority creates no
presumption that comparable permanent authority will later be granted.
                                             
 III. Until the department approves under RSA 376:12 the transfer of
any rights under a certificate or permit, the department may grant,
without hearing, temporary approval of a motor carrier certificate or
permit. Temporary approval shall not exceed 60 days. The department may
grant temporary approval when a lack of service would result in undue
interference with adequate and continuous service to the public.
                                             
 IV. Temporary certificates and permits are subject to RSA 376 and to
rules adopted by the commissioner relative to RSA 376.

**Source.** 1941, 224:26. RL 304:26. RSA 376:26. 1981, 435:38. 1985,
402:6, I(e)(7).

### Section 376:27

 **376:27 Penalty. –**
                                             
 I. Except as provided in paragraph II, any person violating any
provision of this chapter, or any rule or order adopted or issued under
this chapter, or any term or condition of any certificate, permit or
license shall:
                                             
 (a) For a first offense, be guilty of a violation and shall be
fined not less than 
                                             $100.
                                             
 (b) For a second offense, within a 12-month period preceding the
date of the second offense, be guilty of a violation and shall be fined
not less than 
                                             $250.
                                             
 II. Any person found guilty of operating after suspension or
revocation of rights, for a first offense, shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be fined not less than 
                                             $250. For a second such
offense, within a 12-month period, such person shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be fined not less than 
                                             $500.
                                             
 III. Any person found guilty of a third and subsequent offense as
described under paragraph I, paragraph II, or paragraph I and II
combined, in a 12-month period preceding a third or subsequent offense,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be not less than 
                                             $500.

**Source.** 1941, 224:27. RL 304:27. RSA 376:27. 1973, 530:63. 1981,
435:39. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7). 1989, 325:29, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 376:28

 **376:28 Disposition of Revenues. –** All fees and fines collected
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be made available to
the department of safety, except that the cost of issuance of
registration plates shall be paid to the division of motor vehicles.

**Source.** 1941, 224:28. RL 304:28. 1951, 203:63. RSA 376:28. 1961,
166:10. 1985, 402:6, I(e)(7). 1988, 288:26, eff. Jan. 1, 1989. 2013,
100:10, eff. Aug. 23, 2013.

### Section 376:29

 **376:29 Registration of Interstate Certificates and Permits. –**

                                             [Repealed 1993, 338:6, V, eff. Sept. 30, 1993.
                                             ]

### Section 376:30

 **376:30 Registration of Vehicles Operating in Interstate Commerce.
–** 
                                             [Repealed 1993, 338:6, VI, eff. Sept. 30, 1993.
                                             ]
