---
title: CHAPTER 378 RATES AND CHARGES
---

TITLE XXXIV
                                             
PUBLIC UTILITIES
================

CHAPTER 378
                                             
RATES AND CHARGES
-----------------

Schedules, Etc., Generally
--------------------------

### Section 378:1

 **378:1 Schedules. –** Every public utility shall file with the
public utilities commission, and shall print and keep open to public
inspection, schedules showing the rates, fares, charges and prices for
any service rendered or to be rendered in accordance with the rules
adopted by the commission pursuant to RSA 541-A; provided, however, that
public utilities which serve as seasonal tourist attractions only, as
determined in accordance with rules adopted by the commission pursuant
to RSA 541-A, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1911, 164:7. PL 242:1. RL 292:1. 1951, 203:46 par. 1. RSA
378:1. 1983, 115:1, eff. July 24, 1983.

### Section 378:1-a

 **378:1-a Exceptions. –** Except as provided otherwise within this
chapter and except for RSA 378:44 through RSA 378:48, the provisions of
this chapter shall not apply to any end user of an excepted local
exchange carrier, nor to any service provided to such end user. Excepted
local exchange carriers shall post the rates, fares, charges, prices,
terms, and conditions of all such services on its publicly available
website.

**Source.** 2012, 177:15, eff. Aug. 10, 2012.

### Section 378:2

 **378:2 Form. –** In the case of public utilities subject to
regulation by duly constituted federal authority, the requirements
relative to the filing of schedules with the commission and to the
publication thereof shall conform as nearly as may be to the
requirements of said federal authority.

**Source.** 1911, 164:7. 1913, 145:7. PL 242:2. RL 292:2. 1951, 203:46
par. 2, eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:3

 **378:3 Change. –** Unless the commission otherwise orders, no
change shall be made in any rate, fare, charge or price, which shall
have been filed or published by a public utility in compliance with the
requirements hereof, except after 30 days' notice to the commission and
such notice to the public as the commission shall direct.

**Source.** 1911, 164:7. 1913, 145:7. PL 242:3. RL 292:3. 1951, 203:46
par. 3, eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:3-a

 **378:3-a Fuel Adjustment Charge. –**
                                             
 I. In this section "fuel adjustment charge'' means a charge designed
to cover increases and decreases in the cost of purchased electric power
for a public utility purchasing electric power and increases and
decreases in the delivered cost of fuel to the generating plant site for
a public utility generating its own electric power.
                                             
 II. No public utility which generates its own electric power may
levy a fuel adjustment charge unless it secures approval from the
commission subsequent to a public hearing held at least 7 days prior to
the first day of each month in which the charge is to be levied.
                                             
 III. Any public utility which does not generate its own electric
power that purchases electric power already subject to a fuel adjustment
charge approved by the regulatory agency having jurisdiction over said
charge shall not be required to secure approval from the commission by
public hearing prior to passing on the fuel adjustment charge in the
cost of purchased electric power to its customers.

**Source.** 1976, 58:1. 1979, 18:1, eff. March 27, 1979.

### Section 378:4

 **378:4 Retroactive Reduction. –** The commission may approve a
general retroactive reduction in rates by any public utility, covering
service for which payment has not been made, when no discrimination will
be caused thereby.

**Source.** 1913, 145:7. PL 242:4. RL 292:4. 1951, 203:46 par. 4, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:5

 **378:5 Higher Rates. –** Whenever any schedule shall be filed with
the commission stating new and higher rates, fares, charges or prices,
which the public utility filing the same proposes to put into force, the
commission may investigate the reasonableness of such proposed rates,
fares, charges or prices.

**Source.** 1911, 164:7. PL 242:5. RL 292:5. 1951, 203:46 par. 5, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:6

 **378:6 Suspension of Schedule. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Pending any investigation of a rate schedule which represents
a general increase in rates and the decision thereon, the commission
may, by an order served upon the public utility affected, suspend the
taking effect of said schedule and forbid the demanding or collecting of
the rates, fares, charges or prices covered by the schedule for such
period or periods, not to exceed 12 months in all, as in the judgment of
the commission may be necessary for such investigation, except as
provided in paragraph II.
                                             
 (b) Except as provided in RSA 378:6, IV, for all other schedules
filed with the commission, the commission may, by an order served upon
the public utility affected, suspend the taking effect of said schedule
and forbid the demanding or collecting of rates, fares, charges or
prices covered by the schedule for such period or periods, not to exceed
3 months from the date of the order of suspension, but if the
investigation cannot be concluded within a period of 3 months, the
commission in its discretion and with reasonable explanation may extend
the time of suspension for 5 additional months.
                                             
 II. If a public utility submits a rate schedule which incorporates a
newly completed generating facility into the rate base and the capital
investment for the new facility exceeds 50 percent of the total capital
investment of the public utility, the commission may suspend the
schedule as provided in paragraph I, except that such suspension shall
not exceed 18 months. The total capital investment of the public utility
shall include the capital investment of the new facility. The commission
may suspend a schedule under this paragraph only once in relation to
each new facility.
                                             
 III. If for any reason the commission is unable to make its
determination prior to the expiration of 6 months from the originally
proposed effective date of a rate schedule, the public utility affected
may place the filed schedule of rates in effect, pending expiration of
the appropriate suspension period, as provided in paragraph I or II,
upon furnishing the commission with a bond in such form and with such
sureties, if any, as the commission may determine. The bond and
sureties, if any, shall secure the repayment to the customers of the
public utility of the difference, if any, between the amounts collected
under said schedule of rates and the schedule of rates determined by the
commission to be just and reasonable.
                                             
 IV. Any tariff for services filed for commission approval by a
telephone utility, except a tariff reviewed pursuant to RSA 378:6, I(a),
shall become effective as filed 30 days after filing, unless the
commission amends or rejects the filing within the 30-day period. The
commission may, in its discretion and with reasonable explanation,
including an explanation of the likely areas of disagreement with the
tariff, extend the time for its determination by up to 30 days. At its
discretion, the commission may permit changes to existing tariffs to
become effective in fewer than 30 days from the date of filing.

**Source.** 1911, 164:7. PL 242:6. RL 292:6. 1951, 203:46, par. 6. RSA
378:6. 1983, 99:1. 1993, 326:1, 2. 1997, 201:2, 3, eff. June 18, 1997.

### Section 378:7

 **378:7 Fixing of Rates by Commission. –** Whenever the commission
shall be of opinion, after a hearing had upon its own motion or upon
complaint, that the rates, fares or charges demanded or collected, or
proposed to be demanded or collected, by any public utility for service
rendered or to be rendered are unjust or unreasonable, or that the
regulations or practices of such public utility affecting such rates are
unjust or unreasonable, or in any wise in violation of any provision of
law, or that the maximum rates, fares or charges chargeable by any such
public utility are insufficient, the commission shall determine the just
and reasonable or lawful rates, fares and charges to be thereafter
observed and in force as the maximum to be charged for the service to be
performed, and shall fix the same by order to be served upon all public
utilities by which such rates, fares and charges are thereafter to be
observed. The commission shall be under no obligation to investigate any
rate matter which it has investigated within a period of 2 years, but
may do so within said period at its discretion.

**Source.** 1913, 145:10. PL 242:7. RL 292:7. 1951, 203:46 par. 7, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

Electric Utility Rates
----------------------

### Section 378:7-a

 **378:7-a Energy Policy Act Standards. –** The commission may
establish requirements for net metering, fuel diversity, fossil fuel
generation efficiency, advanced metering, time-based rates, and
interconnection with on-site generation facilities of customers in a
manner not inconsistent with section 111 of the Public Utility
Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (16 U.S.C. section 46) as amended by the
Energy Policy Act of 2005.

**Source.** 1978, 29:1. 2007, 25:9, eff. May 11, 2007.

### Section 378:7-b

 **378:7-b Optional Time-of-Use and Time-of-Day Rates Defined. –**

                                             [Repealed 2007, 25:12, II, eff. May 11, 2007.
                                             ]

### Section 378:7-c

 **378:7-c Electric Customer Defined. –** The term "electric
customer'' means any customer to which electric energy is sold for
purposes other than for resale.

**Source.** 1978, 29:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1979.

Rate Increases
--------------

### Section 378:8

 **378:8 Burden of Proof. –** When any public utility shall seek the
benefit of any order of the commission allowing it to charge and collect
rates higher than charged at the time said order is asked for, the
burden of proving the necessity of the increase shall be upon such
applicant.

**Source.** 1913, 145:10. PL 242:8. RL 292:10. 1951, 203:46 par. 8, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:9

 **378:9 Emergency. –** Whenever the commission shall be of the
opinion that an emergency exists, it may authorize any public utility
temporarily to alter, amend or suspend any existing rate, fare, charge,
price, classification or rule or regulation relating thereto.

**Source.** 1913, 145:12. PL 242:10. RL 292:10. 1951, 203:46 par. 9,
eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

Equality of Rates, Etc.
-----------------------

### Section 378:10

 **378:10 Preferences. –** No public utility shall make or give any
undue or unreasonable preference or advantage to any person or
corporation, or to any locality, or to any particular description of
service in any respect whatever or subject any particular person or
corporation or locality, or any particular description of service, to
any undue or unreasonable prejudice or disadvantage in any respect
whatever.

**Source.** 1911, 164:7. PL 242:11. RL 292:11. 1951, 203:46 par. 10,
eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:11

 **378:11 Exceptions. –** The provisions of RSA 378:10 shall not
require absolute uniformity in the charges made and demanded by public
utilities when the circumstances render any lack of uniformity
reasonable, nor prevent telephone, telegraph and cable companies from
entering into contracts, subject to the approval of the commission, with
common carriers for the exchange of services, nor affect existing
contracts relating thereto, nor prohibit a public utility from
establishing differential rates or a sliding scale for the automatic
adjustment of such charges if said rates or sliding scale, subject to
the approval of the commission, shall be reasonable and just, nor
prevent a railroad from providing tickets at reduced rates for
commutation travel, excursion trips and other classes of passenger
traffic subject to the approval of the commission.

**Source.** 1911, 164:7. PL 242:12. RL 292:12. 1951, 203:46 par. 11,
eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:11-a

 **378:11-a Economic Development and Retention Rates. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
commission shall establish procedures for the review and approval of
tariffs for electric service rates that foster economic development and
of tariffs for retention of existing load within the state. For the
purposes of this section the term "economic development rates'' means
rates, the purpose of which is to attract new industrial companies to
the state and to encourage expansion of existing industrial load that
would otherwise not occur in the state. For the purposes of this section
"retention rates'' means rates, the purpose of which is to retain
existing industrial load that would otherwise leave the utility. Such
procedures shall provide that all electric public utilities serving
retail customers may file with the commission generally available rate
schedules for the provision of economic development rates and/or
retention rates to industrial customers. Such rates shall take into
consideration eligibility criteria, the effect on the utility's fixed
and variable costs, the amount of new demand and energy for electric
service involved, the effect on employment within the state, material
adverse competitive impact on existing in-state firms, and end-user
participation in conservation programs and other state established
economic development enhancement programs.
                                             
 II. To ensure fairness in the application of the retention rate to
industrial load that is not planning to leave the utility, if the
commission finds that it is in the public good, the retention rate may
also be offered to a direct competitor of a company that has qualified
for such rate.
                                             
 III. (a) Except as provided in paragraph II, retention rates shall
be available to a customer only if the utility represents that the load
would otherwise have left the utility.
                                             
 (b) Economic development rates shall be available to all new
industrial companies to the state and for all expansion of existing load
without such representation by the utility, provided that eligibility
criteria are met.
                                             
 IV. (a) In any rate proceeding subsequent to approval of economic
development rates or retention rates, the commission shall not impute to
the utility's test year revenues or revenue requirement the difference
between the regular tariffed rate and the economic development rate or
retention rate provided that those customers qualify for the rate.
                                             
 (b) The incremental benefit of the economic development rate,
which is the excess of the incremental revenues over the incremental
cost attributable to the economic development rate, shall be allocated
by the commission between the utility and its other ratepayers in a
manner consistent with the public interest, as determined by the
commission.
                                             
 V. The rates established in this section shall not be available
after December 31, 2002.

**Source.** 1995, 272:9. 1996, 186:2, eff. June 3, 1996.

### Section 378:12,-13

 **378:12, 378:13 Repealed. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 402:39, VI.
                                             ]

### Section 378:14

 **378:14 Free Service, Etc. –** No public utility shall grant any
free service, nor charge or receive a greater or lesser or different
compensation for any service rendered to any person, firm or corporation
than the compensation fixed for such service by the schedules on file
with the commission and in effect at the time such service is rendered.

**Source.** 1913, 99:2. PL 242:15. RL 292:15. 1951, 203:46 par. 14, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:14-a

 **378:14-a Emergency Calls. –** Notwithstanding the provisions of
RSA 378:14, telephone companies authorized by the commission to do
business in any town shall, at the customer's request, adjust the
charges for tolls to such customer so that no toll charges shall be
imposed for any call from any point within the geographical boundaries
of said town placed through such company to the emergency number of an
agency of local government located within such town, provided, however,
that such request for adjustment is made at the company's business
office prior to paying such charges.

**Source.** 1977, 500:1, eff. Sept. 12, 1977.

### Section 378:15

 **378:15 Service to Officers, Etc. –**
                                             
 I. Nothing herein shall prevent any public utility from granting
free or reduced rate service to its officers and employees, nor any
telephone or telegraph utility from granting franks for free service to
the officials of other utilities engaged in the operation of telephone
or telegraph properties, nor prevent any public utility from granting
free or reduced rate service to charitable organizations or to
municipalities.
                                             
 II. In the case of electric utilities, if such a utility offers free
or reduced rate service to its officers and employees, as provided in
paragraph I of this section, then the subsidy created by such service
shall be borne by all classes of customers in direct proportion to each
class's consumption of kilowatt hours.

**Source.** 1913, 99:2. PL 242:16. RL 292:16. 1951, 203:46 par. 15. RSA
378:15. 1977, 163:1, eff. Aug. 6, 1977.

### Section 378:16

 **378:16 Statements of Service at Less Than Schedule Rates. –**
Statements shall be filed with the commission, in such form as the
commission shall require, showing all service of any kind granted at
less than the regular schedule rates.

**Source.** 1913, 99:2. PL 242:17. RL 292:17. 1951, 203:46 par. 16, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:17

 **378:17 Discontinuance, Etc., of Free or Reduced Rate Service. –**
In any case where the commission shall investigate the rates, charges or
prices of any public utility in any town or city, if it shall be of the
opinion that the furnishing of free or reduced rate service under the
authority hereof operates unreasonably to increase the rates, charges
and prices to the public, it may, to such extent as in its opinion
justice may require, order a discontinuance of such free service, or an
increase in the rates, charges or prices collected for such service, or
any part thereof.

**Source.** 1913, 99:2. PL 242:18. RL 292:18. 1951, 203:46 par. 17, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:17-a

 **378:17-a Local Telephone Calling Areas and Intrastate Access
Charges. –**
                                             
 I. In this section, "local calling area'' means the area which may
be called from a telephone calling exchange without paying toll charges
or access charges.
                                             
 II. If the commission uses a community of interest standard to limit
requests to add additional exchanges to a local calling area, the
commission should not reject requests solely because few calls are
currently being made between the exchanges that would become local calls
if the request were granted. If few calls are currently being made, the
commission should consider the likelihood of significant increases in
the number of calls between the exchanges if the request is granted and
these calls become local calls, especially where public school district
boundaries indicate that this is likely to occur.
                                             
 III. (a) The commission should, as soon as possible after each
significant decrease of interstate access charges by the federal
government, consider corresponding reductions in intrastate access
charges, taking into account both the disadvantages to customers of
intrastate access charges that exceed interstate access charges and the
disadvantages to customers of increases in charges for basic services.
                                             
 (b) The commission should consider reducing intrastate access
charges and increasing basic monthly service charges for local exchange
carrier telephone utilities that have both a higher intrastate access
charge than the state median intrastate access charge and a lower basic
monthly service charge than the state median basic monthly service
charge for exchanges with similar numbers of telephones within the local
calling area.

**Source.** 2000, 33:2, eff. June 2, 2000.

### Section 378:17-b

 **378:17-b Competitive Telephone Services Information. –**
                                             
 I. The commission is authorized to require telephone utilities that
are also providers of competitive telephone services within New
Hampshire or outside of New Hampshire to provide information to the
commission concerning potential separation or divestiture. The
information shall include the costs and other adverse consequences of
requiring the separation of these businesses into 2 separate
subsidiaries or the divestiture of one or the other into a completely
separate corporate entity. This information may be required of any
telephone utility which is engaged in any competitive business and which
is also engaged either in any non-competitive business, or in any
competitive business in which it has a market share exceeding 80
percent.
                                             
 II. The commission is authorized to require telephone utilities that
are required to make services available to competitive resellers to
provide information to the commission concerning potential separation or
divestiture. The information shall include the costs and other adverse
consequences of requiring the separation or divestiture of the
competitive portion of their business which competes with the
competitive resellers. It should be assumed that the separated or
divested portion would then be removed from price regulation.
                                             
 III. The commission may require information pursuant to this section
from all telephone utilities, or from telephone utilities larger than a
specified size with or without a representative sample of telephone
utilities smaller than that size, at the commission's discretion.
                                             
 IV. The commission shall not mandate separation or divestiture
without legislative approval unless so required by federal law.

**Source.** 2000, 33:2, eff. June 2, 2000.

### Section 378:17-c

 **378:17-c Requirements for Nonpublic Utility Providers of Telephone
Services. –**
                                             
 I. In this section, "nonpublic utility provider of telephone
services'' includes, but is not limited to, a hotel, motel, hospital,
university, or similar place of temporary accommodation.
                                             
 II. Every nonpublic utility provider of telephone services shall
display or post on or near the telephone equipment so as to be easily
seen by telephone users a notice of the existence of standard and resale
charges and the in-room location of information on all of the charges
applicable to all of the available telephone services. These charges
shall be separately stated, and shall include, but not be limited to,
the following information:
                                             
 (a) Individual customer telephone service activation deposits or
fees, if any.
                                             
 (b) Charges for use of telephone services, including any charges
for calls not completed.
                                             
 III. The public utilities commission shall, by rule or order, adopt
and enforce operating requirements applicable to operator-assisted
telephone services, whether furnished by a telephone corporation or
other than a telephone corporation, for nonpublic utility providers of
telephone services owning or operating message switching or billing
equipment solely for the purpose of reselling services provided by a
telephone corporation to its patients or guests. These operating
requirements shall include, but not be limited to, all of the
following:
                                             
 (a) That there be displayed or posted on or near the telephone
equipment so as to be easily seen by telephone users a notice stating
the identity of the nonpublic utility provider of the telephone services
and the in-room location of information on: the method for obtaining the
rates, terms, or conditions of operator-assisted services; the
operator-assisted services provider's procedures for handling
complaints; the means by which the telephone user may gain access to
other providers of operator-assisted services; and the means by which
the telephone user may gain access to the services of the telephone
corporation operating within the service area within which the telephone
services of the nonpublic utility provider are furnished. The
information shall also provide the telephone number of the public
utilities commission to which questions or complaints may be directed.
                                             
 (b) That, when contacted for service by the telephone user, the
operator-assisted services provider orally identify itself by name prior
to the connection of the telephone call or the commencement of any
charges.
                                             
 (c) That the telephone equipment permit access by the telephone
user to any other provider of operator-assisted services generally
available in the service area.
                                             
 IV. Nonpublic utility providers of telephone services using a PBX
switch or similar equipment shall be considered telephone utilities for
purposes of RSA 106-H:8. Nonpublic utility providers of telephone
services shall comply with the telephone utility requirements of RSA
106-H:8 no later than January 1, 2007.

**Source.** 2001, 248:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2001.

### Section 378:18

 **378:18 Special Contracts for Service. –** Nothing herein shall
prevent a public utility from making a contract for service at rates
other than those fixed by its schedules of general application, if
special circumstances exist which render such departure from the general
schedules just and consistent with the public interest and, except as
provided in RSA 378:18-b, the commission shall by order allow such
contract to take effect.

**Source.** 1913, 99:2. PL 242:19. RL 292:19. 1951, 203:46 par. 18. RSA
378:18. 1996, 186:3, eff. June 3, 1996.

### Section 378:18-a

 **378:18-a Special Contracts; Electric Utilities. –**
                                             
 I. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, for the
purposes of ratemaking, an electric utility that has adopted special
contracts prior to the effective date of this section shall not be
allowed to recover from other ratepayers the difference between the
regular tariffed rate and the special contract rate, unless and only to
the extent that the commission determines that it is in the public
interest and equitable to other ratepayers.
                                             
 II. After the effective date of this section, new special contracts
designed to retain load shall be available to an electric utility
customer only if the utility represents that the load would otherwise
have left the utility, the contract is approved pursuant to RSA 378:18,
and the commission determines that no tariffed rate is sufficient to
retain the load.
                                             
 III. After the effective date of this section, new special contracts
designed to attract load shall be available to an electric utility
customer only if the contract is approved pursuant to RSA 378:18 and the
commission determines that no tariffed rate is sufficient to attract the
load.
                                             
 IV. In any electric utility rate proceeding subsequent to approval
of special contracts, the commission shall not impute to the utility's
test year revenues or revenue requirement the difference between the
regular tariffed rate and the special contract rate.

**Source.** 1996, 186:4, eff. June 3, 1996.

### Section 378:18-b

 **378:18-b Special Contracts; Telephone Utilities. –**
                                             
 I. In this section:
                                             
 (a) "Toll service'' means switched telephone calls to locations
outside of the local service area of the caller, as defined in the
serving telephone utility's tariffs on file with the commission.
                                             
 (b) "Incumbent local exchange carrier'' means a local exchange
carrier authorized to do business in the state prior to the passage of
the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
                                             
 II. (a) Except as provided in RSA 378:18-b, III, any special
contracts for incumbent local exchange carriers providing telephone
services shall be filed with the commission and shall become effective
30 days after filing, provided the rates are set not less than:
                                             
 (1) The incremental cost of the relevant service; or
                                             
 (2) Where the telephone utility's competitors must purchase
access from the telephone utility to offer a competing service, the
price of the lowest cost form of access that competitors could purchase
to compete for customers with comparable volumes of usage, plus the
incremental cost of related overhead.
                                             
 (b) The commission may, in its discretion and with reasonable
explanation, extend the effective date of the special contract by 30
days.
                                             
 III. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, special
contracts for toll service provided by incumbent local exchange carriers
need not be filed with the commission for its approval in order for the
special contract to take effect. Copies of such special contracts shall
be filed with the commission within 7 business days after the special
contract's effective date. The commission may investigate a special
contract for toll service to determine whether the rates are consistent
with the cost considerations of this section. If the special contract
for toll service is not consistent with the cost considerations of this
section, the parties shall either cancel the special contract or agree
to revise the rate.

**Source.** 1996, 186:4. 2001, 76:1, eff. Aug. 18, 2001.

### Section 378:19

 **378:19 Filing. –** Such contracts shall be filed and made public
in such manner as the commission shall require, and shall constitute a
part of the published schedules of the public utility making the same.

**Source.** 1913, 99:2. PL 242:20. RL 292:20. 1951, 203:46 par. 19, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:20

 **378:20 Contracts With Municipalities and Other Utilities. –** Any
public utility shall make, renew, or extend any contract for the
delivery of electrical energy to a municipality, or political
subdivision thereof, or to another utility upon such terms and
conditions consistent with the public good as the commission shall
order.

**Source.** 1929, 179:1. 1933, 74:1. RL 292:21. 1951, 203:46 par. 20,
eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:21

 **378:21 Rebates, Etc. –** No public utility shall, directly or
indirectly or by any special rate, rebate, drawback or other device or
method, make any deviation from the rates, fares, charges or prices for
any service rendered by it specified in its schedules on file and in
effect at the time such service was rendered.

**Source.** 1913, 99:2. PL 242:21. RL 292:22. 1951, 203:46 par. 21, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:22

 **378:22 For Furnishing Facilities. –** No public utility shall
demand or receive less compensation for any service rendered, or to be
rendered, by such public utility in consideration of the furnishing of
any part of the facilities incident thereto.

**Source.** 1913, 99:2. PL 242:22. RL 292:23. 1951, 203:46 par. 22, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:23

 **378:23 Limitation. –** Nothing herein shall prohibit any public
utility from renting any facilities incident to its service and paying a
reasonable rental therefor, or require any public utility to furnish any
part of such appliances which are situated in and upon the premises of
any consumer, except telephone station equipment upon the premises of
subscribers, and, unless otherwise ordered by the commission, meters and
appliances for measurement of any service.

**Source.** 1913, 99:2. PL 242:23. RL 292:24. 1951, 203:46 par. 23, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:24

 **378:24 Contracts for Advertising. –** All advertising contracts of
public utilities shall be made at regular, established, commercial
advertising rates; and such contracts shall be open to inspection by the
commission at all times.

**Source.** 1913, 99:2. PL 242:24. RL 292:25. 1951, 203:46 par. 24, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:25

 **378:25 List of Passes. –** 
                                             [Repealed 1985, 402:39, VI.
                                             ]

### Section 378:26

 **378:26 Filing; Inspection. –** A copy of such list for the
preceding year shall be filed with the commission, in such form and
under such regulations as the commission may prescribe. Such list,
together with the books, records and papers of the carrier so far as
relevant, shall be open at all times to the inspection of the
commission, who shall examine the same whenever they deem it necessary
to the due enforcement of this title.

**Source.** 1913, 99:2. PL 242:26. RL 292:27. 1951, 203:46 par. 26, eff.
Sept. 1, 1951.

Temporary and Permanent Rates of Utilities
------------------------------------------

### Section 378:27

 **378:27 Temporary Rates. –** In any proceeding involving the rates
of a public utility brought either upon motion of the commission or upon
complaint, the commission may, after reasonable notice and hearing, if
it be of the opinion that the public interest so requires, immediately
fix, determine, and prescribe for the duration of said proceeding
reasonable temporary rates; provided, however, that such temporary rates
shall be sufficient to yield not less than a reasonable return on the
cost of the property of the utility used and useful in the public
service less accrued depreciation, as shown by the reports of the
utility filed with the commission, unless there appears to be reasonable
ground for questioning the figures in such reports.

**Source.** 1941, 148:1. RL 292:28. 1951, 203:46 par. 27, eff. Sept. 1,
1951.

### Section 378:28

 **378:28 Permanent Rates. –** So far as possible, the provisions of
RSA 378:27 shall be applied by the commission in fixing and determining
permanent rates, as well as temporary rates. The commission shall not
include in permanent rates any return on any plant, equipment, or
capital improvement which has not first been found by the commission to
be prudent, used, and useful. Nothing contained in this section shall
preclude the commission from receiving and considering any evidence
which may be pertinent and material to the determination of a just and
reasonable rate base and a just and reasonable rate of return thereon.

**Source.** 1951, 203:46 par. 28. RSA 378:28. 1993, 223:1; 330:4. 1994,
193:5, eff. July 23, 1994.

### Section 378:29

 **378:29 Adjustment. –** Temporary rates so fixed, determined, and
prescribed under this subdivision shall be effective until the final
determination of the rate proceeding, unless terminated sooner by the
commission. In every proceeding in which temporary rates are fixed,
determined, and prescribed under this subdivision, the commission shall
consider the effect of such rates in fixing, determining, and
prescribing rates to be thereafter demanded or received by such public
utility on final determination of the rate proceeding. If, upon final
disposition of the issues involved in such proceeding, the rates as
finally determined are in excess of the rates prescribed in such
temporary order, then such public utility shall be permitted to amortize
and recover, by means of a temporary increase over and above the rates
finally determined, such sum as shall represent the difference between
the gross income obtained from the rates prescribed in such temporary
order and the ross income which would have been obtained under the rates
finally determined if applied during the period such temporary order was
in effect.

**Source.** 1941, 148:2. RL 292:29. 1951, 203:46 par. 29, eff. Sept. 1,
1951.

### Section 378:30

 **378:30 Bond. –** If temporary rates are prescribed under RSA
378:27 which are higher than those previously in effect, the commission
may require the public utility to file a bond in such form and with such
sureties, if any, as the commission may determine, to secure the
repayment to the customers of the public utility of the difference
between the amounts collected under such temporary rates and the rates
which the commission finds should have been in effect during the
continuance of such temporary rates.

**Source.** 1951, 203:46 par. 30, eff. Sept. 1, 1951.

### Section 378:30-a

 **378:30-a Public Utility Rate Base; Exclusions. –** Public utility
rates or charges shall not in any manner be based on the cost of
construction work in progress. At no time shall any rates or charges be
based upon any costs associated with construction work if said
construction work is not completed. All costs of construction work in
progress, including, but not limited to, any costs associated with
constructing, owning, maintaining or financing construction work in
progress, shall not be included in a utility's rate base nor be allowed
as an expense for rate making purposes until, and not before, said
construction project is actually providing service to consumers.

**Source.** 1979, 101:1, eff. May 7, 1979.

### Section 378:30-b

 **378:30-b Conservation Investments; Included in Rates. –** The
commission may include the cost or value of capital improvements or
programs in the rates of a utility when the capital improvement or
program provides for the conservation of the energy or water provided by
the utility, regardless of whether the utility's capital improvement or
program is implemented in or on the utility's premises or at the
location of the user of the energy or of the water.

**Source.** 1990, 130:2, eff. June 18, 1990.

### Section 378:30-c

 **378:30-c Exclusion of State Grant Funds From Rate Base. –** The
commission shall exclude any grants provided by the department of
environmental services under RSA 486-A from the rates of water
utilities. Utilities shall comply with the notice provisions of RSA
486-A:10 concerning such grants.

**Source.** 1993, 341:4, eff. July 1, 1993.

### Section 378:30-d

 **378:30-d Regional Technical Planning and New Source Development;
Included in Rates. –** Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 378:30-a,
the commission may include the cost or value of capital improvements or
programs in the rates of a utility when the capital improvement or
program is directly related to technical planning of regional water
supply development or is directly related to development of new water
supply sources.

**Source.** 2002, 141:6, eff. May 13, 2002.

### Section 378:31

 **378:31 Appeals. –** Procedure to be followed in connection with
appeals shall be in accordance with RSA 541.

**Source.** 1941, 148:3. RL 292:30. 1951, 203:46 par. 31, eff. Sept. 1,
1951.

Joint Service and Rates
-----------------------

### Section 378:32

 **378:32 Commission May Establish Joint Service. –**
                                             
 I. The public utilities commission may establish joint services
between localities which cannot be reached either by the lines of a
single utility or by the use of other lines with suitable connections.
                                             
 II. The public utilities commission, after a hearing upon complaint
or on its own initiative, may establish joint services for 2 or more
telephone utilities when the lines or wires form a continuous line of
communication or could form a continuous line by:
                                             
 (a) Construction and maintenance of suitable connections;
                                             
 (b) Joint use of equipment; or
                                             
 (c) Transfer of messages at common points.
                                             
 III. The public utilities commission may determine the rates, fares
and charges to be used by utilities engaged in joint services and may
adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to rates, fares, charges
and classifications.

**Source.** 1985, 402:21.

### Section 378:33

 **378:33 Division of Rates. –** The commission may adopt rules,
pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative to the division of joint rates, fares,
charges, and classifications between telephone utilities engaging in
joint services whenever the divisions shall not be made by agreement.
Any division agreed upon shall be subject to revision by the commission
if found to be inconsistent with the public interest.

**Source.** 1985, 402:21.

### Section 378:34

 **378:34 Termination. –** Whenever joint service has been
established by 2 or more public utilities, the commission shall have
authority to prevent any unjust or unreasonable termination of the same
or to order the reestablishment of such service if so terminated.

**Source.** 1985, 402:21.

### Section 378:35

 **378:35 Fixing Rates. –** Whenever, after hearing and
investigation, the commission shall find any joint rate, fare, charge or
price demanded and collected for any existing joint service participated
in by 2 or more public utilities to be unjust, unreasonable or
discriminatory, it shall fix the same upon a just, reasonable and
nondiscriminatory basis.

**Source.** 1985, 402:21.

### Section 378:36

 **378:36 Apportionment. –** If the public utilities affected thereby
shall fail to agree upon the division or apportionment thereof, the
commission may prescribe the division of such joint rates, fares,
charges and classifications between such public utilities and may revise
any division agreed upon which shall be found inconsistent with the
public interest. In making such apportionment, the commission shall
consider the financial impact of the apportionment on each utility
affected by such apportionment.

**Source.** 1985, 402:21. 1990, 109:2, eff. June 12, 1990.

Least Cost Energy Planning
--------------------------

### Section 378:37

 **378:37 New Hampshire Energy Policy. –** The general court declares
that it shall be the energy policy of this state to meet the energy
needs of the citizens and businesses of the state at the lowest
reasonable cost while providing for the reliability and diversity of
energy sources; to maximize the use of cost effective energy efficiency
and other demand side resources; and to protect the safety and health of
the citizens, the physical environment of the state, and the future
supplies of resources, with consideration of the financial stability of
the state's utilities.

**Source.** 1990, 226:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1991. 2014, 129:1, eff. Aug. 15,
2014.

### Section 378:38

 **378:38 Submission of Plans to the Commission. –** Pursuant to the
policy established under RSA 378:37, each electric and natural gas
utility, under RSA 362:2, shall file a least cost integrated resource
plan with the commission within 2 years of the commission's final order
regarding the utility's prior plan, and in all cases within 5 years of
the filing date of the prior plan. Each such plan shall include, but not
be limited to, the following, as applicable:
                                             
 I. A forecast of future demand for the utility's service area.
                                             
 II. An assessment of demand-side energy management programs,
including conservation, efficiency, and load management programs.
                                             
 III. An assessment of supply options including owned capacity,
market procurements, renewable energy, and distributed energy
resources.
                                             
 IV. An assessment of distribution and transmission requirements,
including an assessment of the benefits and costs of "smart grid''
technologies, and the institution or extension of electric utility
programs designed to ensure a more reliable and resilient grid to
prevent or minimize power outages, including but not limited to,
infrastructure automation and technologies.
                                             
 V. An assessment of plan integration and impact on state compliance
with the Clean Air Act of 1990, as amended, and other environmental laws
that may impact a utility's assets or customers.
                                             
 VI. An assessment of the plan's long- and short-term environmental,
economic, and energy price and supply impact on the state.
                                             
 VII. An assessment of plan integration and consistency with the
state energy strategy under RSA 4-E:1.

**Source.** 1990, 226:1. 1994, 362:4, eff. June 8, 1994. 2014, 129:1,
eff. Aug. 15, 2014. 2015, 89:3, eff. Aug. 4, 2015.

### Section 378:38-a

 **378:38-a Waiver by Commission. –** The commission, by order, may
waive for good cause any requirement under RSA 378:38, upon written
request by a utility.

**Source.** 1997, 298:14, eff. June 20, 1997. 2014, 129:1, eff. Aug. 15,
2014.

### Section 378:39

 **378:39 Commission Evaluation of Plans. –** The commission shall
review integrated least-cost resource plans in order to evaluate the
consistency of each utility's plan with this subdivision, in an
adjudicative proceeding. In deciding whether or not to approve the
utility's plan, the commission shall consider potential environmental,
economic, and health-related impacts of each proposed option. The
commission is encouraged to consult with appropriate state and federal
agencies, alternative and renewable fuel industries, and other
organizations in evaluating such impacts. The commission's approval of a
utility's plan shall not be deemed a pre-approval of any actions taken
or proposed by the utility in implementing the plan. Where the
commission determines the options have equivalent financial costs,
equivalent reliability, and equivalent environmental, economic, and
health-related impacts, the following order of energy policy priorities
shall guide the commission's evaluation:
                                             
 I. Energy efficiency and other demand-side management resources;
                                             
 II. Renewable energy sources;
                                             
 III. All other energy sources.

**Source.** 1990, 226:1. 1994, 362:5, eff. June 8, 1994. 2014, 129:1,
eff. Aug. 15, 2014.

### Section 378:40

 **378:40 Plans Required. –** No rate change shall be approved or
ordered with respect to any utility that does not have on file with the
commission a plan that has been filed and approved in accordance with
the provisions of RSA 378:38 and RSA 378:39. However, nothing contained
in this subdivision shall prevent the commission from approving a
change, otherwise permitted by statute or agreement, where the utility
has made the required plan filing in compliance with RSA 378:38 and the
process of review is proceeding in the ordinary course but has not been
completed.

**Source.** 1994, 362:6, eff. June 8, 1994. 2014, 129:1, eff. Aug. 15,
2014.

### Section 378:41

 **378:41 Conformity of Plans. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2014, 129:3, I, eff.
Aug. 15, 2014.
                                             ]

### Section 378:42

 **378:42 Existing Rate Plans. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2014, 129:3, II, eff.
Aug. 15, 2014.
                                             ]

Information Not Subject to Right-to-Know Law
--------------------------------------------

### Section 378:43

 **378:43 Information Not Subject to Right-to-Know Law. –**

                                             [Repealed 2010, 206:3, eff. Dec. 19, 2010.
                                             ]

Billing by Utility Companies
----------------------------

### Section 378:44

 **378:44 Definitions. –** In this subdivision:
                                             
 I. "Billing aggregator'' means a person, other than a service
provider, who forwards a charge for a product or service offered by a
service provider to the utility company for billing to the customer.
                                             
 II. "Commission'' means the public utilities commission.
                                             
 III. "Cramming'' means a submission or inclusion of unauthorized,
misleading, or deceptive charges for products or services on a
customer's utility bill. Cramming shall not include tariffed charges or
charges required or otherwise allowed by law.
                                             
 IV. "Customer'' means the party identified in the account records of
the utility company, a person contractually or otherwise lawfully
authorized to represent such party, or a person identified in such
records as authorized to change the services subscribed to or to charge
services to the account.
                                             
 V. "Electric distribution company'' means the company franchised by
the commission to provide retail electric delivery service, provided,
however, that municipal electric utilities and rural electric
cooperatives for which certificates of deregulation are on file with the
commission pursuant to RSA 301:57 shall not be considered electric
distribution companies.
                                             
 VI. "Gas distribution company'' means the company franchised by the
commission to provide retail gas delivery service.
                                             
 VII. "Local exchange carrier'' means the company that provides local
telephone exchange service.
                                             
 VIII. "Service provider'' means a person that offers a product or
service to a customer and directly or indirectly sends the billable
charges or credits to the utility company for billing to the customer. A
customer's energy supplier shall not be deemed to be a service
provider.
                                             
 IX. "Utility company'' means the local exchange carrier, electric
distribution company, or gas distribution company who renders the
utility bill to the customer for telephone, electric, or gas services,
respectively.

**Source.** 1999, 168:1. 2002, 12:2, eff. Mar. 25, 2002.

### Section 378:45

 **378:45 Registration Required. –** All billing aggregators and
service providers which directly submit charges to a utility company for
inclusion on the utility bill shall be registered with the commission.
The commission may revoke a registration for cause. The registration of
a billing aggregator may be revoked based upon the fraudulent behavior
or conduct of a service provider for whom the billing aggregator is
billing.

**Source.** 1999, 168:1. 2002, 12:2, eff. Mar. 25, 2002.

### Section 378:46

 **378:46 Cramming Prohibited. –** No billing aggregator or service
provider shall engage in cramming. Any billing aggregator or service
provider that engages in cramming shall be subject to an administrative
fine in an amount to be determined by the commission, not to exceed

                                             $1,000 per offense. The commission may consider intent as a factor when
assessing administrative fines. The commission may prohibit a billing
aggregator or service provider that engages in cramming from billing
through the utility company.

**Source.** 1999, 168:1. 2002, 12:2, eff. Mar. 25, 2002.

### Section 378:47

 **378:47 Charges by Service Providers. –**
                                             
 I. (a) Upon determining that it is technically and economically
feasible, the commission shall require local exchange carriers to permit
a customer to place a block on an account that prevents any
non-telecommunications-related charges that do not originate from the
customer's local exchange or long distance carrier from appearing on the
customer's local exchange carrier bill.
                                             
 (b) A local exchange carrier is prohibited from terminating the
essential voice local exchange service of any customer for failure to
pay charges from a billing aggregator or service provider that are
disputed by the customer.
                                             
 II. (a) Upon determining that it is technically and economically
feasible, the commission shall require electric and gas distribution
companies to permit a customer to place a block on an account that
prevents any charges that do not originate from the customer's energy
supplier or distribution company from appearing on the customer's
distribution company bill.
                                             
 (b) An electric or gas distribution company is prohibited from
terminating the transition service, default service, or distribution
service of any customer for failure to pay charges from a billing
aggregator or service provider.

**Source.** 1999, 168:1. 2002, 12:2, eff. Mar. 25, 2002.

### Section 378:48

 **378:48 Rulemaking. –** The commission shall adopt rules, pursuant
to RSA 541-A, and consistent with rules regarding cramming adopted by
the Federal Communications Commission and the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission, to enforce the provisions of this subdivision.

**Source.** 1999, 168:1. 2002, 12:2, eff. Mar. 25, 2002.

Disclosure of Electric Service Energy Sources and Environmental Characteristics
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Section 378:49

 **378:49 Disclosure of Electric Service Energy Sources and
Environmental Characteristics. –**
                                             
 I. The public utilities commission shall, after notice and hearing,
by order or rule, approve a standard format and methodology that
providers of electricity, as defined in RSA 362-F:2, XIV, shall use when
providing information to existing or prospective customers regarding the
energy sources and environmental characteristics of their electric
service. Such information shall include but not be limited to:
                                             
 (a) A presentation of energy sources used to generate the
electricity and their respective contributions to the service's total
energy mix, by percentage;
                                             
 (b) The environmental characteristics of the service's energy
mix, including but not limited to air pollutant emission rates; and
                                             
 (c) A comparison of source and emissions data between the
service's energy mix and the average energy mix of the region available
from the Independent System Operator of New England.
                                             
 II. Each provider of electricity, as defined in RSA 362-F:2, XIV,
shall in standard format:
                                             
 (a) Provide and make easily accessible on the provider's Internet
site the information for each electric service that it sells in the
state;
                                             
 (b) Update such information at least annually; and
                                             
 (c) Provide such information to electric customers at least
annually in conjunction with billing, whether distributed through the
mail or online, or other mailed or online communication to customers, as
approved by the commission.
                                             
 III. Appropriate access or reference to relevant public information,
including emissions by source, that is more detailed than that contained
in the standard format shall be included in the standard format.

**Source.** 2010, 336:1, eff. Oct. 18, 2010.
