---
title: CHAPTER 381 RAILROAD POLICE
---

TITLE XXXIV
                                             
PUBLIC UTILITIES
================

CHAPTER 381
                                             
RAILROAD POLICE
---------------

### Section 381:1

 **381:1 Definitions. –** As used in this chapter, "railroad,''
"railroads'' or "railway company'' or any combination of such words
means a corporation, company or state engaged as a common carrier in the
furnishing or sale of transportation, freight or passenger service, or
any combination thereof, by railroad.

**Source.** 1979, 331:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.

### Section 381:2

 **381:2 Appointment. –** The commissioner of safety shall have the
authority to commission and rescind the commissions of all railroad
police officers in the state of New Hampshire. The commissioner of
safety may commission and rescind the commissions of railroad police
officers recommended by the commissioner of transportation pursuant to
RSA 228:62-a or recommended and appointed by the chief police officer,
or in his absence the chief operating officer, of any railroad located
wholly, or partially, within the state.

**Source.** 1979, 333:1. 1981, 75:2; 568:166. 1985, 402:6, I(b)(8).

### Section 381:3

 **381:3 Responsibility. –** In enforcing the provisions of this
chapter, neither the commissioner of safety as an individual nor the
state of New Hampshire shall assume any civil liability for acts of a
police officer in exercising or attempting to exercise the powers
conferred by this chapter. Nothing contained in this chapter shall have
the effect of relieving any such railroad from any civil liability for
the acts of a police officer in exercising or attempting to exercise the
powers conferred by this chapter.

**Source.** 1979, 331:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.

### Section 381:4

 **381:4 Qualifying for Commission. –** Any person who was a railroad
police officer on August 21, 1979, in order to qualify for an
appointment as a railroad police officer pursuant to RSA 381:2, must
have been employed on a full-time basis by a railroad police department,
municipal police department or a state police department, or combination
thereof, for a minimum of 3 years. Such employment shall have been in
performing the duties of a police officer. Any person who was not a
railroad police officer on August 21, 1979, or who was so employed but
did not have the 3 years of employment required by this section, shall
be required to be certified as a police officer in accordance with RSA
188-F in order to qualify for appointment pursuant to RSA 381:2. Any
person employed as a railroad police officer after August 21, 1979,
shall complete such training as the police standards and training
council shall determine, which, together with his prior training and
experience in this or any other jurisdiction, is the equivalent required
for certification as a police officer in accordance with RSA 188-F in
order to qualify for appointment pursuant to RSA 381:2.

**Source.** 1979, 331:1. 1989, 260:4, eff. July 1, 1989.

### Section 381:5

 **381:5 Powers. –** Any police officer appointed in accordance with
this chapter shall have the authority in all cases in which the rights
of the appointing railroad are involved to exercise within this state
all the powers of a special police officer, including the powers of
arrest and the carrying of firearms, for the reasonable purpose of his
office.

**Source.** 1979, 331:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.

### Section 381:6

 **381:6 Disposition of Persons Arrested. –** The keepers of jails,
lockups and station houses in any county, city or town shall receive all
persons arrested by railroad police for the commission of any offense
against the laws of this state or the ordinances of any such city or
town to be dealt with according to law, and persons arrested shall be
received by keepers of jails, lockups or station houses and such persons
shall have the same status as other persons arrested by any other police
or peace officer of this state.

**Source.** 1979, 331:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.

### Section 381:7

 **381:7 Carrying of Shield. –** Each railroad police officer so
appointed and commissioned shall, when on duty, carry a shield or star
with the words "Police'', "Railroad Police'', or "Railway Police'', and
the name of initials of the appointing railroad inscribed thereon. This
shield, or star, shall be worn in plain view when in uniform. Such
police officers shall also carry, when on duty, an identification card
issued by the appointing railroad.

**Source.** 1979, 331:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.

### Section 381:8

 **381:8 Compensation. –** The railroad to which each railroad police
officer is assigned shall be responsible for employment and retirement
compensation and for the financial cost of training of railroad police
officers.

**Source.** 1979, 331:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.

### Section 381:9

 **381:9 Reciprocity. –** In order to more effectively carry out the
purposes of this chapter, the governor of this state, referred to as the
empowering state, may enter into a reciprocal agreement with the
governor of any other state, referred to as the reciprocal state,
subject to any regulations prescribed under such agreement, empowering a
railroad police officer with the right to perform any police function
that can be lawfully exercised by a police officer of the reciprocal
state relating to the detection and apprehension of any person
committing an offense against the empowering or the reciprocal state,
but only to the extent that such offense is committed on property owned,
operated or maintained by the appointing railroad or committed against
property owned or in the possession of such railroad.

**Source.** 1979, 331:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.

### Section 381:10

 **381:10 Termination of Authority. –** Upon termination of
employment of any railroad police officer, the powers of such police
officer shall terminate. Within 10 days after such termination, the
appointing railroad shall, through its designated chief police officer
or, in the absence of a chief police officer, its chief operating
officer, file a notice of termination of employment of such individual
with the commissioner of safety.

**Source.** 1979, 331:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.

### Section 381:11

 **381:11 Rules. –** The commissioner of safety shall have the
authority to adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, to carry out the
provisions of this chapter. Railroad police officers shall be subject to
such rules.

**Source.** 1979, 331:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.

### Section 381:12

 **381:12 Impersonating an Officer. –** Any person who impersonates a
railroad police officer shall be guilty of a class B felony.

**Source.** 1979, 331:1. 2008, 225:2, eff. Jan. 1, 2009.

### Section 381:13

 **381:13 Arraignment of Offenders. –** Any police officer may carry
a person arrested upon the cars of the railroad upon whose petition the
officer was appointed to the next railroad station at which the train on
which they are travelling stops, although in another county, and detain
said person until he can be taken back to the county wherein the offense
was committed. All persons so arrested shall be discharged or taken
before a municipal or district court to answer for their offenses within
24 hours after their arrest, Sundays and holidays excepted.

**Source.** 1979, 331:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.

### Section 381:14

 **381:14 Criminal Trespass on Railroad Property. –** Any person who
enters or remains in a railroad station, upon the platform or grounds
adjacent to a station, or upon any property of a railroad knowingly
without license or privilege to do so, or a person who enters or remains
upon or returns to said property in defiance of an order of a station
agent or any police officer shall be guilty of criminal trespass as
provided in RSA 635:2.

**Source.** 1979, 331:1. 1981, 74:1, eff. June 2, 1981.

### Section 381:15

 **381:15 Reporting of Arrests. –** Railroad police officers shall
report all criminal offenses investigated and arrests by them within the
state to the nearest state police troop station or to state police
headquarters in such a manner as the director of state police shall
prescribe.

**Source.** 1979, 331:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.

### Section 381:16

 **381:16 Oath of Office. –** Each police officer so appointed and
commissioned shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take
an oath of office administered by the commissioner of safety or his
designee.

**Source.** 1979, 331:1, eff. Aug. 21, 1979.
