---
title: 'CHAPTER 483-E COASTAL RISK AND HAZARDS COMMISSION'
---

TITLE L
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION
===============================

CHAPTER 483-E
                                             
COASTAL RISK AND HAZARDS COMMISSION
-----------------------------------

### Section 483-E:1


                                             


                                             [RSA 483-E:1 repealed by 2013, 188:2, effective December 1, 2016.
                                             ]

 **483-E:1 Commission Established. –**
                                             
 There is established a coastal risk and hazards commission.

**Source.** 2013, 188:1, eff. July 2, 2013.

### Section 483-E:2


                                             


                                             [RSA 483-E:2 repealed by 2013, 188:2, effective December 1, 2016.
                                             ]

 **483-E:2 Membership and Compensation. –**
                                             
 I. The members of the commission shall be as follows:
                                             
 (a) Two members of the house of representatives, appointed by the
speaker of the house of representatives.
                                             
 (b) Two members of the senate, appointed by the president of the
senate.
                                             
 (c) The commissioner of the department of environmental services,
or designee.
                                             
 (d) The executive director of the fish and game department, or
designee.
                                             
 (e) The administrator of the division of public works design and
construction in the department of administrative services, or designee.
                                             
 (f) The commissioner of the department of transportation, or
designee.
                                             
 (g) The director of the division of parks and recreation, or
designee.
                                             
 (h) The director of the division of historical resources, or
designee.
                                             
 (i) The president of the Seacoast Board of Realtors, or
designee.
                                             
 (j) The director of the New Hampshire Sea Grant, or designee.
                                             
 (k) A representative of the New Hampshire Public Risk Management
Exchange, appointed by the exchange.
                                             
 (l) The director of the office of energy and planning, or
designee.
                                             
 (m) The president of the Homebuilders and Remodelers Association
of New Hampshire, or designee.
                                             
 (n) The commissioner of the department of resources and economic
development, or designee.
                                             
 (o) The president of the university of New Hampshire, or
designee.
                                             
 (p) A representative of the New Hampshire Municipal Association,
appointed by that organization.
                                             
 (q) A representative of the Strafford regional planning board,
appointed by that body.
                                             
 (r) A representative of the Rockingham regional planning board,
appointed by that body.
                                             
 (s) One representative of each of the following towns, appointed
by his or her town's governing body: Rollinsford, Greenland, Stratham,
Exeter, Newfields, Newmarket, Portsmouth, Rye, North Hampton, Hampton,
Dover, Hampton Falls, Seabrook, Newington, New Castle, Madbury, and
Durham.
                                             
 II. Legislative members of the commission shall receive mileage at
the legislative rate when attending to the duties of the commission.
                                             
 III. The members of the commission shall elect a chairperson from
among the members. The first meeting of the commission shall be called
by the first-named house member. The first meeting of the commission
shall be held within 45 days of the effective date of this section.
Eighteen members of the commission shall constitute a quorum.

**Source.** 2013, 188:1, eff. July 2, 2013. 2014, 327:68, eff. Aug. 2,
2014.

### Section 483-E:3


                                             


                                             [RSA 483-E:3 repealed by 2013, 188:2, effective December 1, 2016.
                                             ]

 **483-E:3 Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The commission shall recommend legislation, rules, and other
actions to prepare for projected sea level rise and other coastal and
coastal watershed hazards such as storms, increased river flooding, and
storm water runoff, and the risks such hazards pose to municipalities
and state assets in New Hampshire.
                                             
 II. The commission shall review National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration and other scientific agency projections of coastal storm
inundation, and flood risk to determine the appropriate information,
data, and property risks.
                                             
 III. The commission shall meet 4 times per year.
                                             
 IV. The commission shall annually report its findings and any
recommendations for proposed legislation to the speaker of the house of
representatives, the president of the senate, the house clerk, the
senate clerk, the governor, and the state library on or before November
1.

**Source.** 2013, 188:1, eff. July 2, 2013.
