---
title: 'CHAPTER 483-C PUBLIC USE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE COASTAL SHORELANDS'
---

TITLE L
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION
===============================

CHAPTER 483-C
                                             
PUBLIC USE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE COASTAL SHORELANDS
----------------------------------------------

### Section 483-C:1

 **483-C:1 Public Use of Coastal Shorelands. –**
                                             
 I. It is the purpose of the general court in this section to
recognize and confirm the historical practice and common law right of
the public to enjoy the greatest portion of New Hampshire coastal
shoreland, in accordance with the public trust doctrine subject to those
littoral rights recognized at common law.
                                             
 II. The general court recognizes that New Hampshire holds in "public
trust'' rights in all shorelands subject to the ebb and flow of the tide
to the high water mark and subject to those littoral rights recognized
at common law. This "public trust'' shoreland establishes the extreme
seaward boundary extension of all private property rights in New
Hampshire except for those "jus privatum'' rights validly conveyed by
legislative act without impairment of New Hampshire's "jus publicum''
interests.
                                             
 III. Any person may use the public trust coastal shorelands of New
Hampshire for all useful and lawful purposes, to include recreational
purposes, subject to the provisions of municipal ordinances relative to
the "reasonable use'' of the public trust shorelands.
                                             
 IV. The provisions of this section shall in no way be construed as
affecting the title of private property owners of land contiguous to
land subject to the public trust.
                                             
 V. The high water mark which bounds the shoreward extent of the
public trust shorelands in New Hampshire, excluding abnormal storm
events, means the furthest landward limit reached by the highest tidal
flow, commonly referred to as the highest spring or highest "syzygy''
tide occurring during the 19-year Metonic cycle. The landward trace of
the high water mark in New Hampshire is established by the tidal station
data within the contemporary 19-year "National Tidal Datum Epoch'' for
Portland, Maine, Casco Bay (NOS MAINE 841 8150) as that data is
transposed to New Hampshire tidal stations by the "differences'' tidal
constant established by the National Ocean Service (NOS) of the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for New Hampshire tidal
stations and published in the annual "Tide Tables High and Low Water
Predictions, East Coast of North and South America, Including
Greenland''. The contemporary 19-year National Tidal Datum Epoch is the
national tidal database maintained by NOS of NOAA.
                                             
 VI. For the purposes of this section, "coastal shorelands'' means
that portion of the shoreland extending to the high water mark.

**Source.** 1995, 8:1, eff. June 3, 1995.
