---
title: CHAPTER 483 NEW HAMPSHIRE RIVERS MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION PROGRAM
---

TITLE L
                                             
WATER MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION
===============================

CHAPTER 483
                                             
NEW HAMPSHIRE RIVERS MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION PROGRAM
------------------------------------------------------

### Section 483:1

 **483:1 Statement of Policy. –** New Hampshire's rivers and streams
comprise one of its most important natural resources, historically vital
to New Hampshire's commerce, industry, and tourism, and the quality of
life of New Hampshire people. It is the policy of the state to ensure
the continued viability of New Hampshire rivers as valued ecologic,
economic, public health and safety, and social assets for the benefit of
present and future generations. The state shall encourage and assist in
the development of river corridor management plans and regulate the
quantity and quality of instream flow along certain protected rivers or
segments of rivers to conserve and protect outstanding characteristics
including recreational, fisheries, wildlife, environmental, hydropower,
cultural, historical, archaeological, scientific, ecological, aesthetic,
community significance, agricultural, and public water supply so that
these valued characteristics shall endure as part of the river uses to
be enjoyed by New Hampshire people. If conflicts arise in the attempt to
protect all valued characteristics within a river or stream, priority
shall be given to those characteristics that are necessary to meet state
water quality standards.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1990, 233:21. 2009, 201:3, eff. July 15, 2009.

### Section 483:2

 **483:2 Program Established; Intent. –** There is established within
the department of environmental services the New Hampshire rivers
management and protection program. It is the intent of the legislature
that the New Hampshire rivers management and protection program shall
complement and reinforce existing state and federal water quality laws,
and that in-stream flows are maintained along protected rivers, or
segments thereof, in a manner that will enhance or not diminish the
enjoyment of outstanding river characteristics pursuant to RSA 483:1. It
is also the intent of the legislature that, through said program, the
outstanding characteristics including recreational, fisheries, wildlife,
environmental, hydropower, cultural, historical, archaeological,
scientific, ecological, aesthetic, community significance, agricultural,
public water supply, instream public uses, and riparian rights of such
rivers shall be restored, protected, and maintained, and notwithstanding
the provisions of RSA 483-B, that nothing in this chapter shall be
interpreted to preempt any land and zoning authority granted to
municipal bodies under RSA title LXIV.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1990, 233:1, eff. June 26, 1990. 2016, 287:1,
eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 483:3

 **483:3 Rivers Coordinator. –** There is established in the
department of environmental services, a state rivers coordinator, who
shall be a classified employee qualified by reason of education and
experience, and who shall administer the New Hampshire rivers management
and protection program.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 2007, 285:1, eff. Sept. 1, 2007.

### Section 483:4

 **483:4 Definitions. –** In this chapter:
                                             
 I. "Advisory committee'' means the rivers management advisory
committee established in RSA 483:8.
                                             
 II. "Agriculture'' means agriculture as defined in RSA 21:34-a.
                                             
 II-a. "Aquatic connectivity'' means the ability of aquatic organisms
to move naturally within and among water bodies, riparian areas, and
floodplains freely without barriers.
                                             
 III. "Breached dam'' means any dam which impounds water at less than
80 percent of its original design level at seasonal high flows and for
which the original configuration of the dam can still be determined.
                                             
 IV. "Channel alteration'' means any human activity which changes the
character of a river or stream channel including, but not limited to,
filling, dredging, relocating, excavating, cleaning, deepening,
widening, straightening or riprapping.
                                             
 V. "Commissioner'' means the commissioner, department of
environmental services.
                                             
 VI. "Dam'' means any artificial barrier, including appurtenant
works, across a river which impounds or diverts water.
                                             
 VII. "Department'' means the department of environmental services.
                                             
 VIII. "Designated river'' means that portion of a perennial river
which has been specifically designated by the general court pursuant to
RSA 483:15.
                                             
 IX. "Existing dam'' means any dam which has not deteriorated or been
breached or modified to the point where it no longer impounds water at
80 percent or more of its original design level at seasonal high flows.
                                             
 IX-a. "Flowage right'' means an easement to flow water over the land
of others.
                                             
 IX-b. "Fluvial geomorphology'' means a description of the physical
forms and processes of a river or stream, including but not limited to
bank erosion, bed scour, sediment aggradation, channel constrictions,
and modifications, based on historical and field data, that may be used
to evaluate the impact of riverine hazards, and improve management of
associated risks.
                                             
 X. "Free-flowing,'' as applied to any designated river or river
segment, means existing or flowing without artificial impoundment,
diversion, channel alterations, or other modifications excluding
upstream flow management.
                                             
 XI. "Instream public uses'' means those uses which comprise the
state's interests in surface waters including, but not limited to:
navigation; recreation; fishing; storage; conservation; maintenance and
enhancement of aquatic and fish life; fish and wildlife habitat;
wildlife; the protection of water quality and public health; pollution
abatement; aesthetic beauty; and hydroelectric energy production.
                                             
 XII. "Interbasin transfer'' means any transfer of water for use from
one river drainage basin to another.
                                             
 XII-a. "Meander belt'' means the width on either side of a river
channel which the river can occupy through time as a result of
migration.
                                             
 XIII. "New dam'' means any dam which requires the construction or
enlargement of any impoundment or diversion structure.
                                             
 XIV. "New hydroelectric power facilities'' means the construction,
operation, or installation of electric generating units at dams where no
hydroelectric power generation has occurred for a period of 6 years or
more.
                                             
 XV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]
                                             
 XVI. "Protected instream flow'' means a stream flow pattern which is
established to maintain water for present and future instream public
uses.
                                             
 XVI-a. "Restore'' means to return an ecosystem to a close
approximation of its natural condition.
                                             
 XVII. "River'' means a flowing body of water including the tidal
mouth of rivers whose salinity, flow, or level is influenced by the
tides, or a segment or tributary of such water body.
                                             
 XVIII. "River corridor'' means the river and the land area located
within a distance of 1,320 feet of the normal high water mark or to the
landward extent of the 100 year floodplain as designated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, whichever distance is larger.
                                             
 XIX. "River drainage basin'' means the New Hampshire portions of
USGS Hydrologic Unit Codes 0104 (Androscoggin), 0108 (Connecticut), 0107
(Merrimack), 01060003 (Piscataqua), and 01060002 (Saco) river basins as
delineated on a map compiled by the department.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1990, 233:2. 1992, 261:8. 2007, 285:10. 2009,
201:4, 5, eff. July 15, 2009. 2016, 286:1, eff. Aug. 20, 2016; 287:2-7,
36, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 483:5

 **483:5 Coordination With Federal Statutes. –** For the purposes of
section 10(a)(2)(A) of the Federal Power Act, those rivers or segments
designated under this chapter and any state or local river corridor
management plans developed pursuant to this chapter shall constitute one
element of the state comprehensive plan for river conservation and
development. Designated rivers or segments shall constitute protected
waterways under the provisions of the Public Utilities Regulatory
Policies Act, section 210(j)(2), 16 U.S.C. section 824a-3(j)(2).

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1990, 233:3, eff. June 26, 1990. 2016, 287:8,
eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 483:6

 **483:6 Nominations; Criteria. –**
                                             
 I. Any New Hampshire organization or resident may nominate a
perennial river or any segment or segments of such river for protection
by submitting to the commissioner a description of the river or segment
or segments of such river and its values and characteristics. The
completed nomination shall be submitted to the rivers coordinator on or
before June 1 in order for it to be considered in the next legislative
session. This nomination shall include, but not be limited to, an
assessment of fisheries; geologic and hydrologic features; vegetation;
wildlife; historical and archaeological features; open space and
recreation features and potential; water quality and quantity; dams,
hydropower generation, buildings, and other manmade structures; riparian
interests and public water supply, including flowage rights known by the
nominating individual or group, and other pertinent instream and
riverbank and tributary drainage area information. The nominating party
shall hold at least one public meeting on the information prior to final
submittal to the commissioner. The department shall encourage the
nominating party to include tributary drainage area information in the
nomination. Nominations shall include identification of the stream order
of each river or river segment proposed for designation and the
provisions of RSA 483-B that apply to each segment. The nominating party
shall advertise the meeting publicly in cooperation with the rivers
coordinator and shall give written notice to riparian landowners and the
governing body of any municipality where segments of the river are
located. The rivers coordinator shall provide assistance to the
nominating party in the presentation of the nomination at the public
meeting.
                                             
 II. The rivers coordinator shall assist and cooperate with the
nominator or nominating organization and shall, within 120 days of
receipt of a nomination, review the nomination and prepare a
recommendation for review by the commissioner under the criteria
established in paragraph IV and adopted by rules under RSA 483:11, II.
                                             
 III. The rivers coordinator, in cooperation with the advisory
committee, shall hold at least one public hearing in a community along
the nominated river or segment of such river to receive public comment
on the nomination. Public hearing comments on the nomination, comments
on the nomination from local boards and commissions, factors listed in
RSA 483:6, IV(a) as further defined in rules adopted under RSA 483:11,
II, and other public comments on the nomination submitted to the rivers
coordinator shall be considered by the rivers coordinator and the
advisory committee when preparing a recommendation for review by the
commissioner.
                                             
 IV. The commissioner shall review the nomination within 45 days. The
commissioner shall, in reviewing a nomination under this chapter,
consider the following factors:
                                             
 (a) Whether the river, or segment or segments of such river,
contain or represent either a significant statewide, regional, or local
example of one or more of the following:
                                             
 (1) Geologic resources.
                                             
 (2) Wildlife resources.
                                             
 (3) Vegetation and natural communities.
                                             
 (4) Fish resources.
                                             
 (5) Water quality.
                                             
 (6) Water quantity.
                                             
 (7) Riparian interests.
                                             
 (8) Existing and potential withdrawals and discharges.
                                             
 (9) Existing and potential hydroelectric resources.
                                             
 (10) Hydrologic resources, including natural flow
characteristics.
                                             
 (11) Existing and potential recreational resources.
                                             
 (12) Public access.
                                             
 (13) Scenic characteristics.
                                             
 (14) Cultural, historical, and archaeological resources.
                                             
 (15) Open space.
                                             
 (16) Community resources.
                                             
 (17) Current land use and land use controls.
                                             
 (18) Scientific resources.
                                             
 (b) Public hearing comments on the nomination and other public
comments submitted to the rivers coordinator.
                                             
 (c) The recommendation of the rivers coordinator.
                                             
 (d) The recommendation of the advisory committee.
                                             
 V. If the commissioner, after reviewing a nomination and considering
the factors in RSA 483:6, IV, determines that designation of the river,
or segment or segments of such river, would be consistent with the
purpose of this chapter, the commissioner shall forward the nomination
to the general court for review and legislative approval according to
RSA 483:7.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1991, 338:6-8. 1992, 261:4. 1995, 219:1. 2009,
201:6. 2011, 32:1, eff. May 9, 2011. 2016, 287:9, 10, eff. Aug. 20,
2016.

### Section 483:7

 **483:7 Legislative Designation. –**
                                             
 I. Any nomination approved by the commissioner shall require review
and approval by the general court prior to inclusion in the program.
Such action shall be filed as a bill in the next legislative session
following the nomination.
                                             
 II. Any nomination which is forwarded to the general court for
review and approval shall include:
                                             
 (a) A map showing the boundaries of the river or segment;
                                             
 (b) A report which specifies the values and characteristics which
qualify the river or segment for designation; and
                                             
 (c) The classifications of the proposed designation pursuant to
RSA 483:7-a.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1990, 233:4, eff. June 26, 1990.

### Section 483:7-a

 **483:7-a River Classification Criteria; Management. –**
                                             
 I. Those rivers or segments designated for inclusion in the program
shall be classified as one or more of the following:
                                             
 (a) Natural rivers are free-flowing rivers or segments
characterized by the high quality of natural and scenic resources. River
shorelines are in primarily natural vegetation and river corridors are
generally undeveloped. Development, if any, is limited to forest
management and scattered housing. For natural rivers, the following
criteria and management objectives shall apply:
                                             
 (1) The minimum length of any segment shall be 3 miles.
                                             
 (2) Existing water quality shall be not lower than Class B
level pursuant to the water quality standards established under RSA
485-A:8.
                                             
 (3) Any paved road open to the public for motor vehicle use
shall be screened by the river bank or a vegetative or other natural
barrier to effectively conceal the sight and sound of motor vehicles for
a majority of the length of the river or segment.
                                             
 (4) Management of natural rivers and segments shall perpetuate
their natural condition as defined in this chapter and shall consider,
protect, and ensure the rights of riparian owners to use the river for
forest management, agricultural, public water supply, and other purposes
which are compatible with instream public uses of the river and the
management and protection of the resources for which the river or
segment is designated.
                                             
 (b) Rural rivers are those rivers or segments adjacent to lands
which are partially or predominantly used for agriculture, forest
management and dispersed or clustered residential development. Some
instream structures may exist, including low dams, diversion works and
other minor modifications. The following criteria and management
objectives shall apply to rural rivers:
                                             
 (1) The minimum length of any segment shall be 3 miles.
                                             
 (2) Existing water quality shall be at least Class B level
pursuant to the water quality standards established under RSA 485-A:8 or
have the potential for restoration to that level.
                                             
 (3) There shall be no minimum distance from the shoreline to
an existing road. Roads may parallel the river shoreline with regular
bridge crossings and public access sites.
                                             
 (4) Management of rural rivers and segments shall maintain and
enhance the natural, scenic, and recreational values of the river and
shall consider, protect and ensure the rights of riparian owners to use
the river for agricultural, forest management, public water supply, and
other purposes which are compatible with the instream public uses of the
river and the management and protection of the resources for which the
river or segment is designated.
                                             
 (c) Rural-community rivers are those rivers or segments which
flow through developed or populated areas of the state and which possess
existing or potential community resource values such as those defined in
official municipal plans or land use controls. Such rivers have mixed
land uses in the corridor reflecting some combination of open space,
agricultural, residential, commercial and industrial land uses. Such
rivers are readily accessible by road or railroad and may include
impoundments or diversions. The following criteria and management
objectives shall apply to rural-community rivers:
                                             
 (1) The minimum length of any segment shall be 3 miles.
                                             
 (2) Existing water quality shall be at least Class B level
pursuant to the water quality standards established under RSA 485-A:8,
or have the potential for restoration to that level.
                                             
 (3) Management of rural-community rivers and segments shall
maintain and enhance the natural, scenic, recreational and community
values of the river and shall consider, protect, and ensure the rights
of riparian owners to use the river for such uses as agricultural,
forest management, public water supply, residential, recreational,
commercial, industrial, flood control, and other community uses which
are compatible with the instream public uses of the river and the
management and protection of the resources for which the river or
segment is designated.
                                             
 (d) Community rivers are those rivers or segments which flow
through developed or populated areas of the state and which possess
existing or potential community resource values, such as those
identified in official municipal plans or land use controls. Such rivers
have mixed land uses in the corridor reflecting some combination of open
space, agricultural, residential, commercial and industrial land uses.
Such rivers are readily accessible by road or railroad, may include
existing impoundments or diversions, or potential sites for new
impoundments or diversions for hydropower, flood control or water supply
purposes, and may include the urban centers of municipalities. The
following criteria and management objectives shall apply to community
rivers:
                                             
 (1) The minimum length of any segment shall be one half mile.
                                             
 (2) Existing water quality shall be at least Class B level
pursuant to the water quality standards established under RSA 485-A:8,
or have the potential for restoration to that level.
                                             
 (3) Management of community rivers and segments shall maintain
and enhance the natural, scenic, recreational and community values of
the river and shall consider, protect, and ensure the rights of riparian
owners to use the river for such uses as agricultural, forest
management, public water supply, residential, recreational, commercial,
industrial, flood control and hydroelectric energy production purposes
which are compatible with the instream public uses of the river and the
management and protection of the resources for which the river or
segment is designated.
                                             
 II. The existence of limited exceptions to the criteria for a
certain classification under this section shall not necessarily exclude
a river or segment from that classification. The river or segment shall
be examined as a whole, and the classification of such river or segment
shall be based on the overall values and characteristics of such river
or segment.
                                             
 III. A designated river and its tributary drainage area rivers that
are subsequently designated shall be listed in the same paragraph in RSA
483:15. Each tributary river shall be named in a subparagraph under the
main stem, and designated segments of each tributary shall be listed as
further subparagraphs under each tributary.

**Source.** 1990, 233:5. 1991, 338:10, 11. 2011, 32:2, eff. May 9, 2011.
2016, 287:11-13, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 483:8

 **483:8 Rivers Management Advisory Committee; Establishment. –**
There is established a rivers management advisory committee appointed by
the governor and council. All members shall be New Hampshire residents
and the department shall request that nominating organizations select
nominees representing diverse geographic areas of the state.
                                             
 I. The advisory committee shall include:
                                             
 (a) A representative of public water suppliers who shall be an
officer or employee of any municipal or privately owned water works in
the state nominated by the New Hampshire Water Works Association.
                                             
 (b) A municipal officer nominated by the New Hampshire Municipal
Association.
                                             
 (c) A member of the fish and game commission.
                                             
 (d) A representative nominated by the Business and Industry
Association.
                                             
 (e) A representative of the hydropower industry nominated by the
Granite State Hydropower Association in consultation with the New
Hampshire hydropower industry.
                                             
 (f) A conservation commission member nominated by the New
Hampshire Association of Conservation Commissions.
                                             
 (g) A representative of the conservation community nominated by
the Society for the Protection of New Hampshire Forests, the Audubon
Society of New Hampshire, and the New Hampshire Council of Trout
Unlimited.
                                             
 (h) A representative of recreational interests nominated by the
New Hampshire Rivers Council and the Appalachian Mountain Club.
                                             
 (i) A representative of historic/archaeological interests
nominated by the New Hampshire Historical Society.
                                             
 (j) A representative of the agricultural community nominated by
the New Hampshire Farm Bureau Federation, the Northeast Organic Farming
Association, and the New Hampshire Association of Conservation
Districts.
                                             
 (k) A representative of local river management advisory
committees nominated by the commissioner from a list of members
submitted by the local river management advisory committees.
                                             
 II. The director of the office of energy and planning, the executive
director of the fish and game department, the commissioner of resources
and economic development, the commissioner of the department of
transportation, the commissioner of the department of safety, and the
commissioner of the department of agriculture, markets, and food or
their designees shall serve as nonvoting members of the committee.
                                             
 III. The terms of state agency members shall be the same as their
terms in office. The members shall serve 3-year terms.
                                             
 IV. Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term. Members may hold
office until their successors are appointed and confirmed.
                                             
 V. The committee shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson.
Meetings shall be at the call of the chairperson, or at the request of 5
or more committee members. The rivers coordinator under RSA 483:3 shall
serve as secretary and staff to the committee.
                                             
 VI. The advisory committee shall report biennially and advise the
commissioner, the rivers coordinator, state agencies, municipalities,
and the general court in implementing the purposes of this chapter.
                                             
 VI-a. The advisory committee, at its discretion, may provide
testimony and advice on legislation and rules relevant to the management
and protection of New Hampshire's rivers.
                                             
 VII. No state-owned property adjacent to or providing access to a
river or river segment shall be recommended for disposal by the council
on resources and development or the long range capital planning and
utilization committee, whichever is the first point of review, except
upon the review and recommendation of the advisory committee established
under this section.
                                             
 VIII. When attending to the duties of the committee, appointed
members of the committee shall be eligible to receive mileage at the
state employee rate, within the limits of the department's
appropriations.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1990, 233:7, 8. 1995, 130:4. 1999, 14:1. 2003,
319:9. 2004, 257:44. 2007, 285:2-4. 2009, 201:7, 8, eff. July 15, 2009.
2016, 287:14-16, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 483:8-a

 **483:8-a Local River Management Advisory Committees; Establishment;
Duties. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner shall appoint a local river management advisory
committee for each designated river or segment. Committee members shall
be chosen from lists of nominees submitted by the local governing bodies
of the municipalities through which the designated river or segment
flows. All members of such committees shall be New Hampshire residents.
                                             
 II. Each committee shall be composed of at least 3 members who
represent a broad range of interests in the vicinity of the designated
river or segment. These interests shall include, but not be limited to,
local government, business, conservation interests, recreation,
agriculture, and riparian landowners. If an interest is not represented
by the local governing bodies' nominations, the commissioner may appoint
a member from the vicinity of the designated river or segment, to the
local river management advisory committee who will represent that
interest. County commissioners shall be permitted to nominate members to
the local river management advisory committee in unincorporated towns or
unorganized places. Upon the request of the committee, local governing
bodies or county commissioners within tributary drainage areas may
submit nominees for appointment. Each member shall serve a term of 3
years, except when the committee is first established. When the
committee is first established the commissioner shall appoint members to
one, 2, or 3 year terms to create staggered terms.
                                             
 III. The duties of such committees shall be:
                                             
 (a) To advise the commissioner, the advisory committee, the
municipalities through which the designated river or segment flows, and
municipalities within tributary drainage areas on matters pertaining to
the management of the river or segment, tributary drainage areas, and
disposal of state-owned lands. Municipal officials, boards, and agencies
shall inform such committees of actions which they are considering in
managing and regulating activities within designated river corridors.
                                             
 (b) To consider and comment on any federal, state, or local
governmental plans to approve, license, fund, or construct facilities or
applications for permits, certificates, or licenses, that may alter the
resource values and characteristics for which the river or segment is
designated.
                                             
 (c) To develop or assist in the development and adoption of local
river corridor management plans under RSA 483:10. The local planning
board, or, in the absence of a planning board, the local governing body,
may adopt such plans pursuant to RSA 675:6 as an adjunct to the local
master plan adopted under RSA 674:4. No such plan shall have any
regulatory effect unless implemented through properly adopted
ordinances.
                                             
 (d) To report biennially to the advisory committee and the
commissioner, and annually to municipalities on the status of compliance
with federal and state laws and regulations, local ordinances, and plans
relevant to the designated river or segment, its corridor, tributary
drainage areas, and the activities of the local river management
advisory committee including, but not limited to, committee volunteer
hours, permit applications reviewed, corridor management plans and their
implementation, and education and outreach efforts.
                                             
 III-a. Local river management advisory committees may apply for and
accept, from any source, gifts, grants, and other donations of money or
services that directly assist the committee in meeting its duties,
programs, and projects. The committees may, without further
authorization, expend any funds so received to carry out their duties
under this section.
                                             
 III-b. Local river management advisory committees may, with the
approval and consensus of the local governing bodies, merge with other
local river management advisory committees for a designated river or
segment or re-establish individual committees from previously merged
committees.
                                             
 IV. In the case of the Connecticut River, the commissioner shall
appoint the New Hampshire Connecticut River Valley resource commission
as the local river management advisory committee to work with the
Vermont Connecticut River Watershed Advisory Commission as provided in
RSA 227-E. A minimum of 5 subcommittees shall be established by the
Connecticut River Valley resource commission along the river between
Vermont and New Hampshire as provided in RSA 483:8-a, II. Vermont
residents may be appointed in an advisory capacity to the local river
management advisory committee, except where the Connecticut River is
exclusively intrastate.
                                             
 V. In order to establish the tax exempt status of local river
management advisory committees established under this section, such
advisory committees are deemed to be governmental instrumentalities
having a distinct legal existence separate from the state and shall not
be considered as departments of state government. The exercise by a
local river management advisory committee of any authority granted by
this section shall be deemed to be the performance of public and
essential governmental functions not otherwise fulfilled by state
government.

**Source.** 1990, 233:6. 1991, 338:9. 1992, 261:2. 1995, 219:2. 1997,
7:1; 267:3. 2007, 285:5. 2009, 201:9, eff. July 15, 2009. 2016, 287:17,
18, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 483:9

 **483:9 Natural Rivers Protection. –** The following protection
measures shall apply to a river or segment designated as a natural
river:
                                             
 I. No dam or other structure or improvement that impedes or
significantly alters the free-flowing condition or natural character of
the river or segment shall be permitted, certified, constructed, or
operated in such river or segment.
                                             
 II. No interbasin transfers of water from a designated natural river
or segment shall be permitted.
                                             
 III. No channel alteration activities shall be permitted. The
commissioner may approve channel alterations as follows:
                                             
 (a) Temporary channel alterations in conjunction with the repair
or maintenance of a bridge, road, or riprap which is in place at the
time a river or segment is designated; or
                                             
 (b) Permanent alterations in conjunction with the repair or
maintenance of a bridge, road, or riprap which is in place at the time a
river or segment is designated which have only de minimis impact to or
restore the channel's geomorphic characteristics.
                                             
 IV. A protected instream flow shall be established by the
commissioner for each designated natural river or segment and any
upstream impoundment or diversion facility which may affect the
free-flowing condition or natural character of the designated river or
segment pursuant to RSA 483:9-c.
                                             
 V. Water quality shall be maintained at, or restored to the Class A
level, or maintained at the Class B level. Each designated natural river
or segment shall constitute an outstanding natural resource water
pursuant to the standards adopted under RSA 485-A:8. The department
shall review and consider adopted local river corridor management plans
prior to issuing any permit under RSA 485-A:13 or RSA 485-A:17.
                                             
 VI. Any new solid waste storage or treatment facility, as defined in
RSA 149-M:4, IX shall be set back a minimum of 250 feet from the normal
high water mark of a designated natural river or segment and screened
with a vegetative or other natural barrier to minimize visual impact,
except:
                                             
 (a) New solid waste landfills shall not be permitted within the
corridor of a designated natural river or segment, or less than 100 feet
from the landward extent of the 500 year floodplain, whichever distance
is greater, and shall be screened from the river with a vegetative or
other natural barrier to minimize visual impact;
                                             
 (b) Expansion of existing solid waste landfills shall not occur
within the 500 year floodplain of a designated natural river or segment
and any expansion of such a landfill located within the corridor of a
designated natural river or segment shall be set back a minimum of 100
feet from the landward extent of the 500 year floodplain and screened
from the river with a vegetative or other natural barrier to minimize
visual impact;
                                             
 (c) Any land application within the river corridor of septage,
sludge, or solid waste, as defined in RSA 149-M:4, XXII, shall be set
back a minimum of 250 feet from the normal high water mark and shall be
immediately incorporated into the soil. The provisions of this
subparagraph shall not apply to manure, lime, or wood ash when used for
agricultural purposes and that follow established state or federal best
management practices for the protection of water quality.
                                             
 (d) An existing solid waste facility which is located within 250
feet of the normal high water mark of a designated natural river or
segment may continue to operate under an existing permit provided it
does not cause degradation to an area in excess of that area under
permit at the time of designation; and
                                             
 (e) The department may permit a resource recovery operation at an
existing landfill located within 250 feet of the normal high water mark
of a designated natural river or segment.
                                             
 VII. No new hazardous waste facilities as defined in RSA 147-A:2
which store hazardous waste for more than 90 days, shall be permitted
within the corridor of a designated natural river or segment.
                                             
 VIII. No motorized watercraft shall be permitted to operate on a
designated natural river or segment, except for emergency purposes.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1990, 233:10. 1991, 58:1; 338:2. 1996, 251:14,
15. 1998, 56:2. 2007, 308:1. 2009, 201:10. 2011, 32:3, eff. May 9, 2011.
2016, 286:2, eff. Aug. 20, 2016; 287:19, 20, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 483:9-a

 **483:9-a Rural River Protection. –** The following protection
measures shall apply to a river or segment designated as a rural river:
                                             
 I. No new dams shall be permitted, certified, constructed, operated
or maintained in such river or segment. The repair of a structural
failure of a dam which is in place at the time a river or segment is
designated shall not be considered to be a new dam if such dam is
repaired or reconstructed at the same location and with the same
impoundment level within 6 years of the date of failure.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding paragraph I, the department may approve permits
and certificates for the construction, operation, or maintenance of new
hydroelectric power facilities at existing dams provided that:
                                             
 (a) The operational mode of any proposed facility shall be
run-of-the-river, with project outflow equal to project inflow on an
instantaneous basis and the project does not significantly alter the
natural flow characteristics of the river; and
                                             
 (b) The proposed facility does not provide for diversion of the
river above or below the existing dam for a significant distance; and
                                             
 (c) The height of the impoundment is constant and is not raised
above the maximum historic level of impoundment at that site; and
                                             
 (d) The proposed facility provides adequate fish passage as
determined by the fish and game department.
                                             
 III. No interbasin transfers of water from a designated rural river
or segment shall be permitted.
                                             
 IV. No new channel alteration activities shall be permitted which
interfere with or alter the natural flow characteristics of the river or
segment or which adversely affect the resources for which the river or
segment is designated. However, the commissioner may approve such
channel alterations as may be necessary for the construction, repair, or
maintenance of a project, including public water supply intake
facilities in the river or river corridor. The department shall
encourage the use of native vegetation to stabilize streambanks of
designated rural rivers.
                                             
 V. A protected instream flow shall be established by the
commissioner for each designated rural river or segment and any upstream
impoundment or diversion facility which may affect the natural flow
characteristics or natural character of the designated river or segment
pursuant to RSA 483:9-c.
                                             
 VI. Water quality shall be restored to or maintained at least at the
Class B level. Significant adverse impacts on water quality or other
in-stream public uses shall not be permitted. The department shall
review and consider adopted local river corridor management plans prior
to issuing any permit under RSA 485-A:13, RSA 485-A:17, or RSA 482-A.
                                             
 VII. Any new solid waste storage or treatment facility, as defined
in RSA 149-M:4, IX shall be set back a minimum of 250 feet from the
normal high water mark of a designated rural river or segment and shall
be screened with a vegetative or other natural barrier to minimize
visual impact, except:
                                             
 (a) New solid waste landfills shall not be permitted within the
corridor of a designated rural river or segment or less than 100 feet
from the landward extent of the 500 year floodplain, whichever distance
is greater, and shall be screened from the river with a vegetative or
other natural barrier to minimize visual impact;
                                             
 (b) New solid waste landfills may be permitted within the city of
Rochester within the corridor of the segment defined in RSA 483:15,
XIV(c), and if located in the river corridor shall be set back a minimum
of 100 feet from the landward extent of the 500 year floodplain and
shall be screened from the river with a vegetative or other natural
barrier to minimize visual impact;
                                             
 (c) Expansion of existing solid waste landfills shall not occur
within the 500 year floodplain of a designated rural river or segment,
and any expansion of such a landfill shall be set back a minimum of 100
feet from the landward extent of the 500 year floodplain and shall be
screened from the river with a vegetative or other natural barrier to
minimize visual impact;
                                             
 (d) Any land application within the river corridor of septage,
sludge, or solid waste, as defined in RSA 149-M:4, XXII, shall be set
back a minimum of 250 feet from the normal high water mark and shall be
immediately incorporated into the soil. The provisions of this
subparagraph shall not apply to manure, lime, or wood ash when used for
agricultural purposes and that follow established state or federal best
management practices for the protection of water quality;
                                             
 (e) An existing solid waste facility which is located within 250
feet of the normal high water mark of a designated rural river or
segment may continue to operate under an existing permit provided it
does not cause degradation to an area in excess of that area under
permit at the time of designation; and
                                             
 (f) The department may permit a resource recovery operation at an
existing landfill located within 250 feet of the normal high water mark
of a designated rural river or segment.
                                             
 VIII. Any motorized watercraft operating within 150 feet of the
shoreline of a designated rural river or segment shall travel at the
slowest possible speed necessary to maintain steerage way, but at no
time shall exceed 6 miles per hour.

**Source.** 1990, 233:11. 1991, 58:2; 338:3. 1996, 251:16, 17. 1998,
56:3. 2007, 308:2, eff. Sept. 11, 2007. 2016, 286:3, eff. Aug. 20, 2016;
287:21-23, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 483:9-aa

 **483:9-aa Rural-Community Rivers Protection. –** The following
protection measures shall apply to rivers or segments designated as a
rural-community river:
                                             
 I. No new dams shall be permitted, certified, constructed, operated
or maintained in such river or segment. The repair of a structural
failure of a dam which is in place at the time a river or segment is
designated shall not be considered to be a new dam if repaired or
reconstructed at the same location and with the same impoundment level
within 6 years of the date of failure.
                                             
 II. Notwithstanding paragraph I, the department may approve permits
and certificates for the construction, operation, or maintenance of new
hydroelectric power facilities at existing dams provided that:
                                             
 (a) The operational mode of any proposed facility shall be
run-of-the-river, with project outflow equal to project inflow on an
instantaneous basis and the project does not significantly alter the
natural flow characteristics of the river; and
                                             
 (b) The proposed facility does not provide for diversion of the
river or segment above or below the existing dam for a significant
distance; and
                                             
 (c) The height of the impoundment is constant and is not raised
above the maximum historic level of impoundment at that site; and
                                             
 (d) The proposed facility provides adequate fish passage as
determined by the fish and game department.
                                             
 III. No interbasin transfers of water from a designated
rural-community river or segment shall be permitted.
                                             
 IV. No new channel alteration activities shall be permitted which
interfere with or alter the natural flow characteristics of the river or
segment or which adversely affect the resources for which the river or
segment is designated. However, the commissioner may approve such
channel alterations as may be necessary for the construction, repair, or
maintenance of a project including public water supply intake facilities
in the river or river corridor. The department shall encourage the use
of native vegetation to stabilize streambanks of designated
rural-community rivers.
                                             
 V. A protected instream flow shall be established by the
commissioner for each designated rural-community river or segment and
any upstream impoundment or diversion facility which may affect the
natural flow characteristics of such river or segment pursuant to RSA
483:9-c.
                                             
 VI. Water quality shall be restored or maintained at least at the
Class B level. Significant adverse impacts on water quality or other
instream public uses shall not be permitted. The department shall review
and consider adopted local river corridor management plans prior to
issuing any permit under RSA 485-A:13, RSA 485-A:17 or RSA 482-A.
                                             
 VII. Any new solid waste storage or treatment facility, as defined
in RSA 149-M:4, IX shall be set back a minimum of 250 feet from the
normal high water mark of a designated rural-community river or segment
and screened with a vegetative or other natural barrier to minimize
visual impact, except:
                                             
 (a) New solid waste landfills shall not be permitted within the
500 year floodplain of a designated rural-community river or segment and
any new solid waste landfill located within the corridor of a designated
rural-community river or segment shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet
from the landward extent of the 500 year floodplain and screened from
the river with a vegetative or other natural barrier to minimize visual
impact;
                                             
 (b) Any land application within the river corridor of septage,
sludge, or solid waste, as defined in RSA 149-M:4, XXII, shall be set
back a minimum of 250 feet from the normal high water mark and shall be
immediately incorporated into the soil. The provisions of this
subparagraph shall not apply to manure, lime, or wood ash when used for
agricultural purposes and that follow established state or federal best
management practices for the protection of water quality;
                                             
 (c) An existing solid waste facility which is located within 250
feet of the normal high water mark of a designated rural-community river
or segment may continue to operate under an existing permit provided it
does not cause degradation to an area in excess of that area under
permit at the time of designation; and
                                             
 (d) The department may permit a resource recovery operation at an
existing landfill located within 250 feet of the normal high water mark
of a designated rural-community river or segment.
                                             
 VIII. Any motorized watercraft operating within 150 feet of the
shoreline of a designated rural-community river or segment shall travel
at the slowest possible speed necessary to maintain steerage way, but at
no time shall exceed 6 miles per hour.

**Source.** 1991, 338:12. 1996, 251:18, 19. 1998, 56:4, eff. May 7,
1998. 2016, 286:4, eff. Aug. 20, 2016; 287:24-26, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 483:9-b

 **483:9-b Community Rivers Protection. –** The following protection
measures shall apply to rivers or segments designated as a community
river:
                                             
 I. The department may approve permits for the construction of new
dams for public water supply, flood control or hydroelectric energy
production purposes if such construction is consistent with management
and protection of the resources for which the river or segment is
designated.
                                             
 II. The department may approve permits and certificates for the
construction, operation, or maintenance of new hydroelectric power
facilities at existing or breached dams provided that:
                                             
 (a) The operational mode of any proposed facility shall be
run-of-the-river, with project outflow equal to project inflow on an
instantaneous basis and the project does not significantly alter the
natural flow characteristics of the river; and
                                             
 (b) The proposed facility does not provide for diversion of the
river or segment above or below the existing dam for a significant
distance; and
                                             
 (c) The height of the impoundment is constant and, for existing
or breached dams, is not raised above the maximum historic level of
impoundment at that site; and
                                             
 (d) The proposed facility provides adequate fish passage as
determined by the fish and game department.
                                             
 III. No interbasin transfers of water from a designated community
river or segment shall be permitted.
                                             
 IV. No new channel alteration activities shall be permitted which
interfere with or alter the natural flow characteristics of the river or
segment or which adversely affect the resources for which the river or
segment is designated. However, the commissioner may approve such
channel alterations as may be necessary for the construction, repair, or
maintenance of a project including public water supply intake facilities
in the river or river corridor. The department shall encourage the use
of native vegetation to stabilize streambanks of designated community
rivers.
                                             
 V. A protected instream flow shall be established by the
commissioner for each designated community river or segment and any
upstream impoundment or diversion facility which may affect the natural
flow characteristics of such river or segment pursuant to RSA
483-A:9-c.
                                             
 VI. Water quality shall be restored or maintained at least at the
Class B level. Significant adverse impacts on water quality or other
instream public uses shall not be permitted. The department shall review
and consider adopted local river corridor management plans prior to
issuing any permit under RSA 485-A:13, RSA 485-A:17 or RSA 482-A.
                                             
 VII. Any new solid waste storage or treatment facility, as defined
in RSA 149-M:4, IX shall be set back a minimum of 250 feet from the
normal high water mark of a designated community river or segment and
screened with a vegetative or other natural barrier to minimize visual
impact, except:
                                             
 (a) New solid waste landfills shall not be permitted within the
500 year floodplain of a designated community river or segment and any
new solid waste landfill located within the corridor of a designated
community river or segment shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from
the landward extent of the 500 year floodplain and screened from the
river with a vegetative or other natural barrier to minimize visual
impact;
                                             
 (b) Any land application within the river corridor of septage,
sludge, or solid waste, as defined in RSA 149-M:4, XXII, shall be set
back a minimum of 250 feet from the normal high water mark and shall be
immediately incorporated into the soil. The provisions of this
subparagraph shall not apply to manure, lime, or wood ash when used for
agricultural purposes and that follow established state or federal best
management practices for the protection of water quality;
                                             
 (c) An existing solid waste facility which is located within 250
feet of the normal high water mark of a designated community river or
segment may continue to operate under an existing permit provided it
does not cause degradation to an area in excess of that area under
permit at the time of designation; and
                                             
 (d) The department may permit a resource recovery operation at an
existing landfill located within 250 feet of the normal high water mark
of a designated community river or segment.
                                             
 VIII. Any motorized watercraft operating within 150 feet of the
shoreline of a designated community river or segment shall travel at the
slowest possible speed necessary to maintain steerage way, but at no
time shall exceed 6 miles per hour.

**Source.** 1990, 233:11. 1991, 58:3; 338:4, 13, 14. 1996, 251:20, 21.
1998, 56:5, eff. May 7, 1998. 2016, 286:5, eff. Aug. 20, 2016;
287:27-29, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 483:9-c

 **483:9-c Establishment of Protected Instream Flows. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner, in consultation with the advisory committee,
shall adopt rules under RSA 541-A specifying the standards, criteria,
and procedures by which protected instream flows shall be established
and enforced for each designated river or segment. The department shall
determine the protected instream flow criteria based on the requirements
of flow-dependent instream public uses. Each protected instream flow
shall be established and enforced to maintain water for instream public
uses and to protect characteristics, including recreational, fisheries,
wildlife, environmental, hydropower, cultural, historical,
archaeological, scientific, ecological, aesthetic, community
significance, agricultural, public water supply, riparian rights, and
the resources for which the river or segment is designated. The
department shall determine the protected instream flow criteria based on
the requirements of flow-dependent, instream public uses.
                                             
 II. No less than 60 days prior to commencing a protected instream
flow study on any designated river, the department shall hold a public
hearing jointly with the senate committee with jurisdiction over river
management issues and the house committee with jurisdiction over river
management issues and provide a public comment period of 30 days. The
department shall consider the public comments received before commencing
the study.
                                             
 III. One public hearing shall be held in at least one municipality
along the designated river or segment to receive public comment on the
establishment of a proposed protected instream flow.
                                             
 IV. One public hearing shall be held in at least one municipality
along the designated river or segment to receive public comment on the
establishment of a proposed water management plan intended to implement
the protected instream flow.
                                             
 V. The procedure adopted under this section shall include an
assessment of the effect of a protected instream flow upon existing
hydroelectric power generation, water supply, flood control, and other
riparian users.
                                             
 VI. Water management plans implementing instream flow protections
shall be effective and enforceable upon adoption. The department shall
allow a period of up to 5 years for any party subject to the instream
flow program to implement the provisions of their water management plan.
The department shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, to allow for
one 5-year extension for any party who files ongoing progress reports
for and is working in good faith on their water management plan but is
unable to implement the provisions of their water management plan due to
financial or other hardship.
                                             
 VII. The department shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, to
allow for waivers from the provisions of a water management plan. Such
rules shall specify the waiver criteria based on negative impacts to
public health or safety or an undue financial hardship on a party
subject to a water management plan. Should a party meet the criteria for
a waiver, and notwithstanding paragraph VI, the department shall waive,
in whole or in part, the enforceability of those components of the
party's water management plan until the department amends such plan to
alleviate the negative impacts to public health or safety or undue
financial hardship.
                                             
 VIII. The protected instream flows established under this section
shall be maintained at all times, except when inflow is less than the
protected instream flow level as a result of natural causes or when the
commissioner determines that a public water supply emergency exists
which affects public health and safety.
                                             
 IX. Only those permits issued by the department that affect stream
flow within a designated river shall be required to meet protected
instream flows.
                                             
 X. Any party who is aggrieved by a determination establishing such
protected instream flows may petition the commissioner for a hearing to
review such determination within 30 days of the date the determination
is issued. The filing of such petition shall stay the implementation of
the determination until a final decision has been rendered on the
petition or an appeal taken pursuant to RSA 541.

**Source.** 1990, 233:11. 2009, 208:2. 2011, 32:4, eff. May 9, 2011.
2016, 286:6, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 483:10

 **483:10 River Corridor Management Plans. –**
                                             
 I. The rivers coordinator shall provide technical assistance to
local river management advisory committees, regional planning
commissions, and municipalities, and shall encourage the development and
implementation of local river corridor management plans pursuant to RSA
483:8-a, III(c). In developing these plans, the department shall
coordinate with the department of resources and economic development,
the department of fish and game, the office of energy and planning, the
department of agriculture, markets, and food, the department of
transportation, the department of safety, and the division of historical
resources.
                                             
 II. River corridor management plans developed pursuant to paragraph
I shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
                                             
 (a) Permitted recreational uses and activities.
                                             
 (b) Permitted non-recreational uses and activities.
                                             
 (c) Existing land uses.
                                             
 (cc) Aquatic connectivity.
                                             
 (d) Protection of flood plains, meander belts, wetlands, wildlife
and fish habitat, and other significant open space and natural areas.
                                             
 (e) Dams, bridges, and other water structures.
                                             
 (f) Access by foot and vehicles.
                                             
 (g) Setbacks and other location requirements.
                                             
 (h) Dredging, filling, mining, and earth moving.
                                             
 (i) Prohibited uses.
                                             
 (j) State-owned lands within the corridor and tributary drainage
areas thereof. The plan shall include a description of the importance of
those lands to the characteristics for which the river was designated.
                                             
 (k) Fluvial geomorphology and risk reduction.
                                             
 III. River corridor management plans developed according to this
section may include tributary drainage areas as determined by the local
river management advisory committee.
                                             
 IV. State agencies shall collaborate with and assist the rivers
coordinator and the local river management advisory committee with the
implementation of river corridor management plans.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 2003, 319:9. 2004, 257:44. 2007, 285:6. 2009,
201:11, 12, eff. July 15, 2009. 2016, 287:31, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 483:10-a

 **483:10-a Long-Range River Management Plans. –** 
                                             [Repealed 2016,
287:38, I, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.
                                             ]

### Section 483:10-b

 **483:10-b Withholding of Section 401 Certification. –** The general
court finds that the development of any dam or channel alteration
activities within a natural river or segment or the development of any
new dam within a rural, rural-community, or community river or segment,
except as provided in RSA 483:9-a, II, RSA 483:9-aa, II, and RSA
483:9-b, II, will alter the physical and chemical characteristics of
that river and will constitute violation of the water quality standards
established under RSA 485-A:8. The commissioner shall deny certification
of any federally licensed or permitted activity on such designated
rivers or segments under section 401 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, P.L. 92-500, as amended.

**Source.** 1990, 233:12, eff. June 26, 1990. 2016, 287:32, eff. Aug.
20, 2016.

### Section 483:11

 **483:11 Rulemaking. –** The commissioner, with the advice of the
advisory committee, shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative
to the following:
                                             
 I. Content and submission of nominations, including requirements and
criteria for river segments whose salinity, flow, or level is influenced
by tides at its tidal mouth, under RSA 483:6, I.
                                             
 I-a. Determination of the downstream extent for river segments whose
salinity, flow, or level is influenced by tides at their tidal mouths.
                                             
 II. Criteria for acceptance of nominations by the commissioner,
including criteria listed in RSA 483:6, IV(a).
                                             
 III. Preparation for legislative designation of nominated rivers or
segments of such rivers under RSA 483:7.
                                             
 IV. Development of standards, criteria, and procedures for
establishment and enforcement of protected instream flow levels for
designated rivers and segments under RSA 483:9-c.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1990, 233:13. 1991, 338:15. 2009, 201:17, eff.
July 15, 2009.

### Section 483:12

 **483:12 Consistency of State Action. –** Upon enactment of this
chapter, all state agency actions affecting rivers or segments of such
rivers which may be designated for protection under this chapter shall
conform to the provisions of this chapter.

**Source.** 1989, 339:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1990.

### Section 483:12-a

 **483:12-a State Action; Notification of Rivers Coordinator;
Petition for Review. –**
                                             
 I. Any state agency considering any action affecting any river or
segment designated under this chapter shall notify the rivers
coordinator and the local river management advisory committee prior to
taking any such action. Such agency shall forward to the rivers
coordinator and the local river management advisory committee for review
and comment copies of all notices of public hearings, or, where a public
hearing is not required, a copy of the application for issuance of a
permit, certificate, or license within the designated river or corridor
under RSA 485-C, RSA 485-A, RSA 483-B, RSA 12-E, RSA 270:12, RSA 482,
RSA 482-A, except notifications for minimum impact activities under RSA
482-A:3, V and XII and for routine roadway maintenance under RSA
482-A:3, XVI on land used for agricultural purposes, RSA 149-M, RSA 430,
or RSA 147-A. If an agency is notified by the rivers coordinator that a
proposed activity would violate a protection measure under RSA 483:9,
483:9-a, 483:9-aa, or 483:9-b, such agency shall deny the application.
                                             
 I-a. State agencies shall develop, in conjunction with the rivers
coordinator and the local river management advisory committees, the
procedure by which the state shall notify the appropriate local river
management advisory committee when state action is being considered
which affects a designated river.
                                             
 II. If an application is denied solely because the proposed activity
would violate a protection measure under RSA 483:9, 483:9-a, 483:9-aa,
or 483:9-b, the applicant may petition the commissioner for a review.
Within 30 days of receiving such a petition, the commissioner, in
consultation with the advisory committee and the appropriate local
rivers management advisory committee, shall review the application. If
the commissioner determines that the proposed activity is consistent
with the character of the designated river or segment or that the
proposed activity would provide a public benefit sufficient to outweigh
the public benefit of a protection measure under this chapter, the
commissioner shall submit to the speaker of the house and the president
of the senate a recommendation that the proposed activity be allowed to
proceed. Such recommendation shall require review and approval by the
general court and shall be filed as a bill in the next legislative
session following the petition.

**Source.** 1990, 233:14. 1995, 219:3. 2007, 285:8. 2009, 201:13, eff.
July 15, 2009. 2016, 287:33, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 483:12-b

 **483:12-b Subject to Other Laws; Existing Hydroelectric Facilities.
–**
                                             
 I. Any activities permitted under this chapter shall be subject to
all applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
                                             
 II. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the continued operation,
repair and maintenance of hydroelectric storage and generation
facilities existing on the effective date of this paragraph.

**Source.** 1990, 233:24. 1992, 261:3, eff. July 14, 1992.

### Section 483:13

 **483:13 Acceptance and Expenditure of Funds. –**
                                             
 I. The commissioner may apply for and accept, from any source,
gifts; donations of money; grants; federal, local, private, and other
matching funds and incentives; and interests in land for the purposes of
this chapter. The moneys collected under this paragraph shall be
deposited in the fund established under paragraph II.
                                             
 II. There is hereby established in the office of the state treasurer
a fund to be known as the rivers management and protection fund. The
fund shall be nonlapsing and continually appropriated to the
commissioner for the purposes of this chapter, RSA 487:38 through RSA
487:42, and RSA 483-A.
                                             
 III. The commissioner may expend any funds deposited in the rivers
management and protection fund for the purposes of this chapter, RSA
487:38 through RSA 487:42, and RSA 483-A, and such funds are hereby
continually appropriated.
                                             
 IV. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1989, 339:1. 1995, 219:4. 2009, 201:14. 2010, 269:1, eff.
July 6, 2010. 2015, 259:31, II, eff. July 1, 2015.

### Section 483:14

 **483:14 Disposition of State Property. –**
                                             
 I. No state-owned property adjacent to or providing access to a
river shall be disposed of by the state except upon the review and
recommendation of the advisory committee.
                                             
 II. 
                                             [Repealed.
                                             ]

**Source.** 1990, 118:4. 2009, 201:15, eff. July 15, 2009. 2016, 287:38,
II, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.

### Section 483:15

 **483:15 Rivers Designated for Protection. –** The following rivers
and river segments are designated as protected:
                                             
 I. Lamprey River and the watershed tributaries : North Branch,
Pawtuckaway, North, Little, and Piscassic Rivers.
                                             
 (a)(1) Lamprey River:
                                             
 (A) As a rural river from immediately downstream of Meadow
Lake Dam in Northwood to the confluence with the North Branch River in
Raymond.
                                             
 (B) As a rural-community river from the confluence with the
North Branch River in Raymond to 0.9 miles downstream of the Langford
Road crossing in Raymond.
                                             
 (C) As a community river from 0.9 miles downstream of the
Langford Road crossing in Raymond to 0.3 miles downstream of the Epping
Street crossing in Raymond.
                                             
 (D) As a rural-community river from 0.3 miles downstream of
the Epping Street crossing in Raymond to the confluence with the
Pawtuckaway River in Epping.
                                             
 (E) As a community river from the confluence with the
Pawtuckaway River in Epping to the downstream side of the New Hampshire
Route 125 bridge in Epping.
                                             
 (F) As a rural river from the downstream side of the New
Hampshire Route 125 bridge in Epping to the Epping-Lee town line.
                                             
 (G) As a rural river from the Epping-Lee town line to the
Durham-Newmarket town line. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, the department of environmental services shall not approve the
use of flashboards under RSA 482:29 to increase the height of any
existing dam within this segment of the Lamprey River.
                                             
 (H) As a community river from the Durham-Newmarket town
line to 1.8 miles downstream of the MacCallen Dam in Newmarket.
                                             
 (2) North Branch River--as a natural river from immediately
downstream of the Beaver Pond Dam in Deerfield to the confluence with
the Lamprey River in Raymond.
                                             
 (3) Pawtuckaway River--as a rural river from immediately
downstream of the Pawtuckaway Lake Dam in Nottingham to the confluence
with the Lamprey River in Epping.
                                             
 (4) North River--as a rural river from immediately downstream
of the North River Pond Dam in Nottingham to the confluence with the
Lamprey River in Epping.
                                             
 (5) Little River--as a rural river from immediately downstream
of the Mendum's Pond Dam in Nottingham to the confluence with the
Lamprey River in Lee.
                                             
 (6) Piscassic River:
                                             
 (A) As a natural river from the headwaters 0.5 miles
upstream of the Fremont-Brentwood town line to the upstream side of the
Piscassic Ice Pond Dam in Newfields.
                                             
 (B) As a rural-community river from the upstream side of
the Piscassic Ice Pond Dam in Newfields to the downstream side of the
Grant Road crossing in Newmarket.
                                             
 (C) As a community river from the downstream side of the
Grant Road crossing in Newmarket to the confluence with the Lamprey
River in Newmarket.
                                             
 (b) All 1st, 2nd, and 3rd order portions of the Lamprey River and
its tributary rivers shall be exempt from the provisions of the
shoreland water quality protection act, RSA 483-B.
                                             
 II. Merrimack River--main stem from the Bedford-Merrimack town line
to the New Hampshire-Massachusetts state line as a "community river.''
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit complete capacity
utilization, not to exceed 30 million gallons per day, or any
construction or repairs required to achieve such utilization of the
existing intake facilities of Pennichuck Water Works situated on the
western bank of the Merrimack River in the vicinity of Chase Brook,
so-called. This paragraph shall not affect any private right in the
Merrimack River and shall not relieve Pennichuck Water Works, or its
successors and assigns, from compliance with other laws or rules under
the state's police power.
                                             
 III. Merrimack River--main stem from the confluence of the
Winnipesaukee and Pemigewasset Rivers in the city of Franklin to Garvins
Falls in the town of Bow as a "rural river.''
                                             
 IV. Saco River--main stem from the base of Saco Lake dam to the
southern boundary of Crawford Notch State Park as a "natural river'' and
from the southern boundary of Crawford Notch State Park to the New
Hampshire-Maine state line as a "rural river.'' Nothing in this chapter
shall prohibit the normal repair or maintenance of the Willey House dam
in Crawford Notch State Park.
                                             
 V. Swift River--main stem from its headwaters to the Albany-Conway
town line as a "natural river'' and from the Albany-Conway town line to
its confluence with the Saco River in Conway as a "rural river.''
                                             
 VI. Pemigewasset River:
                                             
 (a) As a natural river from the outlet of Profile Lake in
Franconia to the southern boundary of Franconia Notch State Park.
                                             
 (b) As a rural river from the Holderness-Ashland town line to the
Franklin Falls flood control dam.
                                             
 (c) As a rural-community river from the northernmost Thornton
town line to the I-93 bridge in Plymouth.
                                             
 (d) As a community river:
                                             
 (1) From the I-93 bridge in Plymouth to the Holderness-Ashland
town line.
                                             
 (2) From the Franklin Falls flood control dam to its
confluence with the Merrimack River.
                                             
 VII. (a) Contoocook River--main stem:
                                             
 (1) As a "rural river'':
                                             
 (A) From the Old Sharon Road bridge in Jaffrey to Noone
Falls dam in Peterborough.
                                             
 (B) From the North Peterborough dam to the monument on the
Peterborough-Hancock town line.
                                             
 (C) From the North Bennington Road bridge in Antrim and
Bennington to the confluence of the north branch of the Contoocook River
in Hillsborough.
                                             
 (D) From the Hosiery Mill dam in Hillsborough to the twin
iron bridges in West Henniker.
                                             
 (E) From the Henniker-Hopkinton town line to the Riverhill
bridge in Penacook.
                                             
 (2) As a "community river'':
                                             
 (A) From the outlet of Poole Pond in Rindge to Old Sharon
Road bridge in Jaffrey.
                                             
 (B) From the Noone Falls dam in Peterborough to North
Peterborough dam.
                                             
 (C) From the monument on the Peterborough-Hancock town line
to the North Bennington Road bridge in Antrim and Bennington.
                                             
 (D) From the confluence of the north branch of the
Contoocook River in Hillsborough to the Hosiery Mill dam in
Hillsborough.
                                             
 (E) From the twin iron bridges in West Henniker to the
Henniker-Hopkinton town line.
                                             
 (F) From the Riverhill bridge in Penacook to the confluence
with the Merrimack River.
                                             
 (b) Contoocook River--north branch:
                                             
 (1) As a "rural river,'' from the outlet of Rye Pond in
Stoddard to the outlet of Franklin Pierce Lake.
                                             
 (2) As a "community river,'' from the outlet of Franklin
Pierce Lake to the confluence of the Contoocook River.
                                             
 VIII. Connecticut River:
                                             
 (a) As a rural river from the outlet of the Fourth Connecticut
Lake to a point .3 miles above the Second Connecticut Lake Dam.
                                             
 (b) As a community river from the point above the Second
Connecticut Lake Dam to a point .3 miles below the Second Connecticut
Lake Dam.
                                             
 (c) As a rural river from the point below the Second Connecticut
Lake Dam to a point .3 miles above the First Connecticut Lake Dam.
                                             
 (d) As a community river from the point above the First
Connecticut Lake Dam to a point .3 miles below the First Connecticut
Lake Dam.
                                             
 (e) As a rural river from the point below the First Connecticut
Lake Dam to a point .3 miles above Murphy Dam.
                                             
 (f) As a community river from the point above the Murphy Dam to a
point 2 miles below the Murphy Dam.
                                             
 (g) As a rural river from the point 2 miles below the Murphy Dam
to Bishop Brook in Stewartstown.
                                             
 (h) As a community river from Bishop Brook to Leach Creek in
Canaan, Vermont.
                                             
 (i) As a rural river from Leach Creek to the confluence with the
Mohawk River.
                                             
 (j) As a rural community river from the confluence with the
Mohawk River to the Columbia-Colebrook town line.
                                             
 (k) As a rural river from the Columbia-Colebrook town line to
Wheeler Stream in Brunswick, Vermont.
                                             
 (l) As a natural river from Wheeler Stream to the
Maidstone-Stratford Bridge.
                                             
 (m) As a rural river from the Maidstone-Stratford Bridge to a
point one mile above the breached Wyoming Valley Dam in Northumberland.
                                             
 (n) As a community river from one mile above the breached Wyoming
Valley Dam site to a point one mile below the Wyoming Valley Dam Site.
                                             
 (o) As a rural river from one mile below the breached Wyoming
Valley Dam site to a point .3 miles above the Simpson Paper Company
Dam.
                                             
 (p) As a community river from the point above the Simpson Paper
Company Dam to .3 miles below the Simpson Paper Company.
                                             
 (q) As a rural river from the point below the Simpson Paper
Company Dam to .4 miles above the Moore Dam.
                                             
 (r) As a community river from the point above the Moore Dam to a
point .6 miles below the Moore Dam.
                                             
 (s) As a rural river from the point below Moore Dam to a point .3
miles above the Comerford Dam.
                                             
 (t) As a community river from the point above the Comerford Dam
to a point .2 miles below McIndoes Falls Dam.
                                             
 (u) As a rural river from the point below the McIndoes Falls Dam
to a point .3 miles above the Ryegate Dam.
                                             
 (v) As a community river from the point above the Ryegate Dam to
a point .2 miles below the Ryegate Dam.
                                             
 (w) As a rural river from the point below the Ryegate Dam to the
Ammonoosuc River in Bath.
                                             
 (x) As a community river from the Ammonoosuc River to the point
where routes 135 and 10 meet in Haverhill.
                                             
 (y) As a rural river from the intersection of routes 135 and 10
to Storrs Pond Brook in Hanover.
                                             
 (z) As a rural-community river from Storrs Pond Brook to Dothan
Brook outlet in Hartford, Vermont.
                                             
 (aa) As a community river from the Dothan Brook to .3 miles below
the Wilder Dam.
                                             
 (bb) As a rural-community river from the point below the Wilder
Dam to the Lebanon-Plainfield town line.
                                             
 (cc) As a rural river from the Lebanon-Plainfield town line to
the Blow-Me-Down Brook in Cornish.
                                             
 (dd) As a rural-community river from the Blow-Me-Down Brook to
the northern end of Chase Island in Cornish.
                                             
 (ee) As a rural river from the north end of Chase Island to the
southern side of the Williams River in Bellows Falls, Vermont.
                                             
 (ff) As a community river from the southern side of the Williams
River to the Saxtons River in Westminster, Vermont.
                                             
 (gg) As a rural-community river from the Saxtons River to the
bridge between Westminster Station and Walpole.
                                             
 (hh) As a rural river from the bridge at Westminster Station to
the Brattleboro-Dummerston, Vermont town line.
                                             
 (ii) As a rural-community river from the Brattleboro-Dummerston,
Vermont town line to Sprague Brook.
                                             
 (jj) As a community river from Sprague Brook to a point .3 miles
below the Vernon Dam.
                                             
 (kk) As a rural river from the point below the Vernon Dam to the
Massachusetts border.
                                             
 IX. Ashuelot River:
                                             
 (a) As a natural river from the dam at Butterfield Pond to and
including the falls above Ashuelot Pond.
                                             
 (b) As a rural river from the falls above Ashuelot Pond to
Symondsville Road in Marlow.
                                             
 (c) As a community river from Symondsville Road in Marlow to the
Audio Accessories dam.
                                             
 (d) As a rural river from below the Audio Accessories dam in
Marlow up to the breached Blackstock dam located above the town of
Gilsum.
                                             
 (e) As a community river from the breached Blackstock dam above
the town of Gilsum to the stone arch bridge in Gilsum.
                                             
 (f) As a rural river from the stone arch bridge in Gilsum to the
Court Street bridge in Keene.
                                             
 (g) As a community river from the Court Street bridge in Keene to
the Branch River in Keene.
                                             
 (h) As a rural river from the Branch River in Keene to the
unnamed brook entering on the west bank near the intersection of
Winchester Street and route 10 in West Swanzey.
                                             
 (i) As a community river from the unnamed brook on the west bank
near the intersection of Winchester Street and route 10 in West Swanzey
to the Denman Thompson Bridge.
                                             
 (j) As a rural river from the Denman Thompson Bridge in West
Swanzey to and including the oxbow on the west bank before the A.C.
Lawrence building in Winchester.
                                             
 (k) As a community river from the oxbow on the west bank before
the A.C. Lawrence building in Winchester to the route 119 bridge.
                                             
 (l) As a rural river from the route 119 bridge in Winchester to
the Winchester dam owned by G.E. Robertson and Company in Hinsdale.
                                             
 (m) As a community river from the Winchester dam owned by G.E.
Robertson and Company in Hinsdale to the route 63 bridge.
                                             
 (n) As a rural river from the route 63 bridge in Hinsdale to the
mouth of the Ashuelot River at the Connecticut River.
                                             
 X. (a) Piscataquog River--north branch:
                                             
 (1) As a natural river from the outlet of Deering Lake Dam in
Deering, 6.25 miles to the Abijah bridge in Weare.
                                             
 (2) As a rural river:
                                             
 (A) From the outlet of Lake Horace Dam in Weare, 8 miles to
the Everett Dam flowage in Weare.
                                             
 (B) From the outlet of Everett Dam in Weare, 8 miles to the
river's convergence point with the south branch.
                                             
 (b) Piscataquog River--middle branch. As a natural river from the
natural outlet of Scobie Pond in Francestown to the inlet of the upper
cranberry bog at the New Boston town line, approximately 11.5 miles to
its mouth in New Boston.
                                             
 (c) Piscataquog River--south branch:
                                             
 (1) As a natural river from the outlet of Pleasant Pond in
Francestown, 11.5 miles to New Hampshire Route 13 in New Boston.
                                             
 (2) As a rural river from New Hampshire Route 13 in New
Boston, 7 miles to the confluence with the north branch.
                                             
 (3) As a rural-community river from the confluence with the
north branch, 1.7 miles to New Hampshire Route 114 in Goffstown.
                                             
 (4) As a community river from New Hampshire Route 114 in
Goffstown, 1 mile to the Gregg Dam in Goffstown.
                                             
 (5) As a rural-community river from the Gregg Dam in
Goffstown, 6.9 miles to the river's mouth at Bass Island in Manchester.
                                             
 XI. Exeter/Squamscott River.
                                             
 (a) As a "rural river'' from its headwaters at the route 102
bridge in Chester to its confluence with Great Brook in Exeter;
                                             
 (b) As a community river from the confluence with Great Brook in
Exeter, past the Great Dam and the falls to the head of tide in Exeter;
                                             
 (c) As a rural river from past the Great Dam and the falls to the
head of tide in Exeter, and then the Squamscott River to the boundary of
the Great Bay as defined by the upstream side of the railroad trestle in
Stratham and Newfields.
                                             
 XII. Cold River:
                                             
 (a) As a rural river from the outlet of Crescent Lake Dam in
Acworth, 20.3 miles to the most downstream crossing of the
Langdon-Walpole town line.
                                             
 (b) As a community river from the most downstream crossing of the
Langdon-Walpole town line, 2.1 miles to its confluence with the
Connecticut River in Walpole.
                                             
 XIII. Souhegan River:
                                             
 (a) As a rural-community river from the confluence of its south
and west branches in New Ipswich to a point 0.5 miles above the Otis Dam
in Greenville.
                                             
 (b) As a community river from the point 0.5 miles above the Otis
Dam in Greenville to a point 0.5 miles below the Otis Dam.
                                             
 (c) As a rural river from the point 0.5 miles below the Otis Dam
to the Label Arts Dam located approximately 0.3 miles above the
confluence with Stony Brook in Wilton.
                                             
 (d) As a community river from the Label Arts Dam to the Wilton
Road bridge near the Pine Valley Mill in west Milford.
                                             
 (e) As a rural-community river from the Wilton Road bridge to a
point 0.5 miles above the route 13 bridge in Milford.
                                             
 (f) As a community river from the point 0.5 miles above the route
13 bridge to a point 0.5 miles below the route 13 bridge.
                                             
 (g) As a rural river from the point 0.5 miles below the route 13
bridge to the Everett Turnpike bridge in Merrimack.
                                             
 (h) As a community river from the Everett Turnpike Bridge to the
confluence with the Merrimack River in Merrimack.
                                             
 XIV. Isinglass River:
                                             
 (a) As a rural river from the outflow of Bow Lake Dam in
Strafford, 0.54 miles to immediately downstream of the route 202A
bridge.
                                             
 (b) As a natural river from immediately downstream of the Route
202A bridge in Strafford, 5.75 miles to immediately upstream of the
route 126 bridge in Barrington.
                                             
 (c) As a rural river from immediately upstream of the route 126
bridge in Barrington, 11.64 miles to its confluence with the Cocheco
River in Rochester.
                                             
 XV. Ammonoosuc River:
                                             
 (a) As a natural river from the Lakes of the Clouds in Sargents
Purchase to a point 1.33 miles upstream of Upper Falls in Crawfords
Purchase.
                                             
 (b) As a rural community river from a point 1.33 miles upstream
of Upper Falls in Crawfords Purchase to the White Mountain National
Forest boundary near Lower Falls in the town of Carroll.
                                             
 (c) As a rural river from the White Mountain National Forest
boundary near Lower Falls in Carroll to the Bethlehem-Littleton town
line.
                                             
 (d) As a community river from the Bethlehem-Littleton town line
to the Littleton-Lisbon town line.
                                             
 (e) As a rural-community river from the Littleton-Lisbon town
line to the confluence with Pearl Lake Brook in Lisbon.
                                             
 (f) As a community river from the confluence with the Pearl Lake
Brook in Lisbon to the Lisbon-Landaff-Bath town line.
                                             
 (g) As a rural-community river from the Lisbon-Landaff-Bath town
line to a point 0.9 miles above the covered bridge in Bath.
                                             
 (h) As a community river from the point 0.9 above the covered
bridge in Bath to the confluence with Simonds Brook in Bath.
                                             
 (i) As a rural-community river from the confluence with Simonds
Brook in Bath to the confluence with Burton Brook in Bath.
                                             
 (j) As a community river from the confluence with Burton Brook in
Bath to the confluence with the Connecticut River in Haverhill.
                                             
 XVI. Cocheco River:
                                             
 (a) As a natural river from the Cocheco River headwaters south of
March's Pond in New Durham to Spring Street crossing in Farmington.
                                             
 (b) As a community river from Spring Street crossing in
Farmington to 0.7 miles south of the Cocheco Road Bridge north of Route
11 in Farmington.
                                             
 (c) As a rural-community river from 0.7 miles south of the
Cocheco Road Bridge north of Route 11 in Farmington to Little Falls
Bridge crossing in Rochester.
                                             
 (d) As a community river from Little Falls Bridge crossing in
Rochester to England Road in Rochester.
                                             
 (e) As a rural-community river from England Road in Rochester to
Whittier Street crossing in Dover.
                                             
 (f) As a community river from Whittier Street crossing in Dover
to head of tide at Central Ave dam in Dover.
                                             
 XVII. Mascoma River:
                                             
 (a) As a rural river from the downstream side of the confluence
of the Mascoma River with the Canaan Street Lake tributary in Canaan to
the upstream side of the railroad bridge east of the Baltic Mills Dam in
Enfield.
                                             
 (b) As a community river from the upstream side of the railroad
bridge east of the Baltic Mills Dam in Enfield to the downstream side of
the railroad bridge south of Main Street in Enfield.
                                             
 (c) As a rural-community river from the downstream side of the
railroad bridge south of Main Street in Enfield, including Mascoma Lake,
to the upstream side of the Water Treatment Intake Dam in Lebanon.
                                             
 (d) As a community river from the upstream side of the Water
Treatment Intake Dam in Lebanon to the upstream side of the confluence
of the Mascoma River with the Connecticut River in Lebanon.
                                             
 XVIII. Oyster River:
                                             
 (a)(1) As a rural-community river immediately downstream of the
Hall Road Bridge in Barrington to the upstream side of Old Mill Road in
Lee.
                                             
 (2) As a rural river from the upstream side of Old Mill Road
in Lee to the upstream side of Route 155 crossing in Lee.
                                             
 (3) As a rural-community river from the upstream side of Route
155 crossing in Lee to the upstream side of the Oyster River Dam in
Durham.
                                             
 (4) As a community river from the upstream side of the Oyster
River Dam in Durham to the Mill Pond Dam in Durham.
                                             
 (b) All 1^st^, 2^nd^, and 3^rd^ order portions of the Oyster
River shall be exempt from the comprehensive shoreland protection act
under RSA 483-B.

**Source.** 1990, 233:15. 1991, 338:1. 1992, 261:1, 6, 7. 1993, 47:1;
132:1. 1995, 219:5. 1996, 228:108. 1999, 64:1. 2000, 27:1. 2002, 75:1.
2007, 66:1. 2009, 45:1; 208:1. 2010, 169:1, 2. 2011, 50:1, eff. May 9,
2011; 113:1, eff. May 31, 2011; 118:1, eff. June 2, 2011; 135:1, eff.
June 7, 2011. 2016, 287:34, 35, eff. Aug. 20, 2016.
